I have a brief comment that I hope the cabinet secretary will deal with in his summing up. The argument seems to have been fairly well made that amendment 25 may not be necessary. I am sure that the cabinet secretary will say something about that in his summing up. However, I ask the cabinet secretary, in terms of building the largest possible consensus in relation to the bill, whether there would be any unintended consequences if amendment 25 was passed. In other words, would there be detriment to the bill if amendment 25 was passed? I seek clarification on that from the cabinet secretary in his summing up.

Mr Eadie’s contribution compelled me to rise to speak on amendment 1. I agree whole-heartedly with Mr Eadie that equality and rights in this area cut both ways. He gave a practical example of why amendment 1 is flawed. I hope that I misheard Mr Harvie—whose views on the matter I completely respect—in relation to amendment 1. I thought that he mentioned that he believed that people who opposed same-sex marriage might, as a rule, be homophobic, which I do not believe is necessarily the case. I hope that I am wrong about what Mr Harvie said. This is an opportunity for Mr Harvie to clarify the point.

I am delighted that I did contribute in relation to amendment 1, because I agree with every word that Mr Harvie said and that was an opportunity to clarify what he said. On the basis of what we have heard, I will not be supporting amendment 1 this afternoon.

Glasgow has many town centres that are quite distinct from its city centre. In fleshing out what a town centre first principle means in practice, let us ensure that Glasgow and other places with city-based town centres are at the heart of measures to support Scotland’s town centres. I am confident that that will happen. Following my intervention, the Scottish Government’s town centre regeneration fund included city-based town centres, and my city of Glasgow gained more than £5 million, including £1.8 million for Maryhill borough halls, which is a wonderful asset for the constituents that I represent. However, there are less desirable businesses trading on our high streets and I would like any town centre action plan to deal with them. So-called payday lenders that offer instant cash to vulnerable Scots at exorbitant interest rates add nothing to our city and town centres except, perhaps, misery. They target families who are desperate for cash, offering apparent solutions that only push vulnerable people further into debt. We know that this is a huge and growing problem. More than 100 people contact Citizens Advice Scotland every week with debt problems that are linked to payday lending. I have no doubt that UK welfare cuts to our most needy will be linked to the growth in that area, but that is perhaps a debate for another day. It is no accident that payday lending establishments often locate themselves beside communities that are struggling the most financially. I do not believe that it is right, acceptable or ethical that someone who is struggling financially can walk into an instant-cash shop and borrow money at an annual percentage rate of nearly 4,000 per cent. I checked the rates today. Such rip-off rates are available right now in Maryhill shopping centre, Springburn shopping centre, Rutherglen’s main street and across Scotland. Short of independence, we cannot tackle such unsavoury and undesirable lending practices on our high streets as directly as we might like. Of course, yet again, that is an argument for another day. However, this Parliament, in partnership with our local authorities, must do all that it can to rid our town centres of these outlets, whether we do so via planning, licensing, taxation powers or another mechanism. We must use every tool that we can to ensure that our town centres do not promote such practices. I call on the minister to convene a summit to co-ordinate efforts to clamp down on such payday lending practices on our high streets. I genuinely believe that, together, we can come to a clear consensus that shops offering 4,000 per cent loans to those who are most in debt have no place at the heart of our high streets, and that we can find a way to take action to tackle this scurrilous problem. Thank you for your indulgence, Presiding Officer.

I echo Patricia Ferguson’s calls in relation to the Royston at work project, which I know well and which I have written to the cabinet secretary about. Does the cabinet secretary agree that, when projects such as Royston at work, which was funded initially by the Big Lottery Fund, follow good practice and meet required outcomes, the Scottish Government or others should find ways of mainstreaming the funding so that the best practice endures and is not a short-term initiative?

15. To ask the Scottish Government how its small business bonus scheme supports businesses in Glasgow. (S4O-02791)

I draw the minister’s attention to information on the Scottish Assessors Association website, which shows that on Maryhill Road, there are potentially 243 commercial units that could qualify for the small business bonus. The figure for Springburn shopping centre is 34 and, for Rutherglen Main Street, it is 68. Small businesses have approached me asking for reassurance that the small business bonus is safe with the Scottish Government, because it protects businesses and jobs. Businesses are worried that the Labour Party is seeking to abolish the scheme and with it that support.

I wrote down a couple of words from Jackson Carlaw’s speech. He said that our contributions should be “substantial” and “thoughtful”. If the Parliament takes such an approach to planning Scotland’s NHS we will be in a good place. However, with respect, I genuinely do not think that that is what Mr Findlay has brought to Parliament this afternoon. I will consider two themes: how we deal quickly and efficiently with challenges when they emerge in short order; and how we do long-term planning. The Scottish Government does both well but, more important, it will listen to suggestions about how we can do better. I heard no such suggestions from the Labour Party during the opening speech. I was going to mention the hidden waiting lists under Labour in 2006, but in a spirit of consensus I will not go down that painful road for the Labour Party. Instead, I will consider challenges that the Scottish Government has encountered in relation to the NHS. Health boards, in particular NHS Lothian, had issues with the recording of waiting lists and availability in Scotland. Through the Parliament’s pretty robust structure and the audit process, recommendations were made, and Scotland and the Parliament acted quickly. We are now in a strong position: we have a system of patient-advised availability and complete openness and transparency. That did not happen as a result of a review of the entire NHS. It happened as a result of the Government and the Parliament and its committee system responding to the challenges that presented. On waiting time targets, I will pick one that is good for the Government. In September 2013, our 18-week waiting time target was 90 per cent and was met; 90.9 per cent was achieved. I have no doubt that that was due to investment and the real-terms increase in funding of the NHS by the Scottish Government, which I do not think would have happened under a different Government. However, depending on which waiting times we look at, targets are not always met. In a few months NHS boards will come before the Health and Sport Committee and I will ask them what they are doing to reprioritise their resources to meet targets in which they have fallen short. This is about targets being constantly under review and scrutinised, and it is about continuous improvement in the NHS. Just to say, “Let’s review everything” is meaningless, but that is what is offered in the motion. An example of where Parliament got it right that immediately springs to mind is regulation of care for older people. As cabinet secretary, Nicola Sturgeon listened to an inquiry by the Health and Sport Committee and, before we had reported, moved to address the situation. Again, that was the result of an immediate response by Parliament. It was not just a general review for the sake of having a general review. Alternatively, there could be a more thoughtful review, at which Jackson Carlaw hinted. The review of access to new medicines was thoughtful and considered. It was not a short-term populist soapbox reaction to an issue; it was about making access in Scotland fair and robust in the future for patients, families and the NHS—not just for a couple of years, but for a generation. I hope that we will have some fantastic news on that in the very near future. Let us just deal with the facts, not the spin. Staff numbers look good for the Scottish Government. The facts are that qualified nurses and midwives are up 2.7 per cent compared to the situation under Labour, medical consultants are up 28 per cent, and GPs are up 5.5 per cent. Are there workload issues? Are there issues about staff management and planning? Of course there are. That is why, in conjunction with the RCN, the Scottish Government brought forward workforce and workload management tools in nursing to address the problems. I look forward to more information on how we will tackle other staffing problems. The issues are constantly under review.

I am delighted that Neil Findlay raised that because the Scottish Government is not simply saying that. That is why there is a workload management plan. It is about the roles that nurses are performing, not just their numbers, whether they are in the acute sector, in planned surgery or in the community. The Scottish Government thinks that the matter is not so straightforward. Mr Findlay should start looking at the details of his brief and not just use the soundbites. On the seven-day service in the NHS, I have spoken to a representative of the medical profession who wants to reinforce the fact that there is already a seven-day service, because the NHS has to move quickly in emergency situations. I am delighted that as part of the Scottish Government’s 2020 vision and its advisory board, it is moving forward to work out how we can go further on that, in a planned way, which involves talking to the physiotherapist, the pharmacist, the porters and all the relevant staff, and having a planned seven-day service in the NHS. We must not have a review for the sake of a review, as the Labour Opposition has brought to the chamber today. There is no complacency in how the Scottish Government manages the NHS. There are lots of challenges, but we are heading in the right direction.

Will the member give way?

7. To ask the Scottish Government whether it holds information on how many food banks there are and what assistance it can provide to reduce reliance on them. (S4O-02773)

I accept that the most effective way in which to reduce the reliance on food banks in Scotland is to reverse much of the UK Government’s welfare reforms. However, will the Scottish Government consider working with food banks and other local partners to ensure that all those who present at food banks are given opportunities to receive advice about income maximisation and, for those who are unemployed, potential pathways to employment? I stress that the key role of food banks is to meet the most basic of human needs and that any support that is offered would need to be given sensitively and in a way that did not deter the most vulnerable from presenting at food banks in the first place.

4. To ask the First Minister what assessment the Scottish Government has made of the potential impact on the Scottish economy of a reported additional £25 billion reduction in spending planned by the United Kingdom Government. (S4F-01803)

A suggested Tory attack on vulnerable Scots is to discriminate against young people by withdrawing altogether housing benefit from the under-25s, which is something that I believe an independent Scotland would never consider. What assessment can the Scottish Government make of the potential impact that that Tory plan would have on young Scots, including the 5,200 under-25s in Glasgow who I represent and the 33,000 across Scotland who rely on housing benefit? Will it make urgent representations to the UK Government opposing those plans which, along with the UK Government’s bedroom tax, will only lead to further poverty, fuel family tensions and exacerbate homelessness?

Will the member give way?

I am afraid that I do not have a question about childcare—it is about free school meals. I am glad that the member welcomes that commitment. Does he agree that having universal free school meals is vital in order to remove the stigma of access to free school meals, as well as means testing?

An argument that I make is that if we are to achieve a step change in childcare we need consistently to invest £700 million every year. Can Willie Rennie guarantee that under devolution?

I do not doubt Ms McTaggart’s sincerity when she talks about disabled people and vulnerable citizens. Mr Gray has highlighted his position that any additional money should be spent on childcare. What would Ms McTaggart spend the money on? Would she give it to local government?

I thank the Finance Committee for its detailed and thoughtful report on the draft budget for 2014-15. I would like to look at the moneys that the Scottish Government is giving to change funds, which is an issue that is of particular interest to me, as deputy convener of the Health and Sport Committee. In the three years up to 2014-15, £500 million is being invested in change funds. As the report that is before us notes, the draft budget for 2012-13 said: “Together it is anticipated that national and local government and their community planning partners will invest up to £500 million through these change funds to support the greater alignment of budgets across the public sector on a preventative and outcomes-focused basis.” I suppose that that leaves us asking, “What does that actually mean?” For my part, it means reforming public service delivery in a way that best delivers the outcomes that we all want to see. I have a particular interest in active ageing and the health of our older population, so among the outcomes that I would like to see being achieved—to which the Scottish Government has a clear commitment and to which I am sure that members across the Parliament have a joint commitment—are older people being happier and healthier and staying in their own homes for longer before having to move to a residential setting, if that is necessary; their making fewer unplanned visits to hospital acute services because of slips, trips, falls and so on; and fewer of them being stuck in hospital wards for longer than they need to be as a result of delayed discharge. In recent weeks, Alex Neil, the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing, has talked about having a seven-day healthcare service to help achieve those outcomes. We are trying to achieve quite clear outcomes using change fund money. I hugely welcome the use of £420 million in the change fund for older people between 2011 and 2016, including £70 million in the budget that will be before us early next year. However, we also have to scrutinise the good and effective use of those moneys in achieving those outcomes, some of which I have mentioned. For example, we want to ensure that change fund moneys transition into the core financial budgets that health boards and local authorities set in order to better mainstream any initiatives that are developed through the change funds. As the Finance Committee has said, we need to examine how we can encourage local authorities to make a greater contribution to the change funds. Health and social care integration for older people is currently being legislated on through the Public Bodies (Joint Working) (Scotland) Bill, which is before the Parliament, and we need to think more carefully about how we carry out robust budget scrutiny of single accounts under the bodies corporate that will involve local authorities and health boards. We have to come to terms with scrutiny in relation to that issue as well. The outcomes are easy to measure but they are challenging to achieve, and the framework that I mentioned will be important in ensuring that we can achieve them. The Finance Committee’s report refers to what the Health and Sport Committee said about the lack of a clear link between the draft budget and the indicators. I have been on the Health and Sport Committee for a number of years and there is almost a necessary tension between the budget and the indicators, given that individual health boards have local strategies to identify and address some of the indicators and that there is also a disconnect between when the Parliament sets the budget for health boards at a national level and when health boards set their own budgets. There is a scrutiny issue in there, too. I think that we can improve, but I see a necessary tension as regards how we can go further. I think that it is up to Parliament to suggest how we can do that better. I will come to the Barnett consequentials in a second, but in relation to the moneys in the budget that we are considering—the existing moneys—I have noticed that not one person from the Labour Party has said how one existing pound would be spent elsewhere, despite Labour’s repeated demands that we spend lots of money in lots of different places. That critical fault line runs through the Labour Party’s approach to budget scrutiny. I see that Mr Rennie is in the chamber. He will be delighted to hear that my commitment to extending childcare has not waned; in fact, it is stronger than it has ever been. However, I have had a commitment to kinship care payments and to the roll-out and extension of free school meals for just as long as I have had a commitment to extending childcare. Each of those commitments has to be individually funded and paid for on an on-going basis. There are challenges in that regard, and there are decisions that everyone has to make—including me, Mr Rennie. The free school meals pilot, which was carried out by the Scottish Government in partnership with local authorities, was pretty successful, but it was discontinued because of cuts from the UK Government. That is an example of a pilot that was brought to Scotland by a Scottish Government but which was directly undermined by UK Government spending decisions. We have to bear that in mind. As we look at the budget, it is worth putting on record other potential spending consequences for the Parliament. We know that there is a cross-party effort elsewhere in the UK to take £4 billion away from Scotland by scrapping the Barnett formula. We also know of estimates of a multi-billion pound saving from the NHS in England with the greater use of private funds there. Those two examples have potential spending consequences that put Scotland at risk financially. Yes, I want that step change in childcare—I want to dramatically improve childcare—but I want to ensure that we get that improvement not just for a short time but in perpetuity.

5. To ask the Scottish Government what information is available concerning the use of discretionary housing payments in Glasgow to mitigate the effects of the so-called bedroom tax. (S4O-02731)

I advise the minister that anecdotal information is emerging to suggest that, in Glasgow, initial short-term awards for discretionary payments are, on application for extension, being reduced or refused by those who are processing claims. That is deterring some of my constituents from appealing the decisions in case they lose even more money. I am not criticising Glasgow City Council directly; it is a difficult issue for everyone to deal with. However, will the minister take steps to support the council to ensure that there is greater consistency in the use of discretionary payments that are awarded in the city so that the most vulnerable people whom I represent do not lose out?

Could the cabinet secretary reassure the tens of thousands of constituents that I represent in areas such as Cambuslang and Rutherglen that their transfer from NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde to NHS Lanarkshire in April 2014 is being appropriately planned for and resourced, given the pressures that the essential improvements outlined this afternoon will undoubtedly create?

Will Neil Bibby give way?

I respect Neil Bibby’s argument that childcare should be made a clear priority. Two weeks ago, however, Labour’s priority was colleges, last week it was housing and two hours ago it was local government funding. Have you deserted those three priorities and is childcare now the only priority? Where does Labour stand on the other three issues that it was demanding money for just two hours ago?

Forecasts are one thing; reality is something very different. As we have heard, a UK Government target in 2010 to grow the economy has been dramatically missed. As a result, UK Government borrowing will be £197 billion higher by 2016 than predicted. That is the reality, yet increasing UK debt is being used as an excuse to make drastic and swingeing cuts to the welfare payments of some of the most vulnerable people in Scottish society. That attack on our most vulnerable could result in £4.5 billion being taken from welfare by 2014-15. The reality of that is that working tax credit reforms, for example, will take £3,870 from working families every year. In terms of the childcare element of that, there will be £1,560 less. If we look at the working tax credit reforms by the UK coalition in the round, we see that 372,000 families will be worse off to the tune of, on average, £810 a year. The bedroom tax—a topical subject—will mean that more than 70,000 affected households will be nearly £600 worse off every year and will no longer be able to pay their rent in full. I will give the chamber one final example: the reform of incapacity benefit into employment support allowance affects 144,000 people to the tune of—on average, by 2016—£3,480 a year. That is wrong for a number of ethical and moral reasons, but it is also wrong for economic reasons. Those people in my constituency, across Glasgow and across Scotland spend money in the real economy. They do not hoard money or invest money; they spend it in their local cafe or on getting a bus into the town centre to see if they can get some bargain clothes for their children. The cuts are wrong on many levels, but they also directly take money out of the economy. They are wrong ethically and they are wrong in business terms. The best way in which to cut the welfare budget is to get people into meaningful work, and the way to do that is with increased capital investment. Between 2010 and 2016, there was a 26 per cent cut to Scotland’s capital budget. That is £927 million, which is a huge number at first glance. However, if we put it beside the £197 billion additional UK debt due to the Conservative-led coalition’s mishandling of the economy, it quickly pales into insignificance.

I am sorry, but I have only five minutes. However, every £100 million that is invested in capital projects can generate £160 million of economic activity and support 1,400 people into work in a year. Those capital cuts have cost the Scottish economy £1.5 billion and have prevented 13,000 Scots from having jobs created for them—Scots who could be off benefits and in meaningful employment, paying taxes and doing better in their lives. There has been a mishandling of the economy and completely wrong priorities have been backed by the UK coalition, so I cannot possibly support the motion that is before us today. I am not willing to cheerlead for austerity and pain in my communities. The UK parties should be ashamed of themselves. The Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats are a disgrace, flag waving about the pain that is being caused to the people I represent. We have already heard about more money for housing, colleges and local government. I would love there to be more money for childcare. I would also love there to be more money for free school meals and kinship care, which are two of my other priorities. I draw Labour’s attention to the fact that the free school meals pilot in primary 1 to primary 3 that the Scottish Government proposed had to be shelved because of UK cuts to our budget. The only way in which we can get sustainable, transformational childcare in this country is by the huge investment of £700 million every year—not as a one-off payment—that will transform the lives of the people I represent and will give our children the best start in life.

We all know that that investment will be achieved only with a yes vote and independence.

I, too, thank Linda Fabiani for bringing the debate to the chamber. As other members have done, I put on record my congratulations to Michael O’Neil on winning the Wim de Ruiter Delft plate award from the Institute of Maxillofacial Prosthetists and Technologists. I thought that I knew how to say “maxillofacial prosthetists”, but every member has said it differently, which has somewhat undermined my confidence. I will use the word “confidence” again. I also congratulate the wider team at the Southern general hospital and Glasgow royal infirmary. Michael O’Neil won the award, but there is a variety of experts in the department who excel in the field. I wanted to speak in the debate for a number of reasons. One is that, as a Glasgow member of the Scottish Parliament, I wanted to recognise and acknowledge the very best practice in the world—the world-leading practice—that is clearly evident there. I am also the deputy convener of the Health and Sport Committee, and am interested in finding out more about the issue. Perhaps with my Glasgow colleague James Dornan and the minister, I hope, we can go along and see in action the good work at the Southern general hospital. I also have a personal reason that I had forgotten about for wanting to speak in the debate. As a daft laddie in Dundee around 20 years ago, I took a tumble. I questioned my relationship with alcohol on that particular day, but I took a tumble nevertheless and was left with a fairly dramatic hole in my chin. As I was regaining consciousness, the doctors who were attending to me were debating whether they should try to reconstruct the hole in my chin or put it to the plastic specialist in Dundee. Fortunately for me, they put it to the plastic specialist. The difference that that made to the scar that I was left with on my chin was quite dramatic. It is now pretty minimal. Nanette Milne mentioned confidence. I am not comparing that trivial event with the more dramatic life-changing events that other members have mentioned, but it meant that I had a small beard for a year or so afterwards because I was embarrassed by my scar, which undermined my self-confidence. If something as trivial as that can undermine a young man’s self-confidence, I can only imagine the impact that a full facial reconstruction can have. We have to look at the major technological advances, but we should not forget that little, minor miracles are performed every day of the week. As a young man who was making my way in the world, what happened made a huge difference to my quality of life. I have no idea who the plastic surgeon was, but I thank them greatly, as the work made a difference to my life. I want to quote a colleague, Ken Andrew. He does not work in Glasgow, but he is involved in prosthetics—not facial prosthetics but limb prosthetics. I asked him what he had heard about maxillofacial prosthetisists—I said that wrongly; never mind. He dropped me an email before the debate in which he mentioned the great expertise and the advances that there have been, but he also said a couple of things that were particularly powerful: “The impact these technicians have on the improved well being of individuals that have suffered devastating injury through trauma and disease is very hard to imagine ... Max fax technicians are true artisans with the very best of them possessing genuine artistic talent.” We are not talking just about the high-end stuff, but about the attention to minor details that those experts provide. I have run over my time, Presiding Officer, and I thank you for your patience in listening. As well as thanking Linda Fabiani for bringing the debate to the chamber, I thank Michael O’Neil and his team at the Southern, as well as the GRI, for all the work that they do.

Will Mary Scanlon give way?

I appreciate the opportunity to put on the record what I was going to say to Ms Scanlon. I have not yet been blessed with children, but I have three little nieces—Beth, Emily and Hannah. Gender equality is there for everyone, male or female, and it is important to put it on the record that, in this equality issue, we are all in it together. I want the best for my three little nieces.

Will the member give way?

I am glad that Mr Findlay has started to talk about the bill that is before us. Does he not see that there are opportunities in the bill, such as the opportunity to disaggregate the acute budget for older people and to invest some of that in social care? Surely that is an opportunity. I understand some of the issues that he raises, but surely he should be engaging with the opportunities that exist to improve services rather than just lamenting the poorer practices.

I note that Nanette Milne’s thoughtful speech did the job of stage 1 scrutiny very well. I associate myself with Duncan McNeil’s words and the thanks that he gave to everyone who has been involved in scrutinising the bill, those who gave evidence on it and the Government and its civil service team. A lot of positive work has been done on the bill. I begin by making it clear that I wish that the Parliament did not need to pass the Public Bodies (Joint Working) (Scotland) Bill. The integration of health and social care has been an aspiration for many years, but a reality far too rarely. The bill will set up an overarching framework to deliver integration and, as a last resort, compel health boards and local authorities to get on with the job of integration where that is not happening. I will go on to talk about structures shortly, but first I will say a bit more about what the bill hopes to achieve. We have already heard a great deal about the demographic challenges that Scotland will face with an ageing population. The objective is to have a unified health and social care strategy for our older population that suits the needs of older people and ensures that the person is put before the pound sign—in other words, that cost shunting between health boards and local authorities becomes a thing of the past. That means having a single budget for the health and social care of older people. For too long, there has been a suspicion that there is a tension between speedy discharge and delayed discharge from our hospitals. The longer a patient is in hospital, the greater the cost to the NHS, and the earlier an older person is returned into the community, the greater the cost to local authorities. In what way is the patient, rather than the pound sign, at the centre of that? I do not think that the matter is necessarily a high enough priority at present. If we have a single budget, put people before pounds and have a truly integrated health and social care system, we can end that cost shunting once and for all. We need a disaggregation of acute budgets. I am delighted that the Scottish Government shared with us some estimates of what proportion of acute budgets may be disaggregated and put towards combined health and social care, but there are still no real projections of what sections of local authority budgets will be put towards that. Will it just be whatever budget lines local authorities identify from their own social care budgets, or do we need to be a bit more sophisticated about it? I know that we are not going as far as housing at the moment, but an argument could be made that there is a direct link to housing adaptations and policy. If we can get older people in an ageing population back into their houses and they are happy and safe there, they will be content, and sometimes that will be cheaper than having them in hospitals or residential homes. We have to think in a more sophisticated way about joint budgets for health and social care, and we need more clarity about the expectations on local authorities. As I said, this is not just about saving money. It is about getting older people out of hospital sooner, preventing them from going into hospital in the first place and having them live at home happily for longer. That is not just cheaper but better in relation to outcomes. We have to look at the outcomes that the bill seeks to deliver rather than just structures, but of course we have to look at structures, too.

The 2019 target was jointly agreed by the Parliament and it makes us world leaders in the registration of care-at-home employees. However, it is a vexed issue and the Government has already said that if registration could be accelerated in a safe and structured way, there is no reason why we could not do that. I have only 30 seconds left, and there is so much more that I wanted to say. On structures, if it ever comes down to a vote between health boards and local authorities, we will have lost the case for positive and constructive health and social care integration. Whether or not they have voting rights, we have to make sure that the third and independent sectors, allied health professionals, GPs and the like are involved in drawing up the strategic plans. Assurances need to be given that they will have proper and suitable engagement with any strategic board. The exciting part for me is localised strategic planning, in which local communities and older people are not just told what the priorities are for their care in their local area, because they also get to decide those. Some information on how that would work would be welcome.

Mr Malik is making excellent points about cultural challenges. In Glasgow, our health and care partnerships did not work. Section 12(1) of the bill will give ministers the power to intervene to compel integration. Does he agree with my hope that that power will never have to be used, because local authorities and health boards will finally get on with it and do integration properly?

As others have done, I thank Murdo Fraser for bringing the motion to the chamber. I also congratulate the MRC on 100 years of a job well done—I am sure that it will have another 100 years to excel in what it does. It is worth while talking about the environment in Scotland under which the MRC operates. Five of Scotland’s higher education institutions are in the top 200 institutions in the world. That is the equivalent of how Japan performs with two and a half times Scotland’s population. Seven of Scotland’s universities are in the top 50 worldwide. That places Scotland 50 per cent above the average for research citations every year globally. Indeed, we are ranked first relative to our gross domestic product. That is a remarkable performance. I hear that the MRC gives Scotland approximately 14 per cent of available moneys vis-à-vis 8.5 per cent of the population. That is clearly based on the size and excellence of the research base that exists in Scotland. It is not a pat on the head for Scotland; it is a toughly fought-for, toughly competed-for and well-won research shilling. I was at the science in Parliament event at Our Dynamic Earth recently and spoke informally to some MRC people. They made it clear to me that they award funding based on excellence and potential for results, and nothing else. Collaborative working represents the real opportunities irrespective of Scotland’s constitutional situation. I will say a little more about the UK’s extending collaborative work and the Swiss National Science Foundation’s partnership deal with the UK, which will mean that, on one application form, Swiss institutions can get up to 30 per cent of all research funding. I have a quote from Paul Boyle, the gentleman in charge of the Economic and Social Research Council in the UK, in relation to that deal: “Opening up national project funding to international co-investigators is a simple and effective way of encouraging such collaboration and I am therefore pleased to sign this joint statement, which I hope ... will be the first of several with other sister agencies internationally.” In other words, that is the direction of travel for the UK, and I have no doubt that it will be the direction of travel in partnership with Scotland once we are independent. On international collaborative working, we also have the European horizons 2020 project, which makes €70 billion available for research and development. A prerequisite of getting that funding is three member states of the European Union signing up to apply for it. Given the close relationship, partnerships and collaborative work that already exist between Scottish higher education institutions and others elsewhere in the UK, with independence we would only have to find one final partner to get a larger slice of that €70 billion R and D budget. That means that independence could make it easier for research funding.

I am sorry that Mr Malik would rather play politics than discuss the fine work of the MRC. I point out that the only danger to Scotland’s membership of the European Union is staying in a UK that might leave it. No one has suggested that an independent Scotland would leave the EU, unless Mr Malik is the lone voice suggesting that. I will tell members about a huge opportunity for the MRC in future: the loosening of the restrictive visa policy in the UK. That is one way of creating opportunity, but there is no sign of it happening just now. I am sure that an independent Scotland would take a much more proactive view. Mr Malik and I were in Kurdistan during the summer. While I was there, I met the Kurdish minister for health. He told me that he and his civil servants were unable to get visas to come to the UK and, as a result, Kurdistan has signed a partnership deal with Germany as a European Union partner on medical advancement and the training of doctors. I am sure that the MRC could have sealed the deal in relation to that project, but restrictive practices at a UK level prevented that from happening. This is not a debate about independence, but I point out to Murdo Fraser and others that the MRC will revel in the additional possibilities and the potential that independence will bring. I look forward to that happening in the near future.

It is a privilege to speak in the debate. I will deal almost exclusively with kinship care and the development of the new kinship care order. I reiterate my belief that kinship carers should be given the same support that is given to foster carers. I made a promise to campaigners at a national kinship care hustings in Possilpark in 2007, and I have continued to champion the cause ever since. The views that I express are heavily influenced by constituents of mine, such as Jessie Harvey and Ruby Grant who are members of the kinship care group in the north of the city that I represent, and by several other groups within the city that I work with. Put simply, kinship carers step in and take on a caring role for loved ones, for children, when mum and dad are unwilling or unable to do so. If kinship carers were not there to pick up the pieces, the life chances and life outcomes for such children would be far worse. That would also cost Scotland’s councils a small fortune, as they would instead need to use foster carers or residential care for those vulnerable children. I pay tribute to our former children’s minister Adam Ingram for advancing the cause of kinship care under the SNP Government that was elected in 2007. Putting a kinship care outcome into the Scottish Government’s concordat with councils was vital. That sought to move to parity the financial support given to kinship carers and that given to foster carers. Clearly, although that aspiration was not fully met, that has made a real difference. I agree with the Child Poverty Action Group, which told the Education and Culture Committee: “The initial agreement, which was to pay kinship carers of looked-after children at a rate equivalent to that for foster carers, has not become a reality, but all local authorities have shifted to a position where they are making payments of some sort to kinship carers of looked-after children. Quite a few local authorities are also making payments at some level to kinship carers of non-looked-after children.”—[Official Report, Education and Culture Committee, 24 September 2013; c 2821.] That is not enough, but we have driven a real change and it is important to put that on record. Some kinship carers have asked me why the financial memorandum includes projected cost savings from kinship care. They ask how improvements can be made in the support for kinship carers while cost savings are also expected. However, the financial memorandum states that one reason for developing the kinship care order is “to reduce unchecked growth in formal kinship care”. In other words, as children in kinship care come to the attention of social work or are placed in kinship care by social work—a vital distinction that, if I have time, I will return to later—they are less likely to become formally looked after. Kinship care orders will still provide support, but a crucial point is that the level of direct social work involvement will necessarily be less than if the child was deemed to be formally looked after. I understand that the bill will lead to a projected saving in social work time, and that is the saving referred to in the financial memorandum. Fundamentally, those savings do not signal a reduction in direct cash support to kinship carers, but I would welcome some clarity and reassurance from the minister on that when she sums up the debate. I also ask for some certainty that the bill does not put up any barriers to providing financial support to kinship carers. Can the minister confirm that the bill contains nothing that would instruct councils to pay less or, indeed, hinder them from paying more?

I thank the minister for that intervention. I will move on to the financial working group that the Scottish Government has set up, which will report shortly. My understanding is that the financial package of support to kinship carers is not contained within the bill—that is not what the bill seeks to do—but is the job of the financial working group. Can the minister provide more information on when the working group might report and how long it will take the Scottish Government to consider the group’s recommendations? If she can tease out how that will be taken forward, that would be very helpful. Another issue that I want to mention is the postcode lottery or lack of consistency in how local authorities deal with kinship care. In Glasgow—I single out Glasgow City Council only because that is the local authority that I know best—the council provides payments of £50 a week for voluntary kinship care arrangements. Those payments are not enough, but I welcome them. However, the council makes a distinction between situations in which granny and granddad have decided to look after the vulnerable child, because they know that the child is at risk, and situations in which the local authority has turned up on the doorstep and placed the child with granny and granddad. In one case, the local authority has stepped in, whereas in the other case there is a voluntary arrangement, but I do not think that distinctions should be drawn when providing financial support for those families. I ask the Government to consider that. The final thing that I would like to mention is the need for consistency in social work assessments of kinship carers across the country. Kinship carers in Glasgow believe that they are already going through an assessment process pretty similar to that for foster carers and they are asked for some deeply personal information and access to their personal medical records. Better guidance, better training and more consistency in social work assessments would also be welcome.

Will the member give way?

I have listened with interest to the vast majority of this afternoon’s debate. Does Ms Baillie agree that the debate is not about the competing interests of traditional and modern views of marriage? The reason why I will vote yes this evening is that this piece of legislation allows everyone’s views of marriage to be reflected in statute in Scotland.

Mr McIntosh used the expression “cybernats” to describe one side of the independence debate, demonising it compared with the other side. Does he agree that there are voices on both sides of the independence debate that are deeply irresponsible? To couch his point in language that suggests that only one side, and not the other, is irresponsible is to take the tribal approach that he said he wished to reject.

I am privileged to be able to speak in this afternoon’s debate on the Scottish Independence Referendum Bill. I am sure that we will come together at 5 pm today to vote for a referendum on Scotland’s future that will ask people to choose that most fundamental of democratic principles—self-government. I firmly believe that, when the people of Scotland are asked whether we should be an independent country, they will give a resounding yes. I welcome the non-tribal and constructive approach that, as we have heard, the Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee took to scrutinising the bill. I very much hope that all parties—and, indeed, those of no party-political persuasion—will continue to take a non-tribal and constructive approach to the debate that will now follow and intensify. At First Minister’s question time earlier today, in commenting on the future of Scotland when independent, Johann Lamont asked, “What is plan B?” In other words, what will any party do if it does not get its way? When, in the days ahead, the Scottish Government publishes its white paper on independence, there will be certainty and clarity about what an independent Scotland would look like and aspire to if, following a yes vote, an SNP Government is returned in the 2016 elections. As for plan B, without independence, there will be a commitment to continue to stand up for Scotland’s interests at every opportunity and, if given the honour, to continue to be a responsible Scottish Government. However, the need for a plan B cuts both ways. The Labour Party contends that the only way to protect Scotland’s interest is to elect a UK Labour Party to a Westminster Government, which rarely, if ever, has Scotland on its radar never mind as a priority. The Labour Party plan A includes nuclear weapons and power, draining our oil and gas and other natural resources and sticking to Tory capital cuts to Scotland. That is a weak and ineffective proposition to put to the Scottish people. What about plan B? That includes even more welfare reform and sticking to the bedroom tax. I was about to go through a long list of what plan B would mean, but the Labour Party would implement those measures, too, were it elected as the UK Government. Plan A is not satisfactory for the Scottish people and plan B is to play Russian roulette with Scotland’s future and to let the Tories loose on Scotland with a future UK Tory Government. That is unacceptable; it is why the referendum bill must be passed and why the people must vote yes in the independence referendum. I will mention a couple of obvious things arising from my work in the Parliament that tell me on an elementary basis why we need independence. First, as deputy convener of the Health and Sport Committee, I know that every time there is a £1 million disinvestment from the health service in England, our committee is looking at £98,000 less spent on the Scottish health service. That is simply unacceptable. On a local level, what else is unacceptable is that a wonderful group called Rosemount Workspace, which works with vulnerable young people furthest away from the labour market, cannot get some young people into education courses because of UK benefit rules. The UK Government will not change the rules; Angela Constance, the Minister for Youth Employment, would if she could. That is why I want independence—not as an end in and of itself but for the future of Scotland’s young people. I very much hope that Parliament comes together to take that next step in the journey to Scottish self-determination.

1. To ask the Scottish Government how it meets the health needs of asylum seekers. (S4O-02532)

On a point of order, Presiding Officer, I do not mean to be contrary—I appreciate, of course, that it is not a point of order—but the microphones in the chamber are not working. Can that be rectified?

Yes. It is lit, but it is not working.

I will raise the specific case of one my constituents who is an asylum seeker. I know that Mr Neil, the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing, is aware of the case. My constituent was taken off the kidney transplant list when he was unsuccessful in his asylum case—that automatically triggered removal from the list, based on English NHS guidelines not Scottish ones—although legal moves are pending. My constituent has still not been put back on the NHS transplant list and the case is being peer reviewed by Lothian NHS Board. Is the minister open-minded to reviewing the treatment of asylum seekers in the Scottish NHS to ensure that Scottish NHS boards are properly following the requirement to treat asylum seekers the same as any other Scot resident in our nation?

I am delighted to speak in today’s debate on person-centred care. As deputy convener of the Health and Sport Committee, I often meet stakeholder groups in health and social care—be they doctors groups, nurses groups, allied health professionals, pharmaceutical companies, pharmacists, social workers, addiction workers or occupational therapists. I could go on and on, but do not worry, Presiding Officer, I will not. I mentioned that list of groups because I am sure that for all those stakeholders, the user—the patient—is their primary concern. However, every group also has a specific interest and a specific point of view that sometimes contrasts with and be different from the interests and views of other stakeholders. Person-centred healthcare and social care should see the interests of such stakeholders—vested interests, if you like; I mean that kindly, not negatively—as being secondary to the needs of the constituents; the people we represent, who are the service users. Progress has been made: for instance, GP surgeries are now open for longer and their hours are more flexible. I have listened to some of the concerns that have been raised, but it is now easier, in many cases, to see a GP than it was previously. That is a positive change. I am pleased that the HEAT—health improvement, efficiency and governance, access and treatment—target that was introduced in 2007 to ensure that all patients see an appropriate member of the GP practice team within 48 hours has been met in almost every health board; Fife just missed out. That target’s having been met means that more than 90 per cent of patients see an appropriate person within 48 hours. There should, however, be no complacency about that; targets tell only part of the story, which is why I am delighted that the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing has looked for unintended consequences from that 48-hour target and is considering more imaginatively at how we can use the GP contract better to meet the needs of our constituents. On that last point, I also took part in the keys to life debate on learning disabilities, and I know that the Scottish Government is actively considering the possibility of having a quality and outcomes framework in relation to people with learning disabilities and the special attention and support that they need from GPs. I welcome that possibility, but this is not just about GPs. Perhaps health centres more generally should consider services beyond 9 to 5 and 5 days a week. Why should we single out GPs? Associated support services also have to be in the health centre; if a person has to see a community nurse after they see their doctor, does not it make sense to have community nurses in the health centre on Saturday morning if GPs are working on Saturday morning? We have to think more imaginatively about how we can use the overall resource. I am delighted to know that there are on-going discussions on how we might do that. I am also encouraged that the Scottish Government has established a person-centred health and social care collaborative; its third meeting will be held shortly. I am sure that the 500 stakeholders will consider how services can be developed in the long term. I looked at the remit of the collaborative and was delighted to see that one aspect of the remit is to focus on what we can do now, because sometimes when such things are set up, it is “Mañana”; it is about what can be done in two years, three years or four years. However, the collaborative is actively looking at what can be done in the short term—-in the months and the years ahead—and not just in the long term, important though long-term planning is. I also welcome the fact that the Scottish Government is giving £4 million to five health boards, including NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde in my area, to look at innovative ways of delivering a seven-day health service and of enhancing round-the-clock care. Let me give two examples of that—although I should perhaps first, like Mr Findlay, declare a slight interest, in that my wife is a nurse in a high dependency unit in Glasgow, and has worked in a variety of capacities in surgical nursing. If a patient is ready for discharge, but staff cannot get hold of the pharmacist because the pharmacy is closed, that can lead to a delayed discharge. If, before going home, a patient needs to be declared fit and capable, or able to use appropriately and safely any support equipment that he or she has been given, the patient cannot go home if the physiotherapist is not around. Therefore, we need to look more imaginatively at when various health professionals are on ward, on call, in the hospital or in the health centre. I hope that that £4 million will help us to think of good ideas for how to do that. I am also pleased that the Scottish Government is looking to make both health and social care more person centred. That is welcome, given how liberating self-directed support can be for individuals. Self-directed support has had some negative press, because a number of local authorities have introduced it as a cost-cutting exercise rather than because they adhere to its principles. It is therefore only reasonable that I mention how my local authority has treated people with learning disabilities in the context of its day-centre reforms and closures. In its briefing for today’s debate, the Health and Social Care Alliance says that there should be shared decision making when changes happen, but there was no shared decision making between Glasgow City Council and learning disabled individuals and their families, who were just told that their centres would close. That approach goes completely against the principles both of person-centred care and of self-directed support. As the Learning Disability Alliance Scotland has said, in designing services we should apply the principle, “Nothing about us without us”, but that was simply not the case in Glasgow. I thank the cabinet secretary for offering Glasgow City Council the chance to think again about the proposals to close three day centres, and for offering to work in partnership with the council, but I am disappointed that the council seems to have snubbed that offer. However, we live to fight another day on that one. To come back to the positive aspects of person-centred care, I should mention some good work that already takes place. Revive MS in Glasgow already offers person-centred care not just to people who have multiple sclerosis, but to families who support MS patients. However, person-centred care is always work in progress. For example, my constituent Mr James Jamieson has contacted me about the need to support people who are living with hidradenitis, which is a brutal skin condition, and how we can improve care for such patients. I am in correspondence with the cabinet secretary to seek to improve that, but there are a lot of good things already happening. Let me finish off by saying that, with £300 million already spent through the reshaping care for older people change fund moneys, and with a £100 million fund on the table to help with health and social care integration, I am really excited about the opportunities that lie ahead, but I also have it in mind that we need to scrutinise the changes that we make in order to ensure that they deliver what we said they would deliver. What we want is truly 24/7 health and social care that meets the needs of my constituents and constituents across the country.

Jim Hume has mentioned mental health issues and mental ill health. Does he agree that our mental health needs nurtured consistently along with our physical health? Does he also agree that, if more consideration was given to that in health and social care, we could take preventative measures to prevent mental ill health—that is an unfortunate term—from ever happening in the first place?

I will not get into a political debate about cuts to local authorities, but given that I mentioned Glasgow City Council, I say to the member that there are no cuts in the social work budget in Glasgow in relation to adults with learning difficulties. A political choice has been made not to support self-directed support in Glasgow; that is not to do with cuts. I wanted to put that on the record.

I have listened to the debate with interest. Will Elaine Murray clarify the Labour Party’s position on the free bus pass? I am unclear from her speech precisely what it is.

I have a point of information, which Mr Stewart was perhaps going to address. I am sure that he is about to highlight that there are difficulties with the thresholds and modifiers that are applied, but the £30,000 threshold is not an automatic cut-off. Medicines are approved at a far higher threshold than that—although perhaps not enough; I accept that point.

It is a privilege to sum up the debate on behalf of the Health and Sport Committee. Let me begin by echoing the thanks that many members have given to all those who provided written and verbal evidence to our committee. I also thank the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing, Alex Neil, and his team for their open, constructive and listening approach to the committee’s work. Those sentiments were echoed by both Jackson Carlaw and Willie Coffey during the debate.

Yes, of course. The process by which Scotland’s Parliament has dealt with the access to medicines issue perhaps demonstrates our Parliament at its best. From what we have heard, the cabinet secretary will need to ensure that the door is large enough to fit his head through when he leaves the chamber, but I ask Mr Findlay not to leave the chamber at the same time. I thought that the tone of the speech from Mr Findlay, who leads for the Labour Party on health, shows that we have a real cross-party consensus to move forward on the issue together. I thank Mr Findlay for his speech. There is light and shade to Mr Findlay’s speeches in this Parliament.

I will hold a sweepstake among the back benchers on how long it will be before Mr Findlay gets his second compliment. I will let him know who wins that. On a more serious note, let us not forget that the Health and Sport Committee’s report is a substantial body of work that, as the committee convener said, follows on from a number of petitions that the committee received via the parliamentary petitions system. Our findings are based on robust scrutiny and evidence. Although our committee has not formally considered the Scottish Government’s response to our recommendations, given that many of our recommendations seem to have been accepted by the Scottish Government, I am sure that—in general terms if not on all the specifics—committee members will welcome much of the cabinet secretary’s response. Of course, as the cabinet secretary would expect, detailed scrutiny by our committee will follow. We will also look through the Official Report of today’s debate to see how best to take matters forward as a committee. On the SMC system more generally, in my view our inquiry’s aim was not to fix a system that was broken but to improve a system for approval and access to medicines that was already considered world leading. Malcolm Chisholm also made that point. We looked at the quality-adjusted life year, which we have heard much about during today’s debate. In paragraph 71 of our report, we said: “No one argued that there was a better system than the QALY for assessing the value offered by competing treatments”. However, despite that assertion by our committee, the next three words in the quote, which is incomplete, are vital—they are “despite its limitations.” The committee sought to move forward beyond those limitations, which is why we urged the Scottish Government to “review as a matter of priority how modifiers and thresholds are applied to better take account of orphan and ultra-orphan conditions, end of life and innovation”. Of course we want the details of that review, but I am delighted to hear that the SMC has already started the process and that we expect a report back to the cabinet secretary before Christmas. The committee decided that the matter is pressing and I am glad that the Government appears to have moved speedily on it. I want to raise the matter of modifiers and thresholds, because to focus only on the IPTR system would be to ignore a key issue in our inquiry, which is why the SMC was turning down certain medicines for approval in the first place. In my opinion, that led to the IPTR process being used as a backdoor approval mechanism, for which it was never designed. In giving evidence to the committee, Eric Low of Myeloma UK repeatedly made the point—I am not quoting directly; rather, I am going from memory—that we need to design a system that gets more yeses by the SMC first time but in a fair and consistent manner. I believe that we will achieve that through the review of the QALY modifiers, combined with a number of other matters. The first of those is having a pause in the SMC process. In England, if it looks as though discussions between the pharmaceutical companies and NICE are not going to lead to a yes, there is a pause in the process to allow people to reconsider rather than take entrenched positions. That is a sensible proposal and I am glad that the Government is taking it forward. There are also recommendations, to which I will return if there is time, on taking a wider view of value and cost effectiveness in relation to approval of medicines in Scotland. An issue that could have been controversial but which did not turn out to be because of the sensitive way in which our committee handled it was the matter of the cancer drugs fund in England and end-of-life conditions. I was going to read some quotes from the report but, because of time constraints, I will not do so. However, the committee unanimously ruled out a cancer drugs fund in Scotland. I pay tribute to Nanette Milne for sensitively handling the way in which we got to that cross-party consensus. Needless to say, the committee agreed that we should not single out any end-of-life condition but that we should instead improve our system in a fair, consistent and evidence-based manner. That is why the committee ruled out a cancer drugs fund. I have spoken about the enhanced modifier for the SMC to take greater cognisance of end-of-life conditions. Of course, that is only part of the solution to dealing with end-of-life conditions and, in particular, cancer. As we have heard, no system will always say yes, so individual patient treatment requests become crucial. Paragraph 62 in our report makes a number of recommendations that lean towards a national system of individual patient treatment requests, with a desire to move away from exceptionality, which has been mentioned. We believe that exceptionality was a flawed basis on which to move forward with patient treatment requests. The cabinet secretary’s response to those recommendations is perhaps to rip up the IPTR system, so the committee will now have to take a decision on the peer-approved clinical system. Intuitively, I am drawn towards that. In the debate, we have heard of a number of examples of clinicians saying that there was a strong evidence base for an end-of-life medicine and that it would make a material difference to their patient, yet the request was still refused. If the peer-approved clinical system does what it appears to say on the tin, that situation will become a thing of the past, which I warmly welcome. Of course, the committee will have to hold back on taking a position, to allow us to consider in more detail how the new approach will be rolled out. As the convener, Duncan McNeil, did, I ask the cabinet secretary to consider the use of modifiers in the SMC process before the new system comes into place and to consider how area drug and therapeutics committees will view exceptionality in the transitional period until the peer-approved clinical system comes into place. My strong call—I do not have the convener’s permission to make it, but I am sure that I speak with the committee’s consent—is that we would expect every area drug and therapeutics committee to take cognisance of peer-approved clinical recommendations for drugs now and not to wait until the formal system comes into place. I think that I am on safe ground with the committee in saying that. A delay can occur in medicines that the SMC has approved finding their way on to local formularies. On my reading of the cabinet secretary’s response to the committee, that is one of the few instances when he is not on the same ground as the committee. The committee looked at the idea of making a national formulary available locally and making medicines available consistently and readily within the 30-day period that is set out. The cabinet secretary has given assurances about the speed with which medicines will be put on local formularies but has not necessarily accepted the idea of a national formulary. However, I note that the Scottish Government’s response talked about “the implementation of certain medicines of key clinical importance though discussion and agreement of the relevant specialists within NHSScotland to ensure ... outcomes for patients in all parts of Scotland are optimised”, which will be made available on a national basis outwith local formularies. That moves part of the way towards the committee’s recommendation. The committee will of course have to look at that.

In the time that is left, I will talk about value-based pricing. That has unravelled slightly—to be kind to the UK Government—but we should not dwell on that. We should look forward as a Parliament, a committee and a Government. We must capture better the value of medicines in Scotland. When we give a patient a medicine, that has a benefit. That patient might benefit—as one of my constituents could—by no longer being in a wheelchair. If that is the case, what are the savings to the local authority and to the NHS? What are the benefits to society? Right now, none of that is captured. I am delighted that the cabinet secretary has indicated that we will move to a Scottish model of value to capture the value in what is cost effective, beneficial and desirable for society.

I see this as a groundbreaking moment in how the Parliament and the Government address access to medicines. Like Jackson Carlaw, I think that what is proposed will endure and will make a substantial difference to our constituents’ lives. It is a pleasure to close the debate. I look forward to on-going scrutiny on behalf of and with the Health and Sport Committee.

Although I welcome the IT review across all health boards that the cabinet secretary mentioned, no IT system will ever be foolproof. Does he believe that health boards have contingencies in place to ensure that, when computer systems stop working, patient care of the most vulnerable patients, including cancer patients, is not compromised?

I am sure that Christine Grahame wants to finish grumbling soon and to be positive and constructive about the issue that we are debating.

I congratulate Mary Fee on what I thought was a fine speech. I also congratulate the Parliament on the fact that we are debating a motion with no amendments. I suspect that that shows that members across all the parties are keen to unite as a Parliament as this piece of work goes forward to ensure that we come together not just to increase protections for society but to do more to rehabilitate those who have been through the judicial process. The best way in which to keep the public safe is to prevent offenders from reoffending in the first place. Blocking the path to education, training and employment would clearly be counterproductive in relation to reducing reoffending rates. Indeed, the evidence shows that placing barriers to employment and so forth makes reoffending far more likely. It is with that in mind that I view both the debate generally and the terms of the review of the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974 specifically. As the cabinet secretary mentioned, that act determines when former prisoners or those who have received non-prison sentences have to disclose to employers the fact that they have had convictions. Seemingly populist attempts to make society safer can be counterproductive and make us less safe. I hope that we can get cross-party agreement on that. I will be interested to hear how the Government seeks to amend the 1974 act and its proposals on when disclosure of previous offending should be required. I note that the cabinet secretary is open to suggestions on how the law should change and that he has restated that there should be no dilution of protection for vulnerable groups and appropriate protection when employees have access to at-risk client groups. That is vital. It seems rather arbitrary that those who go to prison for two and a half years or less no longer have to disclose a conviction after a certain period of time because it becomes spent, but that if they do a day more than 30 months they must disclose it ad infinitum. That does not make sense. It seems to involve drawing a line in the sand just for the sake of it. There is a similar position for alternatives to prison. Whether a person has to disclose an offence depends on which of the two categories they are in—namely those with community payback orders and those with fines. That does not make sense to me. We do not need to overhaul the system, but we need to look at it again, take a weather check on it and modernise it. We seem to have started to do that. I note from a briefing for this debate that a 2013 order means that we can go the other way when that is required, such as in relation to those who seek employment in what could be considered industries that may attract more unsavoury types. I know that, given the problems that we have had with the security industry, people continue to have to disclose certain convictions in it, and I could mention other such industries. I would be interested to know whether the cabinet secretary has given further thought to whether people should always have to disclose certain convictions depending on the sector in which they seek to be employed, not because they deal with vulnerable groups but perhaps because their area of the economy is targeted by serious organised criminals. We should give thought to that as well. Of course, there is another side of the coin. The issue is not just about trying to reduce reoffending; it is also about society’s duty to rehabilitate offenders. Graeme Pearson mentioned 1,308 projects, but he might want to revise that to 1,309 because I am about to mention another one that is developing in north Glasgow; I would like to draw the cabinet secretary’s attention to it. The project is run by Open Gates, which operates on the old Pars bakery site near Possil in an old derelict building that the charity has restored with the support of Scottish Canals. The charity is working in a positive and constructive way with five national top-end former prisoners who are out on licence to make sure that they have the support and skills that they need to progress with their lives. The volunteer-led project allows them to gain a series of skills, such as upholstery, wood turning, carpentry, French polishing and strip and dip of wood and metal. The model is that those lifers—or life-licensed individuals—can become volunteers who work with low-level young offenders in the community. They give peer support and skills to young people who have offended and who we wish not to reoffend. That vital project will add something to tackling reoffending rates. I have written to the cabinet secretary in the past few weeks specifically in relation to that project and I have asked him to come and visit it. I hope that in his summing up he will confirm that he will come and see the good work that is being done in the Possil area to tackle reoffending and the peer support that is being offered. In the time I have left, I want to mention one gentleman whom I have permission to say a little about. David Crimin is a former lifer who was convicted when he was 16 years old and who served 16 years in prison. He is now 42. In his 10 years of freedom he has always worked voluntarily. From responding to requests from the elderly to wallpaper and paint rooms to cutting hair for friends and family, he has always kept himself busy. He is now a valuable part of the team at Open Gates, which hopes to give him his first full-time job. He also has qualifications in bricklaying, painting and decorating and hairdressing. I could say a lot more about David, but the one thing I want to say is that, although he got many of those skills while he was in prison, because of the stigma of being in prison and the associated barriers to employment he is only now really able to use them. Via Open Gates, he hopes to pass his skills on to young people who, we hope, will not start on a life of crime. By providing peer support and rehabilitation, such projects can prevent them from taking that path.

I thank the cabinet secretary for reflecting in his summing up points that I made during my speech. I also asked whether he would visit the Open Gates project in north Glasgow. Will he confirm that he would be delighted to come and see that good project in action?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I welcome the publication of the “Keys to life” strategy, which is the second ten-year strategy for tackling learning disabilities and ensuring that independent living is at the heart of everything that we do. The strategy quite rightly builds on a relatively successful strategy that was commissioned by the previous Executive’s “The same as you?” publication. That strategy saw a move away from long-stay beds, which has resulted in there being 1,000 fewer, over the years. It also saw a move away from the traditional day centre set-up. I welcome both of those changes, but I am also heartened to hear the minister say that there is still an essential role for day centres in some circumstances. In my experience, it may even be a desirable role in some circumstances. I will speak about that later. While the second strategy was a long time in the making, it was right to take two years to evaluate the previous 10-year strategy and to run that through the national learning disability strategy group. All stakeholders can rightfully say that they have had a key partnership role in producing this second 10-year strategy. I want to focus initially on some of the health recommendations. The Learning Disability Alliance Scotland said in its very helpful submission that that is the right thing to do. I might also refer to some of those points later if I have time. There is a 20-year reduced life expectancy for adults with learning difficulties, and many learning-disabled individuals have complex learning needs and multimorbidities. It is only right that the health recommendations be a major focus of the strategy. It is also quite right that we quantify the extent of the issue before we can fully address problems and barriers. That is why I welcome recommendations 9 to 12, particularly the new HEAT—health improvement, efficiency and governance, access and treatment—target that is to be developed to identify and track just how the learning-disabled are using the national health service. In a few years we will ask ourselves why we never tracked that use in the first place. It is clearly the right thing to do, not just for its own sake but, as the strategy makes clear, to identify trends and patterns. I assume that it will also help us to identify areas where improvement is needed, and help us to understand key issues better, such as the unnecessary deaths that still occur within the learning-disabled communities. The most significant aspect of the recommendations is the attempt to identify and track the social work resources that are provided to the learning-disabled using the unique NHS number that every learning-disabled individual has, like the rest of us. That will be important and I will perhaps say more about that later, if I have time. In terms of the broad thrust of the health improvements that we seek, I commend the recommendation on oral health, and with regard to epilepsy, I welcome the greater access to specialist nurses at an appropriate time. I will welcome greater access to neurological services, should we make it a reality. A meaningful improvement could be made the next time the general practitioners’ contract is reviewed. It would perhaps be worth having within that contract a special indicator of how GPs deal with the learning-disabled. We should also mention the greater advocacy needs that the learning-disabled may have in accessing GPs and other services, and the greater time that they may need with the GP. There is a lot to welcome within the health aspect of the strategy. I also give a nod to recommendation 7, which suggests that local authorities and NHS boards should, by 2015, have joint commissioning plans to “take account of the needs of people with learning disabilities”. Recommendation 7 also says that plans should maximise “independence and control”. That is clearly the direction of travel in which we want public policy to go to meet the needs of our learning-disabled communities. I will concentrate now on recommendations on traditional social care and independent living. In doing so, I will—as members could probably predict—mention Glasgow City Council’s reform of day centres for the learning disabled. I preface that by saying that local authorities of all political persuasions have not always got that right. This is not a party-political attack; it is me representing constituents whom I defend and whose interests have not been taken account of. Recommendation 5 in “The keys to life” is: “That in preparation for the legal duties imposed by the Social Care (Self-directed Support) (Scotland) Act 2013, local authorities and their NHS partners should work with private, voluntary and third sector agencies to ensure that people with learning disabilities have access to a creative variety of providers and supports and are assisted to think creatively about how outcomes can be met and what assistance they may need to develop control.” I emphasise that it is about “what assistance they may need to develop control.” I ask members to indulge me, because I also will consider recommendation 27, which is: “That by June 2018 the Scottish Government in partnership with local authorities, the Third Sector and people with learning disabilities and carers review and further develop day opportunities”. I have missed out the second part of that recommendation because of time constraints, but I emphasise that the recommendation says that “people with learning disabilities and carers” should get to “review and further develop day opportunities”. In other words, as the Learning Disability Alliance Scotland puts it, the recommendations “could have been strengthened from the start by re-emphasising the phrase ‘Nothing About Us, Without Us’” in terms of the learning disabled. It is in the light of those good principles being included in the new strategy and their having been a thread running through previous strategies that I look at Glasgow City Council’s approach. The council developed a plan to close three day centres for adults with learning disabilities. It did not consult them, but instead presented the closures as a fait accompli and consulted on the alternatives after the centres were closed. That is not about control; is about marginalisation of some of the most vulnerable people in society. It should not be allowed. I stress again that carers and adults with learning disabilities in Glasgow have said that they are open to reforming day-centre provision and general learning disability provision within the city, but the council should speak to them. There should be a two-year moratorium on closures in order that they can engage positively with Glasgow City Council to map out the best service provision and support for adults with learning disabilities in the city. To what do adults with learning disabilities have recourse when councils get it wrong? Councils have statutory duties in terms of consultation if they decide to consult. However, when they get it spectacularly wrong, as they have done in Glasgow—and, sometimes, elsewhere; it is not only about Glasgow—to what can those most vulnerable people whom I seek to represent have recourse? There is a fantastic 10-year strategy in front of us, but we should also be mindful of the gaps that still exist and the need to represent the most vulnerable people in our constituencies.

I was going to intervene earlier, but I wanted to let Mr Chisholm finish telling his constituent’s story. I agree with Mr Chisholm about the co-production commissioning model, which would put the carers and service users at the heart of the process. Earlier, Mr Chisholm mentioned day centres. I am not wedded to a day-centre model. Would he agree that the principle is that there should be choice and control and that, if some adults make positive choices to use day centres, they should be able to do so?

Will the member give way?

Kinship carers do a tremendous job supporting some of our most vulnerable children. What progress is being made to better support them, including moving towards parity of support with foster carers?

I welcome the announcement of additional cash from the Scottish Government to mitigate some of the terrible refugee problems in Syria. A couple of weeks ago, I spoke to some refugees in a Kurdistan refugee camp. From that experience, I am aware of the dire need they have and how much they appreciate any support and any amount of money from anywhere in the world. I am proud to be part of a Parliament that does what it can, with limited resources, to make international humanitarian contributions. Unfortunately, I must contrast the Government’s approach with Jackie Baillie’s tasteless comments on nationality. I want to give her comments no further credence, so I make the point only for the record. This Government bases its policies and position not only on what is best for all the people of Scotland, no matter where they come from, but in the interests of all humanitarian interventions across the world in order to meet our international obligations. The approach is not about nationality; it is about the human condition and helping everyone. Many Labour speakers chose to ignore the legislative programme. Instead, they sought to indulge in negative speeches that did little to comment on or scrutinise the programme. Not for the first time in the chamber, it will take an SNP MSP to scrutinise the Government’s legislative programme. The Labour Party needs to be mindful of being fit for opposition, never mind being fit for government. In doing my bit for scrutiny, I will talk about the bankruptcy consolidation bill. I ask colleagues to look closely at the bill. The bill could be vital in improving debt solutions for some of the most vulnerable people. The bill will build on the good legislation in the previous session—the Home Owner and Debtor Protection (Scotland) Act 2010—that I helped to scrutinise at committee stage. I want to comment in detail on a problem that still exists, and I ask for the chamber’s indulgence in doing so. There are three core debt solutions for those who have no realistic hope of finding a way out of their personal debt. Those solutions are bankruptcy via a sequestration or the low-income low-asset route, the debt arrangement scheme and protected trust deeds. There may be others, but those are the three core routes that I will focus on. Which debt solution is appropriate will, of course, depend on individual circumstances. For example, home owners with substantial debt might benefit from a protected trust deed, which could protect their family home from repossession and enable them to achieve a workable debt solution. This Government brought in the relevant legislation. Other people—non-home owners with a certain level of debt—might be best served by the low-income, low-assets route to bankruptcy. It is evident that it would be wholly inappropriate to offer a protected trust deed to someone who would clearly benefit from the LILA route. I believe that protected trust deeds are being offered irresponsibly to vulnerable tenants in Scotland. Protected trust deeds can lead to debt repayment schemes that cost tenants many thousands of pounds and take them several years to pay, and which leave them struggling financially. I put it on record that there will be many good advisers in the marketplace, but some of those who provide advice on protected trust deeds might not give the best, or clear, advice. Such advisers get finders’ fees of more than £1,500 to put people through the protected trust deed process, which they may do inappropriately. I hope that the Scottish Government will use the proposed bankruptcy consolidation bill to regulate debt advice in that area and to ensure that any debt advisers who offer such flawed advice are driven out of the sector. Such inappropriate advice might be offered as a result of incompetence, but it might also be offered by cowboys in the marketplace, whom we should drive out. The Parliament has the regulatory powers to do that. Debt advisers who offer other debt solutions have to be registered with the Scottish Government’s Accountant in Bankruptcy. We could stipulate that those who offer advice on protected trust deeds also have to be registered with the Accountant in Bankruptcy and that, if they did not fulfil their functions properly, they would no longer be registered with the AIB. That is just one way of improving people’s situation. In the time that I have left—with the Presiding Officer’s indulgence—I would like to refer briefly to two other aspects of the legislative programme. I had hoped that people would come forward with ideas for measures to improve the quality of housing that could be included in the proposed housing bill instead of sniping from the sidelines. I would like to offer one thought on how we can improve the quality of housing in Scotland. We must go a lot further in the private housing sector. We must find ways of rewarding good registered private landlords—we should incentivise them to improve their stock, where we can—and of clamping down further on the cowboys. I also think that we must do more to put an obligation on landlords in the private rented sector as far as electrical safety is concerned. Finally—do I have time, Presiding Officer?

I will leave it at that and sum up by saying that there is a lot in the legislative programme, about which members—if they took the time to read it and think constructively about it—could say something meaningful. That is what MSPs should be doing, rather than letting themselves down, as members of the Labour Party have done over the past two days.

They are back-door solutions.

I welcome the forthcoming Scottish Government strategy on youth sport. I also welcome the fact that it will be a draft strategy, which will give all interested stakeholders the opportunity to work constructively to develop the strategy in a collegiate way. That is the right way in which to proceed. We all want to ensure that the potential legacy from Glasgow’s Commonwealth games is maximised, as it should significantly increase youngsters’ interest in getting involved in sport. However, just as significant, as the motion states, we want to create a lifelong habit of being active. It is not just about getting young people active; it is about keeping them active. If I have time later, I will say more about that. Undoubtedly, investment in sporting infrastructure and funds for specific initiatives to support schools and sports clubs to get many more young people active are crucial. I will note one or two of the investment priorities alongside community sport hubs, which deliver a significant cash saving to many clubs that work together. The £7.4 million capital spending budget to transform local sports facilities throughout Scotland is money that local clubs can access, and the £10 million legacy 2014 active places fund has already awarded cash to 24 community projects. Those are two examples of funding being leveraged in. I want to talk about how we should direct future investment. We need a full audit to determine where there are lower levels of sporting participation among young people. Just as important is how we tackle the problem that exists. Is it an issue around volunteers or the range of sports clubs and sporting opportunities that are available? Is it a lack of access to qualified coaches? Is it a facilities issue? Is it to do with the cost of access? Is it down to the fact that there is a weak sporting culture in some areas? Those are potential barriers to participation in sport, and we must have that information before we can direct funds to tackling the issues through the opportunities provided by the Commonwealth games. We need a baseline against which to measure any future success in terms of sporting participation and, crucially, to inform future investment. As part of that baseline to inform future investment, we should consider how we can prioritise investment in areas of particular deprivation and areas with particularly poor health outcomes. Unfortunately, those are often the same areas, but those are two clear criteria for the direction of funding to get young people more physically active. There have been some really good signs. For example, there has been an investment of £2.2 million in developing a paddlesports centre at Pinkston in Glasgow, with £1 million coming from the Scottish Government. That crucial initiative is driving regeneration in a deprived area. Just as important, a network of youth clubs in the area are now forming their own canoe club to get physically active. Those are opportunities that would not otherwise be available to the people of Maryhill, Springburn and beyond. I am delighted by the joint work that Glasgow City Council and the Scottish Government are doing on the bid to host the youth Olympics in north Glasgow. We will see 400 new social rented houses delivered in that part of the city because of the Scottish Government’s commitment, irrespective of whether the youth Olympics bid is successful. We all want the bid to be successful, but it is important that that investment is leveraged in irrespective of that. I will say a little bit about the cost of accessing sports facilities. I recently met the football club North Kelvin United, which told me that it was trying to keep costs as low as possible. However, even if the club charges only £3 or £4 a week for young people, the cost for a family with two young boys to get them actively involved in sport can add up to £10 a week if they are bought a can of juice as well, and a lot of families on benefits do not have that money. We must think carefully about that. I give credit to that club because, for the first time, it is launching a girls’ football team. We all want young girls to get more physically active. We need to consider how we support success in deprived communities, where there are examples of sports clubs that are doing well, and how we help them. It is incumbent on me to mention the formidable Alex Richardson, from the gladiators weightlifting project, who gave quite dramatic evidence to the Health and Sport Committee. He has informed me that, in the recent championships in Austria, young kids from the east end of Glasgow won two gold, four silver, and four bronze medals and that others were highly placed. He pointed out that, should the 2018 youth Olympics bid be successful, many of those young people will qualify for it. However, those young people should be taking part in the 2018 youth Olympics irrespective of where it is held. Therefore, my plea is that sportscotland, the Scottish Government and others work strategically to ensure that young people who could be sporting icons in their local communities can excel at the highest level. In gladiators, we perhaps have an example of how that could be done. My final point concerns the oldies. We want young people to get physically active, but they eventually get old. I therefore suggest that Glasgow should put in a bid for the 2021 world masters games for the over-35s. Young people will—we hope—reach 35 at some point in their lives, so I hope that the minister will back that bid. I have written to Glasgow City Council about that, too—I have asked that it sees those games as part of the legacy to keep people physically active throughout their lives—so that we can work in partnership to deliver for the city and for Scotland.

Even though I do not agree with the terms of Paul Martin’s motion, I thank him for bringing an important issue to the Parliament. I could not sign the motion, because I believe that it is incomplete. It is in complete denial about the 26 per cent capital cuts that the UK Government has imposed. Under those circumstances, I simply could not support it. I put it on record that the UK Government’s welfare reforms are probably the greatest challenge that the housing association movement faces. I am referring not just to the bedroom tax, which has received much publicity, but to the reform of disability living allowance and the introduction of personal independence payments, which will deprive a lot more constituents of money that they need to pay their rent than will the bedroom tax, horrible though that is. I also put on record my apologies for not being able to meet the representatives of Glasgow’s community-based housing association movement earlier today. I was at a meeting about developing a fairer system for accessing new medicines, including end-of-life cancer drugs. I hope that members will appreciate that that was an important meeting for me to attend. That is why I could not meet the movement’s representatives outside Parliament. I know that a number of people from community-based housing associations are in the gallery, and I hope to mention some of the work that they have done, if time allows. I say gently to Paul Martin that I cannot take any lessons from the Labour Party on supporting community-based housing associations. There are larger, stronger community-based housing associations in north Glasgow because the SNP Government got the second-stage transfer from the GHA moving. We now have a larger Maryhill Housing Association, a larger Queens Cross Housing Association and a larger NG Homes because our Government got community-based housing associations motoring and delivered on second-stage transfer.

I will come on to speak specifically about those figures, but I think that Mr Martin made a Freudian slip—he began by saying “the gaffe”. In denying the reality that we are building social houses in Glasgow and Scotland more widely, part of his speech was an absolute gaffe, so I will take no lessons from him on community-based housing associations. Let us talk about some of the HAG realities. Mr Martin made a reasonable point when he said that either more capital expenditure has to be put into building new social houses, in which case other parties must say where that would come from—they have failed to do that—or the HAG level has to be lowered to allow more houses to be built. The alternative, as Mr Mason suggested, would be not to lower the HAG level unless houses are built. The SNP Government has made a political decision—incidentally, that is something that it would like to do more of—but no other party is prepared to do the same. That is a cop-out and it shows an Opposition party that is not fit to be in charge of housing policy. Another thing that I wish to say to Mr Martin is that Labour Opposition members mention capital expenditure cuts when it suits them, but not when it does not. The real-terms increase to our national health service budget, for example, is a dramatic investment in the NHS, but the capital budget has gone down because of UK cuts. That is something that Ms Baillie, Labour’s health spokesperson, fails to take into account when she is discussing the health budget. That is an inconsistent, incoherent message.

I think that I am running short of time. I apologise to Mr Johnstone.

I have one or two more things that I want to say. I want to consider some positive aspects.

In the three years up to 2015, Glasgow will have received £181 million in housing association grant money and, on top of that, nearly £29 million of reprovisioning money through the Glasgow Housing Association for demolitions. I would like to say that Glasgow City Council—

I am in my final minute, Mr Scott—I realise that.

Let me just put this in. We need more flexibility on the grant arrangements under reprovisioning to allow greater access to local housing, whether it be in transformational regeneration areas in Maryhill or in Sighthill, where the youth Olympics is hopefully coming to town and an additional 400 social units will be built as a result of that.

Will the member give way?

I want to intervene on my committee convener because he said something a bit more nuanced in relation to companies fulfilling their contractual obligations and employment law. I agree with him that we still want to attract employers. There are clearly two options on the table. One is to improve employment law at a UK level, which might be the member’s solution, but does he accept that having responsibility for employment law in this Parliament would give us an opportunity to protect workers? I merely ask him to take a balanced view and accept that bringing responsibility for employment law to this Parliament would also be an opportunity.

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

Like Mr Stevenson, I do not sit on the committee that produced the report but, as a former deputy convener of the Subordinate Legislation Committee, I feel Mr Stevenson’s pain in relation to the meetings of that committee. As regards incentivising people into employment, I have not yet heard anyone mention reforms to the tax credit system. A lot has been said about gender inequalities in relation to underemployment. Does Mr Stevenson think that reforms to the tax credit system in particular have disadvantaged a lot of women who work part-time but would like to do more hours, and that that is something that—while the power sits at Westminster and not with this Parliament—the UK Government should consider?

I have asked about various reports that have established the facts about the cost of childcare in Scotland, but they do not go into detail to explain why it is more expensive. It could be because there is a more qualified workforce. Does Rhoda Grant believe that there is a need to expand partnership nurseries? Often, the traditional local authority nurseries, which do a fantastic job, are just not flexible enough to fit in with the working lives of all families, and in particular the lives of female workers.

I note that Mr Pearson’s speech seemed to be a speech of two halves, and that the tone of the first half was just a little bit wrong. I do not understand how he managed to bring independence into a consensual debate like this; that was a complete non sequitur and a bit insulting to the substance of the debate. It might be out of character, but there we are. As other members have done, I pay tribute to Susan Archibald and her petition, and to all those who are involved in the wider campaign to improve the situation for those who live with chronic pain. I have not followed the issue particularly closely, so today’s debate has given me the opportunity to find out more. Having said that, a number of individual constituents have made representations to me in the past on chronic pain issues. Indeed, I am sure that we all have, as I have, a family member who lives with chronic pain, so we can all see the social and emotional consequences of it as much as the medical consequences. I welcome the progress that has been made with regard to chronic pain. In doing so, I note the concerns of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on chronic pain, which supplied a briefing for this afternoon’s debate, and those of the Health and Social Care Alliance Scotland. Those groups have raised concerns about the pace of implementation of recommendations that started as early as 2007 with “Getting to GRIPS with Chronic Pain in Scotland”, and about the progress that has been made by each of the 14 health boards. I believe that progress has been made, but we must draw attention to the fact that concerns have been raised about that progress. Of course, it is right for passionate and committed campaigners to be in a hurry for quick progress to be made on chronic pain management—that is the role of doughty campaigners, for which I pay tribute to them. Health boards and the Government must take a planned approach to developing new or improved services. The important date for many will be April 2014, by which time each health board will need to have in place a chronic pain service delivery plan. Since 2009, we have had a national lead clinician whose job it is to spearhead and champion the development of pain management services. A national chronic pain steering group has been developed, as well as a Scottish service model for chronic pain. I would welcome information from the Scottish Government on the degree of preparedness for the April 2014 deadline. Many people see that date as an end point for having a comprehensive system in place to tackle chronic pain, rather than a starting point. More information on the preparedness of each health board would be welcome. There is a new set of SIGN guidelines that should underpin any managed clinical network and how it will work. I note that NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde now has a managed clinical network for the management of chronic pain. I am interested to know how the care pathways will work for those who live with chronic pain. How will sufferers seek support? The documentation may be available on file and briefings may have been provided to MSPs, but what will be the reality for those who live with chronic pain? I would welcome more information on how the Scottish Government will ensure a consistent approach in the quality of service that is provided across all health boards. However, although I mention the need for a consistent approach, I accept that there is a need for localised delivery models and that is what I want to concentrate much of my speech on. One of the organisations that I work with in Maryhill is Revive MS Support—multiple sclerosis is a significant cause of chronic pain for many—which provides services such as physiotherapy, aromatherapy, reflexology, counselling, hyperbaric oxygen therapy and speech and language therapy, including swallowing and cognitive advice. I could cite many more examples of the services that Revive MS Support provides, but the important point is that the organisation provides an holistic approach to help those living with chronic pain, such as MS sufferers and their families, by supporting them in the community. Revive MS Support is based in the north of Glasgow, but it also does outreach work in Paisley, Douglas, Hamilton, Glasgow’s south side and beyond. Therefore, as others have said, in looking at the network of support that is available for those living with chronic pain, it is important that we consider the support that can be provided by the third sector or voluntary sector. I want to put on record the words of a lady called Jenny Wilson Best, who is an ambassador for Revive MS Support. She said: “REVIVE offer many different therapies but for me it was the ‘Fatigue Management Group’ that allowed me to find myself again. I renamed it ‘Anger Management’ then ‘Sadness Management’ and finally to ‘Acceptance Management’. I cried a lot but I don’t cry anymore. Now I get on with my life and live it to the full. I still suffer fatigue and chronic pain and have learnt how to use my wheelchair but thanks to REVIVE I have found a path upon which I can walk.” The reason for my using that quote is that people may not consider organisations such as Revive MS Support to be clinician led, but they provide a quality service that supports people living with chronic pain. When we look at the strategy in each health board area, we need to ensure that there is breathing space for organisations such as Revive MS Support. I should put on record that Revive MS Support recently got a £20,000 grant from the Scottish Government to provide an additional support worker for its outreach work.

As we move towards health and social care integration, health boards and local authorities should be looking to disinvest some of their funds in favour of such organisations, which provide an holistic approach to tackling chronic pain in our communities.

10. To ask the Scottish Government how it seeks to support vulnerable children and their families. (S4O-02144)

I thank the minister for that detailed answer. Yesterday, I met families from across Scotland who are benefiting from the Family Fund’s take a break initiative, which gives the families of disabled youngsters financial assistance to plan a holiday of their choice, which under-pressure families greatly value. The Scottish Government’s support for that initiative is welcome. Will the minister confirm that the fund includes support for families of disabled young people over the age of 18? Will he continue to work constructively with the Family Fund to ensure that there is sufficient provision to meet the needs of families of young people over the age of 18?

I, too, congratulate Joan McAlpine on securing the debate. I also congratulate Alex Hamilton, who is one of my constituents, on lodging the petition that inspired the debate. As has been mentioned, RSPB Scotland, Trees for Life, the Woodland Trust, the Scottish Wildlife Trust and the John Muir Trust—I could go on—are just some of the groups and organisations that have backed Mr Hamilton’s request. Clearly, he has a knack of getting people and organisations with similar interests and passions together to achieve change. That fact that he has got me—an unreconstructed city boy who, in my earlier years, did not pay much attention to nature—speaking in the debate shows the strength of the idea of a national tree. I will say more about that later. Rod Campbell talked about the importance of symbols. As a multinational state, the symbols of the United Kingdom’s constituent countries tend to be recognised by general public agreement, rather than in any official way. The example of the national anthem is an obvious one. “Flower of Scotland” is widely recognised as Scotland’s national anthem, although officially we share—for the moment—“God Save the Queen” with England, Wales and Northern Ireland. England and United Kingdom also share a national tree—the pedunculate oak, which is more commonly known as the royal oak. I am one of the MSPs who have made representations on behalf of Mr Hamilton to Paul Wheelhouse, the Minister for Environment and Climate Change. I am sure that we will hear from him shortly on how he wants to progress the matter. Although there is no formal mechanism in place for designating an official national tree, that is not a reason not to do it. It can be done and it should be done, and with willingness it will be done. The process to date has been constructive. It has certainly got people thinking about our natural world, and appreciating the wonderful wildlife and scenery of Scotland, which are two of our most internationally recognised assets. At times, some of us—as I said at the start of the debate, that includes me—can easily take that for granted. Joan McAlpine mentioned the boost to our timber industry that having a national tree would bring, and others have said that it will reinforce Scotland the brand. I think that the process by which we choose a national tree is just as important as the tree that we choose, so I would like to say a little about that. As we have heard already, the Woodland Trust conducted a poll about what tree Scots would go for; two thirds went for the Scots pine, with the rowan coming second. I understand that the winner got 414 votes. I commend the Woodland Trust for that initiative, but I think that we will be talking about thousands of votes when we take the debate forward nationally on a structured and engaged level. That is the key bit that I would like to talk about. After we eventually decide on what our national tree will be, why not reaffirm that, say, every 10 years and let the people decide whether they wish to stay with the Scots pine, which seems to be the favourite, or whether they wish to replace that? In the time that I have left I want to talk about that process. I would like to see our schoolchildren, for example, deciding what they prefer. Would they prefer the Scots pine, or would they think that perhaps it should be the birch, because the birch covers twice the area of Scotland that the Scots pine covers?

Would schoolchildren reject the birch, because Finland and Russia already have it as their national tree? Let us get people talking about it and engaged with the question. As I said, it started me thinking about something that previously I would not have thought about. Once again, I commend Joan McAlpine on bringing the debate to the chamber.

As other members have done, I thank Clare Adamson for bringing the issue to the chamber and for hosting a round-table discussion in the Parliament on electrical safety. I found the frank and constructive exchange of views at that meeting useful and informative. Members have mentioned the tenant information pack. We should acknowledge that the Electrical Safety Council was a constructive partner in the pack’s formation in relation to the safety aspects, as were the Scottish Association of Landlords and others. Many good landlords were keen for a tenant information pack to be created. I will put one or two quotes about the pack on the record. Margaret Burgess, the Minister for Housing and Welfare, said: “The introduction of the pack will contribute towards ensuring that the private rented sector provides good quality and well managed accommodation, where both landlords and tenants understand their respective rights and responsibilities.” I stress that the key word there is “responsibilities”, and that responsibilities come in conjunction with rights. The Scottish Association of Landlords said: “We are encouraged by the possibility offered by the Tenant Information Pack to improve and maintain landlord-tenant relationships. The pack is also a helpful resource which will raise awareness of both landlord and tenant rights and responsibilities.” There is that word “responsibilities” again. We have partnership working with the private rented sector on improving standards and responsibilities. On electrical safety, the tenant information pack states: “Your landlord, in accordance with the Repairing Standard for private rented properties ... must ensure that the electrical installation and appliances provided with the property are in a reasonable state of repair and in proper working order.” It goes on to say a bit more, but I will not quote it, because of time constraints. However, there is no great detail on what an acceptable standard and acceptable working order are. We need to scratch beneath the surface and flesh out some of the issues. When the weather improved in the past week or so, I was out cutting the grass—[Laughter.] I know that it is surprising that I do any physical exercise, Mr Johnstone. I cut the cable, but I was perfectly safe, because of the residual current device that is fitted in the new-build house where I live. Tenants in the private rented sector surely deserve similar protection when they go about their business. I was mindful of that when that happened to me just the other day. How can we take matters forward? The Electrical Safety Council is asking for proof of an inspection of electrical installation every five years by a qualified electrician. It is also asking for portable appliance testing on electrical appliances provided by the landlord every five years and a statement on whether residual current devices are installed. Instinctively, I am tempted to say that we should agree to all of that, but I am also mindful of Mr Johnstone’s comments about the possibility that we might put further regulatory burdens on well-performing landlords and that the cowboys will ignore them all. Therefore, before we make any commitment introduce further regulation of the private rented sector—incidentally, I think that we should have further regulation, but we must introduce it in a planned and evidence-led manner—we must ensure that a business impact assessment is made of the effect on good, well-performing private landlords. How can we incentivise good, well-performing private landlords to do a lot of those things in preparation for further regulation that may be introduced? More important, if we are not able under current rules and regulations to crack down hard enough on the cowboys, we will have to think again. In the previous parliamentary session, I was involved in the scrutiny of various pieces of legislation that increased fines for unregistered landlords. We are seeing some success coming from that—but only some. The Parliament has shown some willingness to legislate on the matter, but we must think about it again. I make one suggestion. The Scottish Government is funding many energy efficiency initiatives in the public and private rented sectors and in private dwellings. Many households in Scotland are being contacted right now about energy efficiency and anti-fuel poverty measures. Surely it is not outwith the realms of possibility to fit a residual current device or give a leaflet on electrical safety as part of that work. We need some joined-up thinking. If the Scottish Government is going through hundreds of thousands of households—as it is—perhaps it can weave in some electrical safety as it goes along. Let us do something about electrical safety in the private rented sector, but let us ensure that it is evidence based and does not cause an undue burden for the good performers in the sector. I thank Clare Adamson once more for bringing the subject to the chamber.

As other members have done, I thank Clare Adamson for bringing the issue to the chamber and for hosting a round-table discussion in the Parliament on electrical safety. I found the frank and constructive exchange of views at that meeting useful and informative. Members have mentioned the tenant information pack. We should acknowledge that the Electrical Safety Council was a constructive partner in the pack’s formation in relation to the safety aspects, as were the Scottish Association of Landlords and others. Many good landlords were keen for a tenant information pack to be created. I will put one or two quotes about the pack on the record. Margaret Burgess, the Minister for Housing and Welfare, said: “The introduction of the pack will contribute towards ensuring that the private rented sector provides good quality and well managed accommodation, where both landlords and tenants understand their respective rights and responsibilities.” I stress that the key word there is “responsibilities”, and that responsibilities come in conjunction with rights. The Scottish Association of Landlords said: “We are encouraged by the possibility offered by the Tenant Information Pack to improve and maintain landlord-tenant relationships. The pack is also a helpful resource which will raise awareness of both landlord and tenant rights and responsibilities.” There is that word “responsibilities” again. We have partnership working with the private rented sector on improving standards and responsibilities. On electrical safety, the tenant information pack states: “Your landlord, in accordance with the Repairing Standard for private rented properties ... must ensure that the electrical installation and appliances provided with the property are in a reasonable state of repair and in proper working order.” It goes on to say a bit more, but I will not quote it, because of time constraints. However, there is no great detail on what an acceptable standard and acceptable working order are. We need to scratch beneath the surface and flesh out some of the issues. When the weather improved in the past week or so, I was out cutting the grass—[Laughter.] I know that it is surprising that I do any physical exercise, Mr Johnstone. I cut the cable, but I was perfectly safe, because of the residual current device that is fitted in the new-build house where I live. Tenants in the private rented sector surely deserve similar protection when they go about their business. I was mindful of that when that happened to me just the other day. How can we take matters forward? The Electrical Safety Council is asking for proof of an inspection of electrical installation every five years by a qualified electrician. It is also asking for portable appliance testing on electrical appliances provided by the landlord every five years and a statement on whether residual current devices are installed. Instinctively, I am tempted to say that we should agree to all of that, but I am also mindful of Mr Johnstone’s comments about the possibility that we might put further regulatory burdens on well-performing landlords and that the cowboys will ignore them all. Therefore, before we make any commitment to introduce further regulation of the private rented sector—incidentally, I think that we should have further regulation, but we must introduce it in a planned and evidence-led manner—we must ensure that a business impact assessment is made of the effect on good, well-performing private landlords. How can we incentivise good, well-performing private landlords to do a lot of those things in preparation for further regulation that may be introduced? More important, if we are not able under current rules and regulations to crack down hard enough on the cowboys, we will have to think again. In the previous parliamentary session, I was involved in the scrutiny of various pieces of legislation that increased fines for unregistered landlords. We are seeing some success coming from that—but only some. The Parliament has shown some willingness to legislate on the matter, but we must think about it again. I make one suggestion. The Scottish Government is funding many energy efficiency initiatives in the public and private rented sectors and in private dwellings. Many households in Scotland are being contacted right now about energy efficiency and anti-fuel poverty measures. Surely it is not outwith the realms of possibility to fit a residual current device or give a leaflet on electrical safety as part of that work. We need some joined-up thinking. If the Scottish Government is going through hundreds of thousands of households—as it is—perhaps it can weave in some electrical safety as it goes along. Let us do something about electrical safety in the private rented sector, but let us ensure that it is evidence based and does not cause an undue burden for the good performers in the sector. I thank Clare Adamson once more for bringing the subject to the chamber.

8. To ask the Scottish Government how it is working with the Kurdistan Regional Government to strengthen links between Scotland and Kurdistan. (S4O-02112)

I thank the minister for that detailed answer. As he will know, my region of Glasgow has a large Kurdish community, many of whom were present in the chamber during my members’ business debate to pay tribute to Scotland’s Kurdish diaspora and to recognise the horrific genocide of Halabja and Saddam Hussein’s horrific al-Anfal campaign. Will the Scottish Government work with the Kurdistan Regional Government to ensure that the Halabja and al-Anfal genocides are recognised by the international community? My constituents in Glasgow and Kurds around the world feel that recognition of the horrors that befell them during a dreadful period in their history is a vital step.

Rob Gibson mentioned modern studies education for young people at school—I am a former modern studies teacher. Does he acknowledge that, in the context of the introduction of curriculum for excellence, it is the responsibility of the whole school community and not just under-pressure modern studies teachers to raise awareness of the referendum?

Will Tavish Scott give way?

Will the member give way?

2. To ask the Scottish Government how it ensures that the health and wellbeing needs of adults with learning difficulties are taken into account when service redesign is being proposed at a local level. (S4O-02076)

The minister will be aware that Glasgow City Council has decided to close three day centres for adults with learning difficulties, which will have a massive detrimental impact on the health and wellbeing of service users and carers across the city. If those centres were schools, ministers would have the power to call in any decisions on them. Given the health impact on my constituents, what powers does the health minister have to intervene, particularly given the flawed and pre-determined consultation process? I believe that further powers, including the possibility of call-in, are required to protect the vulnerable constituents I represent.

I declare an interest, in that my wife is a nurse in a high dependency unit in Glasgow. I am in no doubt about the challenges that NHS staff face daily, nor about the exceptional job that they do as they meet those challenges. It is simply not an option for Scotland’s NHS to stand still. That is not just because of the ageing population, but because we should always look for continuous improvement in the health service. Much of what the NHS has done in the past has been demand led; it has been about downstream intervention. In other words, the system waited until someone was ill and then took steps to make them better—or, at least, as comfortable as possible. Scotland’s NHS is—and needs to be—increasingly involved in early intervention and public health initiatives. That has been a key strategy of the Scottish Government. It is far better to detect illness early, be it through national initiatives, such as the Scottish Government’s detect cancer early initiative, or local initiatives, such as NHS Lanarkshire’s efforts to detect and treat irregular heart rhythm, which can lead to health problems including atrial fibrillation and stroke, which put great demands on Scotland’s NHS. The Scottish Government is also involved in key public health initiatives, such as minimum unit pricing of alcohol, which can dramatically improve Scots’ health and ease the burden on our NHS. Recent evidence from Canada shows that over a number of years a 10 per cent increase in alcohol prices has led to an 8.9 per cent decrease in admissions to acute services. There has been a direct public health benefit and a direct saving. We should be mindful of that when we talk about pressure on Scotland’s NHS.

I would like to, but I honestly do not have time. Nothing is standing still in Scotland’s NHS, which means that we need to ensure effective planning in relation to staff and bed management. That is where the focus of much of this debate should be. Unison and the Royal College of Nursing have been helping to develop workforce and workload management tools, which will be mandatory in the coming year. The cabinet secretary announced a bed-management tool. As healthcare and social care are integrated, we must consider how the tool can be developed in the context of the knock-on effects of reconfiguring the bed estate in the traditional hospital setting. In other words, when we move older people out of a traditional hospital setting and put them in a care home environment or support them at home, we need to ensure that we monitor whether local authorities put in place adequate provision for support services. In the future, those issues need to be combined within an overall bed-management tool that deals with where our most needy citizens stay, whether that be in hospital, at home or within a home setting within the community. I would like more information on that. All politicians can become obsessed by numbers, but I have deliberately not given the numbers that relate to the increase in the health budget or to staffing numbers, on which we have done very well—

We can all be obsessed with numbers, but surely to goodness any individual politician giving the number of beds within Scotland’s NHS would be sticking to an arbitrary number—

We need to get the bed-management tool correct in order to make a proper assessment. I point out to Ms Baillie that this is my speech and not hers, if she does not mind.

Presiding Officer, I was just finishing off, but I was quite rudely interrupted. The point that I am trying to make is that any number that is arrived at must be based on evidence and it must be based on getting the bed-management tool right. If Labour had come to the chamber in a positive and constructive vein, we could have had an excellent debate, but yet again—unfortunately—Labour has let itself down on health.

I was not going to speak this afternoon, but along with a number of other MSPs, I received briefings from local and regional newspapers about their concerns, some of which have been mentioned. I wanted to listen to the debate, consider some of the arguments and then make a few points myself. When my constituents consider irresponsible press practices, I do not believe that they think about local or regional newspapers; they think about high-profile scandals, which were examined by Leveson. Some of those have been dealt with very sensitively this afternoon, so I will not go over them again. I grew up in the Vale of Leven and reading local newspapers such as the Lennox Herald or the Dumbarton and Vale of Leven Reporter played a really important role—not in getting me politicised, but in getting me active in my community, because of the role and function that they carry out. Today as a regional MSP for Glasgow, I know that my constituents and I benefit greatly from similar newspapers, such as the regional Evening Times or more local titles such as the Rutherglen Reformer or the Springburn Herald. Those titles provide an important service and quite often do so under tight budgetary constraints and margins. Graeme Dey put on record very eloquently the pressures that the newspaper industry is under. Local and regional newspapers get it right, by and large, far more often than they get it wrong. The strengths of our press as well as the weaknesses should be recognised. When the local and regional press raise concerns about how the royal charter and everything that flows from it could impact on them, of course we should listen. Whether we will agree with them fully is another matter, but we should listen to and air some of their concerns. One editor contacted me—I am sure that the person contacted other members, too—to say: “The proposed arbitration system will potentially lead to the closure of many of these titles which, instead of being able to deal with small errors in a reasonable fashion and without cost to either side, will face a costly system which will inevitably lead to many frivolous civil legal claims from complainants wanting money not corrections, clarifications or apologies.” I do not know whether that is true, but we have to air that concern and consider what it could mean. If the proposed system is accepted and the press sign up to it, we have to ask what the monitoring process will be, and what will be the business impact of any arbitration system on the local and regional press. It is important that we consider that.

I thank the cabinet secretary for that intervention. I need not have worried that I will not be able to find enough things to say during my six minutes. I may now struggle to get through the rest of my speech.

Thank you very much. I take on board and accept pretty much all that the cabinet secretary said. When groups have concerns, we reassure them by airing those concerns in a forum such as this, and by addressing them. I thank the cabinet secretary for putting that on the record. A lot of local titles suggest that, when individuals and groups within communities have issues with newspapers, the matter is addressed speedily and amicably at local level. They want to ensure that the default option for individuals is not to seek arbitration as a matter of course, but to seek local redress in the first instance. It is important that we consider that. I will briefly mention one or two other concerns relating to the local and regional press. I am pleased that there are now fines of up to £1 million, but fines are to be capped at 1 per cent of turnover. For local and regional titles the impact of fines, if not applied proportionately, could be greater. I do not see that as being an excuse for any local or regional title that deserves a fine, because practice should be of the highest standard, but we must ensure that any system of fines following arbitration is not only consistent, but proportionate. I smiled throughout the chat about incentives. I agree with incentives, but I have never in my life seen a carrot that looks so much like a stick. It is not really an incentive to say that we will let a newspaper publish public information notices if it signs up to the voluntary regulatory system and that we will not ask the courts to take into account who pays the legal expenses, although we might if it does not sign up to that system. We must be honest and say that that is as much a stick as a carrot; it is to compel the sector as much as it is to incentivise it. I think that it is the right thing to do, but we should not pretend that it is an incentive. On public information notices, I wonder how much local and regional titles, compared with national titles, rely on that income. Perhaps we might look at whether public information notices could include advertising for appointments to various public sector bodies, higher education establishments and that kind of thing. Titles receive a lot of revenue from that. How much time do I have left, Presiding Officer?

I will draw a line under things there—apart from to say that just because one part of the press is currently performing to a high standard, that does not mean that, when we go through the process of voluntary regulation underpinned by royal charter, it will not continue to have the same responsibilities as other parts of the press. Its performing well does not mean that we should be complacent; it, too, must fit in with the new arrangements. I ask that when the proposed system receives cross-party consent—I hope that the press across the UK will come on board—it will be monitored closely and that, if it does not work for the UK or for Scotland, we will have the power to unpick some of it. However, I am working on the basis that it will be a success rather than a failure.

I thank the members of the Welfare Reform Committee for the on-going scrutiny that they provide. I was a member of the Health and Sport Committee when we first scrutinised welfare reform and I recall that it was clear that our committee believed that, such was the tidal wave of negative impacts that would hit Scotland as a result of welfare reform, the Parliament needed a stand-alone committee on the issue. I think that history will show that, irrespective of whether the Parliament gets more powers, we will need that committee for the long term to analyse and scrutinise welfare benefits in this country. I thank all the members of that committee for their hard work. The Sheffield Hallam University report on the impact of welfare reform makes sobering reading. As we have heard, it estimates that £1.6 billion will be lost to many of the most vulnerable Scots each year as a result of the reforms. People in every local authority area will suffer, but my constituents in Glasgow will suffer more than most. In absolute terms and in per capita terms, Glasgow will be hit more than any other area. The reforms are a brutal attack by the UK Government on the very people whom all Governments have a duty to support where they can. My constituents ask me how the Scottish Government and Parliament can protect them from that attack and what we can do to help. The bedroom tax features prominently in my constituents’ list of concerns, but they mention a variety of other changes, including the abolition of disability living allowance and move to personal independence payments and the reform to incapacity benefit. Those two actions alone will affect about 200,000 households and will, if combined, take up to £6,500 away from individual households across Scotland. Again, those changes will impact more on my constituents than on people anywhere else in Scotland. Last night, I attended an initial meeting to establish the greater Maryhill food bank in the north of Glasgow, which aims to provide support for families who are in financial and food crisis and who have only three days’ worth of non-perishable food provisions in their home and no way to get additional food. That is a response to current real hunger in Maryhill. The initiative was inspired by local police as the key stakeholders. They do not want to spend their time seeking to prosecute vulnerable individuals who commit crime because of poverty; they want to chase real criminals. Last night, I heard a story about a police van driving round Maryhill with a number of police officers inside. They saw a young guy running out of the Lidl supermarket being chased by a security officer. They were heading to an unrelated incident, but they pulled up and cornered the guy, who ran into a garden and was found under a bush. He had stolen a bar of chocolate. That was not petty pilfering—he had not eaten for a number of days. The local community police shared that story with us at the greater Maryhill food bank meeting last night. That cannot be right, but the situation will get a lot worse as the reform continues. I fully accept that such cases are a tiny minority at present, but they will not remain so for long if we do not do something about the issue. I am therefore delighted that housing associations, churches, charities, community councils, youth groups and others are coming together to address the situation. They should not have to address it, because that is up to the state but, because of their community spirit and solidarity, they are compelled to do what they can to provide support. I have constituents who, right now, are being asked to move out of their homes and communities so that their housing benefit will meet their rent. Local links are being destroyed, support networks are being broken, childcare provision is being wrecked and lives are being placed in turmoil. Of course, they can move only if another property is available and, often, it is not. In many cases, even when a property is available, families do not for understandable reasons feel able to move. In Glasgow, the SNP opposition group is seeking to get the Labour-run council to increase the housing benefit discretionary fund by the maximum permitted under the legislation, which is by two and a half times. The shortfall in housing benefit in Glasgow will be about £10 million per annum, while the discretionary fund from the UK is less than £3 million. I hope that the council will listen to those constructive representations from the SNP and I urge the council to increase the discretionary fund by the maximum allowed, if it can do so. That would be a form of mitigation. We have heard about a number of other forms of mitigation by the Scottish Government, such as the £9 million for the welfare fund; the £40 million, with our local authority partners, to deal with the council tax benefit cut; and the funding for money advice services. However, the changes to council tax benefit are a £50 million per annum cut from Scotland’s most vulnerable people, out of a total cut to those people of £1.6 billion. Can we get real? Those who call for us to plug every gap from the UK Government’s attacks on our most vulnerable people are deceiving themselves and the people of Scotland. Only giving this Parliament powers over tax and benefits with full independence will ever protect Scotland’s most vulnerable people.

I very much agree that the cuts will particularly target women. Does Anne McTaggart agree that lone parents, the majority of whom are women, will be particularly affected? Of course, it is not just lone parents who will be affected. The bedroom tax means that former partners who wish to have an active part in their children’s lives will not often have a room for their child to stay in, which will make it difficult to keep that relationship going.

I want to look at taxation in the UK and make a direct link to universal services. The current UK Government has courted much controversy by reducing the highest rate of income tax from 50 per cent to 45 per cent, which will benefit any UK taxpayer who earns more than £150,000 a year, while those earning more than £32,000 a year will pay 40 per cent tax on their income. Only two years ago, the 40 per cent level was paid by those earning more than £35,000 a year. As we know, as of next year, the 20 per cent basic tax rate will begin at £10,000. All those taxpayers, as well as those who pay tax via measures such as VAT and various business taxes, pay for all the services on which the state decides to spend money—we should be clear on that. Irrespective of how it gets to Scotland via the block grant of £30 billion, £12 billion is spent in Scotland on the NHS. Of that £12 billion, just £50 million is spent on ensuring that all in our society are given free prescriptions. I use the word “free” advisedly: as we know, of course, prescriptions are not free, because the tax collected by society pays for them. What of the classroom teacher in Scotland on between £21,400 and £34,000 a year, whose income is taxed at either 20 per cent or 40 per cent? Do they not pay through taxation for prescriptions? What about MSPs, who are on £57,000 a year? Do we not already pay for prescriptions in some way via general levels of taxation? If people want to have a debate about general levels of taxation, they should do so. I do not believe that taxation can be conflated with fundamental universal service provision, although I think that many in the chamber are in danger of doing that. Why do we insist that a teacher or a nurse—

I will develop my point first. Why do we insist that a teacher, a nurse, a firefighter, a police officer or, indeed, an MSP should pay more towards the NHS when they are ill than they pay when they are healthy? They already pay towards the NHS as a duty because they pay taxes. To me, that is a fundamental point, and it is why I believe that free prescriptions—again, I use the word “free” advisedly—are important in a civilised, modern society in which the NHS and medical provision should be free to everyone at the point of need.

I will give way to Drew Smith.

On corporation tax, the cabinet secretary has made it clear that the strategy will be to increase the overall cake. As for sustainability, we have had police reform, fire reform, pay constraint and preventative spend for the long term, while the most recent “Government Expenditure and Revenue in Scotland” figures show a £4 billion relative surplus. All of that, plus the fact that, in each of the past 30 years, we have collected more per person in tax than anywhere else in the UK shows that sustainability is possible. Let us look at prescription charges in more detail. They were abolished by an SNP Government and benefit in particular 600,000 Scots whose income is below £16,000 a year. Abolishing prescription charges therefore helped the most vulnerable in society. I will talk a little bit about the concessionary travel scheme. Just as Labour members have said that they are keen to reintroduce prescription charges, they have said that they want to pick away at the universal concessionary travel scheme and take bus passes off some over-60s, although they will not say whom. For many, the scheme is a lifeline in relation to not only balancing household budgets but preventing social isolation. What about the well-off pensioner? The argument has been made many times in the chamber that they should not get a free bus pass, but have pensioners not paid taxes throughout their lives? Also, any pensioner who does not use the bus pass will not cost the state a penny—that is important as well. I do not want to live in a society in which the absolute poorest get free medicine at the point of need but no one else does. I do not want to live in a society that divides our pensioners into the haves and the have-nots. That is corrosive and, ultimately, it undermines the social provision of services. That is the real point that I want members to take from my speech. I do not want people in Scotland to pay taxes to the state and get little in return, as they might see it. Universal service provision benefits all in society and is a social contract between Government and communities. I say to Mr Rennie that that is not a new concept. The idea of no taxation without representation was not invented by the SNP, but there we are—we will take credit for that as well, if he wants. If we really want a society in which Scottish people, by and large, feel that it is a duty to pay tax for service provision not just for the weakest in society but for everyone, we must preserve certain core universal services that are paid for by all via general taxation. That is the core of the debate, and history will show that the SNP and the Scottish Government are on the correct side of the debate.

I thank Mr Rennie for his kind words, but just for clarity I point out that cutting the upper rate of taxation from 50 per cent to 45 per cent for those who earn over £150,000 a year is an appalling policy decision by the UK Government.

2. To ask the Scottish Government to provide an update on the progress to retender the franchise to operate rail passenger services in Scotland. (S4O-01956)

I draw the minister’s attention to the lack of a Sunday service on the Glasgow to Maryhill line. If such a service was introduced, it would provide significant benefit to the constituents whom I serve. Can the minister explain what provisions could be placed in any tender document to enhance services on such lines? Will he look specifically at the case for a Sunday service on the Maryhill line?

I congratulate James Kelly on securing the debate. As Jim Hume said, it is around two weeks since we last debated David Livingstone’s bicentenary, in a members’ business debate on a motion that I had lodged. At that time, I said that this month was likely to be “Malawi March”, and it is certainly turning out to be that way, but that is no bad thing. The highlight may yet be tonight’s debate, of course, but so far it has been the address by the President of Malawi, Joyce Banda, to the Parliament last week. A number of things struck me about that, and I took a number of messages from it. One was that Malawi is open for visitors and tourism and for business. There was a strong message that Malawi wishes to forge even deeper social and economic links with Scotland. That process was started many years ago and formalised in 2005 by the First Minister at the time, Jack McConnell. From 2005, £3 million a year was spent on international development in connection with Malawi and the figure has been £4.5 million since 2010. I am sure that we as a Parliament agree that, in our commitment to Malawi and in the bilateral connection that we have made with Malawi, the Parliament and the Government are in it for the long haul.

I completely agree with that comment. We have to look at practical ways of taking that matter forward. That is a point well made. My time is limited, and I want to draw on some of the things in David Livingstone’s legacy that have resonated with me. First, as people have said, not enough has been made of Mary Moffat’s legacy. She was the first white woman to cross the Kalahari desert, and she did so while she was pregnant. That is no mean feat in itself. There is the active role that she played herself, not just the support that she offered to David Livingstone. She is an inspiration to many women. Often in history, the roles of great men overshadow the significant contributions of remarkable women. As has been said, we have to tease out Mary Moffat’s role to women today. There are some sacrifices that they should simply not have to make as they go forward in life. I think that many of the young girls from St Blane’s primary school who are here will take that on board. It is not an either/or question when somebody is committing to a relationship or ploughing their way in the world. People should be able to do both. We can take the fact that David Livingstone came from a humble background and went to university as a strong theme. We all think that Scotland’s steadfast commitment to free education for all is vital. The Scottish Government’s commitment to spend £100,000 to put 50 gifted but underprivileged Malawians through masters degrees is, of course, part of the legacy. I wanted to say so much, but I will be brief. When the bicentenary fades from public attention, we have to ensure that the moneys that are invested in the David Livingstone centre in Blantyre go beyond the current commitment to 2014, and that we have a strong action plan to have the centre as a hub for David Livingstone and associated activities. It should not just be for celebrating the bicentenary; it should be fit for the next 200 years, as I said a couple of weeks ago. I thank James Kelly for bringing the bicentenary to our attention.

I begin by welcoming my Kurdish constituents from Glasgow—and, in particular, a young man, Mr Shakha Sattar—who inspired me to secure this debate in Scotland’s national Parliament. It might be a politician who is opening the debate, but it is very much the Kurds of Glasgow who have brought it to the Parliament. I also welcome Kurds from other parts of Scotland and from across the United Kingdom and beyond who are here, and I thank them for their support. [Applause.] I know that the debate has generated much interest in Kurdistan and in Kurdish communities around the world, and I want to say a few words to pay respect to them. Ema Sarbarzin ba Kurdakani Scotland. Bashdari Kurdakan le komalgay emada gringa boman. Scotland herqyz karasata tyrsnakakani Halabja w anfal la yad nakat ka boona hoay hatni zhmaraiky zory Kurd bo welatekaman. [Applause.] I hope that I said that we are proud of Scotland’s Kurds, that their contribution to our society is valued by our nation, and that Scotland will never forget the horrific events at Halabja and the brutal Anfal campaign that brought many Kurds to our shores. The debate is an opportunity to pay tribute to them and to thank them for all that they do for Scotland. It is also important that we stand in solidarity with Scotland’s Kurds and recognise the pain and suffering that led many of them and their families to come to Scotland in the first place. As it is now 25 years since the horrors of Halabja and the Anfal campaign, it is both right and timely for Scotland to show solidarity with them. We must all do what we can to prevent such genocide and such acts against humanity from ever happening again. For me, never forgetting those events and recognising them as genocide are fundamental to ensuring that that is the case. Two other motions before the Scottish Parliament seek to do likewise. The genocide has been recognised. In 2005, the International Court of Justice in The Hague recognised it and, in 2007, it again said at an appeal that there had been genocidal intent. Between 2007 and 2010, the Supreme Court of Iraq ruled that the 1988 attacks on the Kurdish population constituted genocide. That they were genocide has been acknowledged by members of the Swedish, Norwegian and Westminster Parliaments. On 16 March 1988, indiscriminate rocket, phosphorus and napalm attacks fell upon Halabja. Chemical weapons that are likely to have included mustard gas, various nerve agents and cyanide were carried by Iraqi MiG and Mirage fighters. Up to 5,000 Kurds died and 10,000 were injured. Most were women and children. Many died instantly. Others did not—they died painfully from their injuries, in some cases much, much later. No one can ever quantify the physical pain and mental anguish of those who survived, but other long-term effects can be quantified, such as higher probabilities of miscarriage, infertility, birth defects, blood malignancies and cancer. Al-Anfal in 1988 was part of wider attacks that were carried out on Kurds between March 1987 and April 1989. During that two-year period, Kurds were forced to endure great pain. That evil campaign was led by Saddam Hussein’s first cousin, Ali Hassan al-Majid, who was notoriously known as Chemical Ali. The scale of the horror was massive. Thousands of Kurdish villages—perhaps 90 per cent of all Kurdish villages in Iraq—were destroyed. Official figures document that 100,000 persons disappeared in 1988 alone, although some Kurdish sources claim that the figure could be as high as 182,000. Those who were abducted or arrested were often sent to concentration camps, where women and children were separated from men of military age. The elderly and infirm were also separated from others. Many Kurds across the world—many of whom were displaced because of these very events—live with the memory of those atrocities. Younger Kurds in Glasgow and elsewhere have heard stories about the events, and it is vital that the younger generation grows up with the knowledge and understanding of the previous generation’s suffering. I know that many of them have done so. However, it is not only Kurds who should remember such terrible events, but all of us. Before today’s debate, Fergus Ewing MSP told me about his work with Kurds in Glasgow in the late 1980s and early 1990s. He recalls attending a ceremony in Queens park—which is one of Glasgow’s large parks—where a tree was planted by Kurdish families in remembrance of those whose lives were lost at Halabja. That small gesture is a powerful symbol of solidarity with Kurds not only in Glasgow but everywhere. I am sure that there have been similar events across Scotland over the years in remembrance of Halabja and Anfal. Perhaps the Scottish Government will consider how to support and co-ordinate such activities in the future. I said that such genocide must never be allowed to happen again. Looking at the world, we see how troubled it can be. Remembering the history of pain and suffering is crucial to that, but so is how people respond. Peace and mutual respect are vital ingredients in that response, too. For Glasgow and Scotland, that should be about celebrating our Kurdish communities—not only the Kurdish doctors, lawyers and engineers who contribute to our society, but the asylum seekers and refugees who still need much support and assistance. I began by mentioning Shakha Sattar. His response to the atrocities when he came to Scotland as a boy was to grow up steadfast in the belief that helping his community in Glasgow was how he could play his part in ensuring a positive legacy from such terrible crimes. It is a privilege to work with him and others on that task. Scotland is a more rich and vibrant place because of the contribution that many new Scots have made to our nation. Glasgow’s Kurds are a powerful part of that mix. I note that today we commemorate with sadness the events of Halabja and Anfal. It is crucial that we also celebrate the contribution that Glasgow’s and Scotland’s Kurds have made to our nation.

I agree with all the sentiments that Hanzala Malik has expressed. The European Union and the United Nations have been mentioned. I believe that the genocide should be formally recognised by both those institutions, but not just as an end in itself. Rather than just individual Parliaments recognising the genocide, the strength of having it recognised by the United Nations would be in the entire international community that turned its back on the people of Kurdistan formally recognising the genocide that took place there. That would be a powerful cathartic experience for the international community in ensuring that such events never happen again.

I have a lot of sympathy with much of Jean Urquhart’s amendment but will she also acknowledge that the Scottish Government has made it clear that if it comes to a choice between NATO and a nuclear-free Scotland, a nuclear-free Scotland will win every time?

4. To ask the First Minister how the Scottish Government seeks to ensure that all relevant medical information is available to support patients who appeal to the disability benefits tribunal system. (S4F-01248)

There are concerns over how and when the Department for Work and Pensions and Atos both request and use information that is provided by general practitioners in relation to work capability assessments and the resultant need for tribunals for constituents who are wrongly assessed by Atos in the first place. Significant concerns also exist that additional pressures are being placed on GPs in relation to sharing information due to the shameful and unjustifiable bedroom tax. Will the First Minister support my call for the DWP and Atos to review urgently this flawed process to ensure that medical information is requested from GPs on a consistent basis and, more important, that it is used appropriately to assist my constituents in getting the support that they need from a deeply flawed United Kingdom benefits system?

I will pick up on a theme that a number of speakers have raised, which is that there has been progress on tackling child poverty since devolution. That is a consensual basis from which to start. In 1999, 28 per cent of children lived in poverty. As Mr Hepburn said, that figure is estimated to be about 17 per cent today, so dramatically fewer children are living in poverty. When the figures are calculated in the same way, I notice that the UK figure is 18 per cent. I draw that comparison for a reason. I am not quibbling over a percentage point, but I raise the idea of competition across the UK and beyond on tackling child poverty. Let us have competition—absolutely—because the only winners when we tackle child poverty, anywhere in the UK or in the world, will be the children. Let us have some good old competition to raise the bar for life expectancy and the quality of life that children in Scotland and beyond experience. I will focus for a bit on the UK context, because we cannot and never will be able to deal with Scotland in isolation, whether we are independent or otherwise. We must look at welfare reform. It has been said that 50,000 children face being plunged into poverty because of the UK Tory Government’s welfare reform proposals. In the process, £2.5 billion will be taken from Scottish households—households that often do not have enough money currently, never mind after further cuts from the UK Government. We cannot deny that that is the context in which we seek to improve the lives of children in Scotland. In its briefing for the debate, Children in Scotland urges “Parliament to act together to persuade the UK Government to abandon proposed legislation on welfare reform which will worsen already unacceptable levels of child poverty.” I completely agree with that sentiment from Children in Scotland. The issue that I have is that the UK Government is simply not listening. Mr Hepburn mentioned some quite alarming facts in his contribution. A Labour spokesperson at the UK level is also not listening now on the bedroom tax. I heard Mr Chisholm talking about a Twitter account called LabourNoBedTax. Perhaps that should be LabourNoConsistencyOrHonestyOnTheBedroomTax. Perhaps Labour should change its Twitter account. Such situations drive me towards thinking that it is not a matter of waiting for independence, but that only independence can guarantee that the Scottish people and Scottish families see the future that we need for our children. I believe in powers coming to the Scottish Parliament so that we do not have to face the dreadful situation that we currently face under the UK Government. I want to improve the lives of children in Scotland, but I also want to improve their aspirations.

It has been well established that, where the UK Government seems to be giving money with one hand in welfare reform, it is taking away far more with the other hand, and is doing more harm than good. Children in Scotland says in its welcome briefing for the debate: “The Scottish Parliament has shown that it can set aside political differences and we urge Parliament to work together to use its full range of powers to combat child poverty in Scotland.” On a consensual note, I completely agree with that. I believe in the Joseph Rowntree Foundation’s right to say, “Look, we have powers over health, housing and education,” and I say gently to Labour that no one is waiting for independence. My goodness, we need it, but no one is waiting for it. We are getting on with the job as best as we can right now. That is exactly what the early years collaborative is all about. I have seen family nurse partnerships in action and have spoken directly to young women who attend a special teenage pregnancy unit at Wester Hailes education centre. The City of Edinburgh Council is putting a lot of focus and attention on those young girls. I spoke to a young girl who benefits from the family nurse partnership and she said that it has been absolutely transformational and really important in helping her. I look at the third sector and organisations such as Blochairn Housing Association and Spire View Housing Association in the north of Glasgow, which work quite closely with the local primary schools to support families and education and learning, and reward positive behaviour and outcomes in classrooms. A lot of collaborative work is going on. There is much more that I want to say, but I will finish by talking a little bit more about the third sector, which will be crucial in early years collaborative work. Last week, we had a debate on health and social care integration, and I had a great concern that the Labour version of health and social care integration was to let the councils run it all. That was what Jackie Baillie put forward in that debate. We need a greater role for the third sector, not the dominance of local government. There is a lot of money out there that can be used better, and that will happen only by combining health and education services and local authorities and the third sector as an equal and valued partner. That can really deliver for the children of Scotland.

I am pleased to host this debate on the legacy of David Livingstone, who would have been 200 next Tuesday. This is fast becoming Malawi March in the Parliament, with the state visit by President Joyce Banda next week and the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association reception the week after that. In addition, James Kelly, who is present this evening, will be having a debate on the theme later this month. Other than the legacy of David Livingstone, the inspiration for having the debate was Councillor Bert Thomson, the councillor for Blantyre, who told me about his fondness for the connection that the area he represents has with David Livingstone, and about his experiences as a boy—which I am sure were not that long ago—in relation to the work carried out. Also, Jim Hume has a strong family connection with David Livingstone, and a number of members who are in the chamber have strong connections with Malawi and have done a lot of work on that. I pay tribute to them for that. By way of introduction, I would like to reflect on Scotland’s special relationship with Malawi. That is the most enduring legacy of Dr Livingstone, who was undoubtedly one of the most renowned Scots of the 19th century and is surely Blantyre’s most famous son. Unlike his devout, Sunday school teaching father, Livingstone was convinced of the compatibility of religion and science and he hoped to use one to advance the other, although his emphasis was always more on exploration and humanitarian concerns than on straight missionary work. It was those humanitarian concerns that led Kenneth Kaunda, the first President of Zambia, to describe Livingstone as Africa’s first freedom fighter. A staunch opponent of slavery, Livingstone strongly believed that promoting enterprise and commerce would help to bring social justice, self-government and light to what was unfortunately still described in Europe as the dark continent. Dr Livingstone’s navigation of the Zambezi on one such expedition in the 1870s took him to what is now known as Malawi. The visit opened up the interior of the sub-Saharan region to European trade and watered the seeds that have flowered into the modern nation of Malawi. The trade settlement that Livingstone established has since grown into the country’s commercial capital, and his influence is made plain in the city’s name, Blantyre. Although Malawi became independent in 1964, it has retained its close links with the United Kingdom and Scotland in particular. Those links were fostered by Jack McConnell when he was First Minister in what was the devolved Scottish Administration’s first high-profile international engagement, and I think that the move represented a coming of age for the Parliament and the then Executive. The co-operation agreement that was signed in 2005 by the Scottish and Malawian Administrations codifies the role of the Scottish Government in international development in Malawi in the areas of health, education, the economy and governance. Under the agreement, the Scottish Government ring fences a minimum of £3 million from its international development fund for projects in Malawi. However, I am delighted to say that since 2010 the average has been about £4.5 million per year. The bicentenary offers a chance to build on that fantastic legacy. Throughout the year, a number of grass-roots and Scottish Government-supported activities are being held both here and in Africa to mark the anniversary. Perhaps most significantly, Zambia, which is arguably the country after Malawi that has been most influenced by Livingstone, will host the Livingstone 2013 festival, which will include an exchange programme with Scotland for medical students at Zambia’s Livingstone hospital. The programme will allow the countries to share expertise in what are, given Livingstone’s background, particularly appropriate fields. The David Livingstone bicentenary scholarship programme, which I mention in my motion, is a central part of that legacy. In my research for this debate, I was surprised to find that Malawi has the lowest rate of university enrolment in the world; only 51 in 100,000 Malawians are in higher education and most of them are in liberal arts courses. Although that is in many ways a positive sign and suggests an improvement in standards of living and the emergence of a middle class, Malawian universities need to produce graduates with the skills to contribute directly to the country’s economic and social development and this £100,000 programme, which is funded by the Scottish Government and managed by the Scotland Malawi Partnership, will help to support up to 50 gifted but underprivileged Malawians through a masters degree. Although the scholarship is a one-off, it should, if done correctly, have benefits that endure long after the bicentenary year. To achieve that—and I understand that the partnership is still fleshing out the details of this—it has suggested that one of the criteria for the awarding of the grant be that applicants contribute via their studies to the wider community, perhaps by teaching in a school or working in the development sector. In that way, the investment will have a knock-on effect beyond the students who will benefit directly. The National Trust for Scotland’s David Livingstone centre, which is based in Livingstone’s childhood home in Blantyre, is at the heart of the bicentenary celebrations, and I am pleased to welcome some of the centre’s staff to the chamber. This year, more than 80 years after its establishment, it has been awarded official museum accreditation, and I know that the centre hopes that another legacy of the bicentenary will be a major repair and refurbishment programme for its buildings. Next week, on the bicentenary itself, children from local Blantyre primary schools will bury at the centre a time capsule containing a mixture of historic materials, some of which have been provided by a primary school in Malawi. Later that day, the centre will unveil one of Livingstone’s newly discovered diaries. I pay special tribute to the centre for this activity because I think that teaching children about and encouraging them to participate in Livingstone’s legacy is a wonderful way of ensuring that the special links between Scotland and Malawi remain strong into the next generation and—I hope—for centuries to come. As a Glasgow MSP, I feel it a privilege that boundaries were changed to bring Blantyre into the Glasgow region. It enriches the geographical area that I represent in the same way that David Livingstone’s legacy enriches Scotland, Malawi and, indeed, the world. I am sure that when we celebrate David Livingstone’s 400th birthday in 200 years’ time, those bonds will be stronger than ever.

Will the member take an intervention?

I appreciate the point about including the voluntary sector, but on the issue of local authorities and health boards working together I have found that local authorities tend to be worse because, unlike health boards, they can get politically defensive. Does Jackie Baillie accept that the key strength in health and social care integration will be having a single accountable officer, who is equally accountable to both the health board and the local authority, so that there is absolutely no passing the buck?

I commend Duncan McNeil for his speech, which was thoughtful. I did not agree with everything that he said, but I absolutely agree with much of what he said, which was testament to the work that we did in the Local Government and Communities Committee in the previous session of the Parliament and the work that we are currently doing in the Health and Sport Committee. Committees have served the Parliament well in taking things forward in conjunction with the Government. I am delighted to speak in a debate that ain’t the debate that we had yesterday. Many members who are here took part in yesterday’s debate, which did not cover the Parliament in glory—I see that Jackie Baillie is muttering, and perhaps we should both reflect on the tone of that debate. The tone of today’s debate is much better and the Parliament is the better served for that. There are, however, strong links between the two debates. Why are accident and emergency units getting busier? Why do more people need a hospital procedure? Part of the answer is about demographic change, but it is also about getting things right in the community, through preventative spend. There are things that can be done quite easily in communities to reduce slips, trips and falls among older people, for example, which would drastically reduce the number of people who turn up at A and E or who need a hospital stay. We need to integrate and co-ordinate strategy for matters such as care at home and prevention work, to reduce presentations to hospital and ensure that people can be treated in the community. We also need appropriate discharges from hospital. I do not like to use the terms “delayed discharge” or “bed blocking”, because I do not want discharges to be quick or slow. I want people to be discharged from hospital at a time that suits their care and medical needs—their discharge should be neither fast nor slow, but appropriate. We all need to reflect on that. That approach needs a single accountable officer, so that the buck cannot be passed on getting the strategy right, and there have to be clear lines of accountability. There is of course a core role for local authorities in that. However, some of Ms Baillie’s comments make it sound as if local authorities should have a dominant role, which would be the wrong approach.

I will make this point first. I will let Ms Baillie in, assuming that I get a little bit of additional time, which would be welcome, Presiding Officer. In our report on this subject, the Health and Sport Committee said: “The Committee acknowledges the findings of Audit Scotland that governance and accountability arrangements for CHPs have been “complex” and “not always clear”. The Committee therefore welcomes the Scottish Government’s proposal for a clear line of accountability to rest with a single individual for each health and social care partnership. The Committee also considers it essential that the governance arrangements for each local partnership should retain strong links with local government through representation of councillors on partnership boards.” Local authorities should have a clear core role, but not a dominant one. Of course, local authorities are democratically elected bodies, but I say gently to some of my Labour colleagues that saying, “Just leave it to the cooncil,” results in a shiver of fear running through Glaswegians, given what is happening in Glasgow, particularly regarding protecting the most vulnerable. Just yesterday, three day care centres were earmarked for closure without there having been any proper consultation with the community. I needed to raise that point; had I not done so, vulnerable people in Glasgow would think that I had betrayed them. We have heard a lot about national care standards and Duncan McNeil made some important points. I ask the Labour Party to reflect on the use of expressions such as “postcode lottery”. In its report, the committee said that it “welcomes the intention of the Scottish Government to provide flexibility within a legislative framework which will prescribe minimum standards.” We absolutely need core minimum enforceable standards, but we must ensure that minimum standards do not become the extent of our aspirations. We must ensure that local health boards and local authorities can, if they decide, invest more money and go beyond a basic minimum standard. That is my issue with the Labour Party wanting to take local democracy away from the system and leave minimum standards as the only standards that people receive. There is a threat to local democracy in that. Taking forward this agenda will need significant service redesign. I agree with Duncan McNeil that we should do that to improve the outcomes for all people in society, irrespective of the demographic challenges and the financial situation. However, those two things are clearly drivers for change. The point has been made that when we redesign services, the voluntary and third sector should be seen as an equal partner. There is a fear that if local authorities and health boards come to the table with millions and millions of pounds, the third sector will find itself squeezed out of service redesign and the commissioning process, which often looks at what parties can bring to the table, rather than what they can do for the people most in need in our society. I will use some of the time that I have left to mention a couple of excellent projects. The good morning project in Glasgow—sorry, Presiding Officer, do I have time to let Ms Baillie in?

I apologise for not having time to let Ms Baillie in, but she will find that it is far more important that we talk about the good morning project in north Glasgow. It gives hundreds of older people in the community a friendly telephone call in the morning, to provide them with the support and reassurance they need to sustain their tenancy and place in society. The call is also to make sure that they are not lonely or isolated and that they can live happy, healthy and productive lives. It is an innovative way to keep our older people happy. There is also South Lanarkshire’s hands-on project in Cambuslang, which the minister and I visited, and which includes a handyman service and a befriending service. Those are innovative ways of redesigning services to support older people within the community. Rather than the good morning project, the hands-on project and the hundreds of projects around the country looking to a fragmented funding system to keep their projects going from one year to the next, it would be good if, with health and social care integration, they had a seat at the table and got some secure core funding, and a core, secure, long-term strategy for health and social care provision. It is a shame that we need the forthcoming bill to deliver that, but we do, and I thoroughly welcome it.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what assistance is available to help companies grow and identify new markets. (S4O-01862)

The firm Elmwood employs 102 workers in my region in the design, manufacture and fitting of various products, and includes a museum fit-out division. It informs me that despite a strong performance throughout the United Kingdom, further expansion depends on being able to promote its high-end products on the world stage, which means attending global conferences and expos. Will the minister consider what incentives might be available from Government or Scottish Development International to support Elmwood in such ventures throughout the world? Will he consider visiting Elmwood with me to see the fine work that it does?

The Labour Party motion adds to the growing evidence of that party’s decision to use the NHS overtly as a political football to seek party advantage, whereas a responsible Opposition would use the Parliament to improve the NHS for the people of Scotland. That is the Opposition’s duty. It is in sorrow rather than in anger that I call into question the motivation behind the Labour motion. I hope that we can unite across party boundaries where possible to support our NHS. However, I believe that the current Labour strategy deliberately seeks only to create conflict. That strategy can serve only to potentially demoralise many hard-working NHS employees and disengage the public, whom we all seek to serve. The first sentence in the motion refers to a “hidden waiting times scandal”, which, as I shall go on to prove, is clearly a preposterous and demonstrably erroneous statement. When Nicola Sturgeon and the Scottish Government abolished the shameful hidden waiting lists that were inherited from the Labour and Liberal Democrat Executive, waiting lists received the full glare of public scrutiny for the first time since devolution. Let us not forget that up to one third of patients were removed from regular waiting lists altogether and were left languishing on hidden waiting lists, sometimes for many years, without treatment. That was the unacceptable situation that the current Government inherited. That previous system treated patients as an irrelevance, and an accounting process was used so that patients on waiting lists simply disappeared, in a fashion of which even David Copperfield would have been rightly proud. Labour must apologise for that if it is ever to start to regain any credibility with the NHS. What progress has been made since Labour was kicked out of power in 2007? Under the new ways system that the SNP Government introduced, for the first time all patients were accounted for on waiting lists in a system that was open to public scrutiny. There is now nothing hidden about waiting lists under the Scottish Government. Labour would do better to have a constructive discussion on how we improve matters further. The Labour motion notes, wrongly, a supposed “waiting times scandal”. I will focus on the period during which Audit Scotland said that there were issues with the recording of data. There were shortcomings and many of the matters that needed to be addressed have either been attended to or are currently being attended to. However, let us consider the waiting time experiences of all patients during the period in question. I refer to ISD data, which includes patients who were designated as socially or medically unavailable and who may have had delays as a result. Irrespective of social or medical unavailability, we find that 94.3 per cent of all patients—including those who had delays—were treated within 18 weeks. That is a figure to be proud of, but I stress that it is not one to be complacent about. Record levels of achievement against waiting time targets is not my definition of a scandal. It is a scandal only in the parallel, alternative universe of the Labour Opposition in the Parliament. Audit Scotland did not suggest that there was a lack of progress on waiting time targets. It rightly suggested that there was a need to improve recording of reasons for patient delays. That is what the NHS seeks to address. I am pleased to hear much of the Scottish Government response to date. The Labour Party tends to ignore the vast majority of patient experiences. Every negative patient experience that has been put to the chamber today should be taken seriously, but the Labour Party completely ignores the vast majority of patient experiences. It completely ignores the 88 per cent satisfaction rating that the NHS in Scotland has. I stress again that I want to consider how we further engage with the 12 per cent and improve the quality of service to them, but Labour completely ignores the vast majority of people, who are happy with the NHS. I will give members one example, because Jackie Baillie gave us many examples. How about the patient from the area that I represent, who said: “Splendid! Many thanks to all at southern General and Glasgow Royal for looking after my 83 year old mother during her operation on Jan 10th. Splendid care from splendid staff in a splendid organisation. No wonder our NHS is the envy of the world.” That is completely ignored by the Labour Party, which puts a cheap tabloid headline ahead of patient care. That is absolutely scandalous. I will say something that the Labour Party could do to shine some scrutiny on the matter. At the Public Audit Committee, the Auditor General mentioned a particularly good use of waiting time targets: she said that, when they are not achieved, it identifies a financial or provision gap and Audit Scotland would expect the NHS to act on that. It is in that light that I look at NHS targets for waiting times of four hours in accident and emergency—I point out that they are considerably better than they were under the Labour Party, although, to be frank, they are still not good enough—and the £50 million of investment in the unscheduled care action plan to address that. Where targets are met, we should be proud of our NHS; where we fall just short, we allocate and reallocate resources to address the fact. That is a quality NHS, well funded by the Government, which the Labour Party would not have supported financially had it got into power and been where we are standing in the chamber.

16. To ask the Scottish Government what work it is carrying out in partnership with the United Kingdom Government to support young people back into employment. (S4O-01844)

A number of training courses that are provided by third sector organisations such as the Royston at work project, which I know the minister is aware of, are targeted at young adults who have most difficulty in gaining employment. However, a significant barrier for such schemes is that, unlike in some United Kingdom Government programmes, participants’ benefits are threatened if the course hours mean that the young person is deemed under current rules to be not actively seeking work. Will the minister consider asking the UK Government to develop a system that would allow some young adults on such courses to retain benefits while having the opportunity to improve their employment prospects?

I thank John Mason for bringing to the Parliament what has been so far an excellent debate. I signed his motion, and I had been thinking of putting my name down to speak in the debate, without quite getting around to it until I was contacted by constituents who reminded me how important the issue is to them. That was a reality check and reminded me that some of what we say in the Parliament does not go unheard to the extent that we sometimes think that it does. People sometimes listen to every word of a debate that chimes with them, and the debate about fathers certainly chimed with the constituents who contacted me. Constituents wanted me to raise the idea of shared parenting, on which Families Need Fathers has produced a briefing. Let me be clear: I am talking not about fathers and mums each getting 50 per cent of the time, but about dad—or whoever is the so-called absent parent—being more than a weekend visitor and being a core part of the family, with a proactive role in the child’s life that is about more than just taking them out for a day here or an hour there. Many fathers feel that they are denied that role. We must consider the whole idea of access to children, which seems to be interpreted restrictively in some cases. People think that if someone is guaranteed access to their child for a couple of hours once a week, that is the maximum time that they are allowed to spend with their child. That is not the case, and I think that Christine Grahame also said that it is not the case in law. I find that attitude worrying. We also need to consider the whole idea of custody of children, which comes back to children’s rights. Children are not assets to be divided up on the breakdown of a marriage. We can miss that point. Christine Grahame talked about how the Scottish Schools (Parental Involvement) Act 2006 seems to have gone unnoticed by many people in the education sector. Why should a dad not attend their kid’s parents night, whether with mum or not, to find out how the child is doing? Why should they not be an active member of the parent teacher association, if they choose to do that? Why should they not take part in school life? After all, school is a major part of their child’s life, from which they should not be excluded. We will have to return to the 2006 act and ensure that it can be properly and appropriately implemented. I will be interested to hear the minister’s views on that. As we heard, the issue is not just about guidance for schools and the laws and rights that exist. There is also an issue to do with access to healthcare information and how the national health service treats fathers—or absent parents, whoever they are. I point out that, in a minority of cases, fathers are sometimes the main custodians, and it is the mums who are seeking access. That does happen. These matters concern absent parents, not specifically fathers. We must consider whether or not sheriffs are skilled enough in how they deal with access and custody arrangements and with the rights of fathers and mothers. We must consider why the amount of people applying for legal aid has doubled within five years. Are lawyers driving people towards that solution, instead of pushing them to use the avenue of the national parenting agreement to facilitate a consensual move forward? Families do need fathers. The United Kingdom Government’s bedroom tax will make it incredibly difficult for fathers who have positive access arrangements with their children even to have a bed for their kids to stay the night. Where things are working well, they have been put at risk by the UK welfare reforms.

Does the cabinet secretary believe that there is a need for clearer recording of reasons for social unavailability, given that it is reported that 900 orthopaedic patients at Glasgow’s Western infirmary were deemed socially unavailable? For some patients, that was because they had opted to wait for their preferred hospital and consultant. Can the cabinet secretary confirm that such preferences are not part of the waiting time guarantee, that NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde did not remove those patients from the waiting list, and that they were still being seen by their preferred clinician in the hospital of their choice?

I welcome the debate, although I cannot accept the Conservative motion. I will explain to Jackson Carlaw why that is the case. Mr Carlaw will not share this view, but I think that the Conservatives are creating the perception that drugs that are not routinely approved by the SMC should pretty much always be approved by another method. All drugs are not routinely approved, whether through method A, method B or method C. That has never happened in Scotland or anywhere in the UK. I say gently to Mr Carlaw that he is creating a false perception that all new drugs will be made available one way or another. That is not the case. There is also a false perception about individual patient treatment requests. It is thought that any patient who is not prescribed a drug can be encouraged to fill out an IPTR form, even when there is little hope of the drug being approved.

I hear Mr Simpson speaking from a sedentary position. I point out to him that there is a patchwork approach to IPTRs across health board areas. There must be a reason for the lack of consistency across the country. Mr Carlaw namechecked cancer, but to single out cancer for special treatment is to set a dangerous precedent. The outgoing chair of NICE, Sir Michael Rawlins, said in the context of the cancer drugs fund: “There are other rotten diseases apart from cancer. To limit it to cancer has always made me uncomfortable”. The incoming chair of NICE, Professor Haslam, said: “there are other conditions that are as serious as cancer and we should not discriminate against those because they do not have as frightening a name.” We have to be careful. We must take cancer incredibly seriously; we must also ensure that other serious and life-threatening conditions are not regarded as second class. An equitable approach must be taken. That is a difficult job and it is a job for the SMC rather than politicians. Politicians should get the process right and then ask the SMC to make its judgments based on that process. Not just the outgoing and incoming chairs of NICE but Prostate Cancer UK, Breakthrough Breast Cancer, Myeloma UK, Macmillan Cancer Support and others support appropriate treatment while rejecting the idea of special treatment for cancer in the form of a cancer drugs fund. Difficult as the decisions are, the SMC must make them and when it does so it must consider not just cancer but heart disease, multiple sclerosis, cystic fibrosis and other conditions—the list goes on and on. The SMC has the unenviable task of comparing such conditions and working out from the best evidence what drug has the best impact for patients and is cost effective. That is a huge challenge for the SMC, which is a world leader in the process. I am sure that the review will improve the process. I also want to talk a little about funding. Funding of cancer drugs cannot be talked about in a vacuum.

The Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing, Alex Neil, launched the bowel cancer detection hotline just the other day. I will give the number: 0800 0121 833. I encourage all men over 50 to call that hotline and get themselves screened. [Interruption.] No, Jackie Baillie, I am not over 50, but I am almost there. Detect cancer early initiatives cost money. If Mr Carlaw wants to spend money in one place, he has to take it from another place and we have to get the balance right. I believe that we have the balance right, but the process can be improved. I wish that we could talk more about issues with IPTRs and rare conditions—

It has been identified that rare conditions are not suitably dealt with under IPTRs—

The review will deal with that.

6. I apologise for my late arrival in the chamber, Presiding Officer. To ask the Scottish Government how best practice in prescribing is shared between national health service boards. (S4O-01774)

I suspect that mention has been made of the 11 per cent real-terms fall in the cost of prescription drugs in the NHS since 2004, despite there having been an increase of one third in the quantity of drugs that are prescribed. The best practice that the cabinet secretary speaks of comes from NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde. Will he give a commitment that its best practice on prescribing advisers and use of generic drugs—statins, for example—will be shared across Scotland?

In opening the debate, I welcome to the public gallery a number of family members of service users from the Summerston day centre for adults with learning difficulties. I also welcome former service users—and their family members—of the Accord Centre in Glasgow’s east end, which was one of the three centres that Glasgow City Council previously closed. In Glasgow, there are seven day centres for adults with learning difficulties. The Summerston, Hinshaw Street and Berryknowes centres have all been targeted for closure. Each of those centres is cherished by the users and those who care for them, as it provides a sense of community, fosters friendship and underpins peer support. The centres also provide vital support to families and carers, many of whom—if they do not mind my saying so—are entering old age. The closure of the centres means that roughly 320 learning-disabled people will move to alternative day services. The problem is that no one has any idea what that will involve, as no details have been given. The council’s proposal paper says: “The capacity to use community venues throughout the city is currently severely constrained by the availability of appropriate toileting and changing facilities.” Members can see our concern about whether, even if other facilities were used, they would be appropriate. The situation will come as no surprise to some of the people who relied on the Accord centre before its closure. The people who are here today tell me that they are still waiting for adequate provision to be offered following that closure. The Learning Disability Alliance Scotland reports that one Glasgow mother whose daughter used one of the now-closed day centres said: “Now I take Megan to a church hall, where for £5 we can sit from 11 to 3. For lunch she gets a sliced ham and white bread sandwich and a chocolate biscuit but at least it’s warm and dry. There’s pens and colouring books to keep her occupied.” If that is the level of ambition for some of Glasgow’s most vulnerable adults, I urge the city council urgently to reconsider its position. The proposals will also affect the 200 adults with the most profound learning difficulties who will be left using the four remaining centres. They are part of a wider community in the day centre network. They have friends with a range of learning difficulties; they thrive in one another’s company and there is a clear benefit to all. That will be lost, and the danger is that we will marginalise and isolate the most vulnerable in society. I do not believe that that is the council’s intention, but the plans could well achieve that. I will look briefly at the council’s financial position. The council has recently published plans to cut £70 million from its budget over two years, but I clarify that it does not have a £70 million cash shortfall in its coffers and that it has a £2.3 billion budget. The city has the money to retain the centres, so the closures are a political choice. As things stand, the current administration has made the wrong choice, which I very much hope that it will reconsider.

All that I will say to Mr Smith is that I am disappointed that he seeks to make party-political capital from the issue. As far as I am concerned, I am representing my constituents and the centres should stay open. The council also proposes to save up to £3 million on transport costs for the most vulnerable people. The council questions whether it will provide transport even for the 200 adults with the most profound learning difficulties who will continue to use centres. That transport is under threat, which is unacceptable. The council says: “If ... needs were being assessed for the first time today ... in most cases service users would not be assessed as needing full time day centre services.” However, few users have been through the council’s personalisation assessment in the past 18 months, so no robust evidence underpins the basis of the decision. More important, the decision fails to consider our learning disabled adults as a community in which individual choice is important but the group’s needs are also respected. The Parliament will be aware that choice is a fundamental principle that is inherent in self-directed support, which empowers service users to extend, terminate or retain services as appropriate. However, the council’s proposed actions will restrict choice dramatically. Personalisation can involve retaining an existing service, but the plans will not provide for that. I do not oppose reform and the families to whom I have spoken do not object to it. However, they have not been included in any meaningful discussions about what a future service might or might not look like. Families and service users feel that the council has frozen them out. Surely any service redesign proposals should place current users and carers at the heart of the consultation process. Unfortunately, Glasgow City Council has a dreadful track record in that area, whether in respect of the school estate, the plans for George Square or the most vulnerable people in our society. The short, six-question consultation that the council issued was produced after firm proposals to close three centres were published, and it has been widely criticised as being completely biased in favour of the council proposals and completely lacking in respect of providing families with the opportunity to suggest any alternatives whatsoever. Glasgow City Council’s leader, Gordon Matheson, should listen to his own carers champion, Dr Chris Mason, who believes that the proposals are not fit for purpose. I agree. I urge the council to shelve the plans to close the three day centres, to open meaningful discussions with service users and families and, when appropriate, to consult on any new proposals that may emerge. I know that my SNP colleagues in Glasgow City Council agree with that position. I would welcome such a change of heart; more important, it would reassure families, service users and carers, who are terrified that the support that is vital to them will be withdrawn and that there will be no suitable alternative provision. Glasgow City Council can change all that. It just takes political will to do so.

Does the member agree that self-directed support does not change the need for assessments, which have happened over the years, but have failed to happen in Glasgow? Does he agree that existing services are one valid choice within self-directed support?

I agree with much of what Jackie Baillie has said, but she mentioned user choice. Does she not think that it was wrong that service users were not asked for their view of what a new service should look like before proposals were presented?

I welcome the fact that there was no material evidence of manipulation or abuse of waiting times policies in Glasgow. However, there were concerns about how information was recorded on IT systems. What action is being taken in Glasgow to improve the IT systems to ensure that my constituents get the best and most reliable service possible?

I echo Patricia Ferguson’s concerns and sentiments. I am particularly concerned about who now holds the NHS wheelchair contract for Scotland. Does the minister believe that there might be a need to reprocure that contract? More generally, does the minister agree that, when public bodies procure, they should make sure that clear information is given to potential bidders to assist and encourage them to use the £5,000 recruitment incentive that he has announced and to ensure that they can access other incentives, such as modern apprenticeships?

I begin by focusing on the race equality and community cohesion opportunities that will be created by the Commonwealth games coming to Glasgow and Scotland in 2014. Ahead of the games arriving in Glasgow, the Commonwealth baton relay will be a wonderful opportunity and we can do so much with it. A fanfare will surround the baton relay across all Commonwealth countries and a positive message will be sent about what awaits the athletes, their families and tourists when they arrive in Scotland. I am delighted that the Commonwealth 2014 team plans to initiate related events for the diaspora of people from Commonwealth countries who are in Scotland. Working with that diaspora in Scotland is vital. We can produce as many glossy brochures as we like that say how wonderful Scotland is, but it will be what the diaspora in Scotland of Pakistanis, Indians, Sri Lankans and Cameroonians—we could go on and on—tell sportspersons and tourists from Commonwealth countries about their experiences of living in Scotland that really sells Glasgow’s and Scotland’s games to the rest of the Commonwealth. I am delighted that deep and meaningful engagement will take place, as that is vital. Linked to that is the £4 million cultural fund that has been announced. I was delighted to hear about the variety of cultural events in Angus that Graeme Dey referred to, which will include work in schools. I am sure that that will be significant. I should plug the organisation of the former MSP Anne McLaughlin—the African Caribbean centre in Glasgow, which the minister has visited. That is an example of a community hub for a diaspora of people from the Commonwealth who are vibrant and active and who enjoy living in Scotland. We must make the link between people who travel to Scotland and the diaspora in Scotland. The cultural fund provides a wonderful opportunity to develop that. Health inequalities have an impact on black and minority ethnic groups, as they do in significant ways on a range of groups in Scotland. Specific needs arise from the mental health issues that many minority ethnic communities face. In looking through my briefings in preparing for the debate, I was delighted to see that the Scottish sport relief programme has started to give out meaningful awards. It is a partnership between sport relief and the Scottish Government, and an additional £1.2 million has recently been put into the pot of cash for it. I note that the Glasgow Association for Mental Health recently got £120,000 from that programme for training and advocacy work for black and minority ethnic mental health service users in the area that I represent. On dealing with ethnic and gender inequality, I note that £117,000 was awarded to the Rape Crisis Centre in Glasgow to support women refugees who have experienced rape and that Freedom from Torture Scotland got £120,000 for therapeutic support for women who have experienced torture and who are refugees or asylum seekers. That is a meaningful legacy and work that is taking place in relation to the Commonwealth games that is not just sport related. The games provide an opportunity to do much across society. I chair the cross-party group on racial equality in Scotland. At our annual general meeting in October, we were addressed by Paul Zealey of the Glasgow 2014 team. His presentation was impressive and comprehensive, and the BME stakeholders who were present—of whom I assure members there were many—unanimously welcomed it. As Hanzala Malik knows, getting unanimous support at a meeting of the cross-party group on racial equality is a pretty tough bar to reach, but the consensus was that things were proceeding well. We will seek tangible outcomes in, say, six months’ time and one year’s time on delivery of Mr Zealey’s vision. Part of that delivery will involve engaging further with the cross-party group, which I hope will happen at a stakeholder event in Glasgow in the new year, to ensure that black and minority ethnic groups are suitably consulted and engaged with on the games. In our cross-party group, Mr Malik has something to offer in relation to that. I will widen out the discussion about volunteers. It is wonderful news that 40,000 people have volunteered to be volunteers, although we need only 15,000. I agree with the minister about keeping the volunteer registrations coming. I am keen that we do not have the usual faces as volunteers. We have a professional class of volunteers in Scotland and across the UK—sometimes that involves MSPs, too. We must ensure that the people who are least likely to volunteer are the most likely to be given support to volunteer.

I completely agree with Mr Malik. He mentioned ineligibility for volunteering in his speech, and I add asylum seekers to the list of those whom we would like to be able to volunteer at the games. I am delighted that 15,000 of the potential volunteers come from the rest of the UK outwith Scotland. Irrespective of where the volunteers come from—whether they are from Scotland or the rest of the UK—we should ensure that there is a vibrant ethnic mix. We should ensure that some of the volunteers from the rest of the UK who will come to Glasgow and offer their services, for which we are grateful, come from deprived communities in which people are least likely to volunteer. I will make a couple of brief points if I still have time. With regard to the games legacy, we have heard that increased sports participation is already happening due to the success of the London Olympic games. Many young people have presented at sports centres throughout Scotland and the UK, but coaching staff have not necessarily been in place to handle that demand. I am sure that the sports inquiry by the Health and Sport Committee, on which I and Nanette Milne sit, is considering that issue. We must ensure that we find a solution so that there are enough coaches in place to meet the demand for increased participation in sport. Some leisure trusts in Scotland—including Glasgow Life from time to time—have slightly restricted practices with regard to who they define as a coach to allow that person to use the facilities. Perhaps, in the short term at least, we need to find more innovative ways to get volunteer coaches in to help to meet that demand. Of course, that is no replacement for fully qualified coaches, which would be my first preference. I do not care who takes the credit for the Glasgow 2014 Commonwealth games. I note that Jack McConnell and Steven Purcell, as well as Scotland’s First Minister Alex Salmond, led the way on the games, along with Glasgow City Council. However, there should not be a bunfight over who gets the credit. We should all just enjoy the games together and make them as good as they possibly can be.

4. To ask the Scottish Government how it will continue to address gun crime in light of a 50 per cent reduction in firearms offences over the last five years. (S4O-01591)

That is welcome progress, but we must go further. I note that 38 per cent of all firearms offences in 2011-12 involved air weapons, which are particularly prevalent despite the campaign for their restriction since the murder of Andrew Morton in the Glasgow region in 2005. What additional information can the cabinet secretary give us about the timing of any consultation to restrict the use of air rifles in Scotland now that those powers are contained in the Scotland Act 2012?

As others have done, I thank and pay tribute to Patricia Ferguson for bringing the motion to the chamber and for hosting Bobath Scotland’s visit to the Parliament ahead of this debate. A friend of mine was at the garden lobby reception, so I know that people who have children and other family members with cerebral palsy know about the awareness raising activities that are taking place right now and are grateful for them. The number of people with cerebral palsy in Scotland has never been definitively recorded, but Capability Scotland is in the process of establishing a register for that purpose. Currently, it estimates that about 15,000 people in Scotland—approximately one in every 350 in society—have cerebral palsy. Although cerebral palsy is not directly life-threatening, certain associated conditions, such as epilepsy and respiratory complications, can be. The primary debilitating effect is on movement and reflexes. The Bobath approach is particularly important, as it addresses the issues directly by focusing on improving motor skills, posture and speech, and helping people to live more independently. The therapy that is offered is highly flexible and tailored to the specific needs of the individual. The main aim of Bobath therapy is to encourage the child and increase their ability to move and function in as normal a way as possible. Normal movements cannot be achieved if a child stays in a few positions and moves in a limited or disordered way. The intervention of Bobath therapy, which helps to change a child’s seemingly abnormal postures and movements, can lead to real progress. Bobath involves a transdisciplinary approach that includes physiotherapy, occupational therapy, and speech and language therapy that enable children to participate in daily activities. In preparing for the debate, I read Bobath Scotland’s annual report and found the case of five-year-old Katie, which is a particularly good example of the Bobath approach. Because of underdevelopment in Katie’s leg and arm muscles, she tended to bottom shuffle around the floor, which led to further muscular problems in her hips. Following just two months of treatment at the Glasgow centre, the problems were alleviated and she was able to pull herself up using furniture. To some people, that might not seem a great deal, but that sort of thing can be revolutionary for families and can improve the quality of life in their homes. I was pleased to meet with people from Bobath Scotland at the recent exhibition in Parliament and to sign their petition calling for equal access to Bobath treatment throughout Scotland. I was comfortable with that and relaxed about it. The Glasgow centre provides a world-class service and caters for people from throughout the country. It was established 17 years ago and so far has treated 700 children. Of course, their families have also benefited. We have heard much about the provision of Bobath therapy across Scotland. It is right to draw that to the minister’s attention but, from my discussions with Bobath Scotland in the Parliament, I understand that the issue is not just about Bobath Scotland doing what it does so well as a centre of excellence; it is about skills transfer to teams throughout Scotland to allow allied health professionals in all of Scotland’s health boards to act appropriately and to provide such a holistic service. We cannot and should not take away the independence of health boards to make clinical and care decisions, but we need a co-ordinated approach to ensure that we share best practice and systems across the country, and the minister has a role in ensuring that that happens. That is not just about supporting Bobath Scotland as an organisation but about ensuring that the various allied health professionals have the support and time that they need to care and treat. I mentioned that we are not sure how many people in Scotland have cerebral palsy and that Capability Scotland is carrying out an exercise on that. To plan services we have to capture need, and to capture need we have to know the numbers. Therefore, anything that the Government can do to assist Capability Scotland in that work would be greatly appreciated. I again thank Patricia Ferguson for bringing the motion to the Parliament.

I will focus on the fact that, even at this late stage, it might be possible to save the jobs of disabled workers at Remploy Springburn. I understand that Remploy has decided to close the Springburn factory and that the UK Government has approved that decision. However, I firmly believe that the sale process has been fundamentally flawed from the start. Shortly, I will make the case for holding an investigation into the details and events that surround the sale of the Springburn factory. Before I do so, I note that the UK Government has embarked on the wholesale destruction of Remploy as a valued and worthwhile employer of disabled workers in Scotland and across the UK in the manner of an ideologically driven exercise that gives no consideration to the devastating human cost of closure. After the GMB union raised concerns with me, I wrote to Maria Miller, the then UK Minister for Disabled People, on 8 June. I raised a number of concerns about the relationship between Remploy and the company R Link, which is also known as R Healthcare. I say for the avoidance of doubt that I make no allegations of impropriety against R Link, although I will have some words for it later. It has been suggested to me that Remploy in Springburn no longer controls its own order book. If that is true, it means that any potential buyer would not control the order book, even if it bought the factory and took on the workers. When I raised such concerns with Maria Miller, she said: “Whilst I understand the concerns held by members of the GMB, I am sorry that I am unable to comment on Remploy (Springburn) or any other Remploy contracts, which are a matter for the Remploy Board.” In October, I wrote to the new minister, Esther McVey, about additional concerns, which involved allegations about potential buyers being excluded unfairly from the process. Her reply said: “Any requests for an investigation into this process should be raised with Remploy direct.” I do not know the truth behind any possible loss of the key sales arm of the business at Remploy Springburn or whether that affected the sale process. I also do not know whether potential buyers were unfairly excluded. However, it is unacceptable that, when those serious concerns were raised with me and I asked the UK minister who is directly responsible to investigate, she simply passed the buck and washed her hands of this murky process, which has let the workers of Remploy Springburn down.

Mr Brodie has put on the record another reason why the closure of Remploy Springburn must be halted in its tracks and why an investigation must be launched, with a view to finding a new potential buyer. The GMB union has raised concerns about whether the profit-and-loss balance sheet that has been attributed to Remploy Springburn is accurate. The allocation of central Remploy costs of senior managers elsewhere has led Remploy Springburn to look as if it is losing more money that it actually does. The situation is not as simple as profit and loss on a balance sheet; it is about doing the right thing by Remploy workers.

I thank Patricia Ferguson for putting that on the record. That makes a murky business stink even further. I said that I would have some words about R Healthcare, or R Link, towards the end of my speech. If it works out in the end that it will be responsible for the delivery of wheelchairs via the national health service in Scotland, I hope that we will maximise the number of disabled workers who will work on that. However, it is not acceptable for it to enter a bidding process with a view to taking on the deep responsibility of Remploy workers at the factory at Springburn and walk away from the community with the order book in its mitts. Something has to be done about that.

Dennis Robertson makes a powerful argument for disabilities not limiting people from returning to mainstream employment, but does he accept that sheltered workplaces offer an opportunity for non-disabled workers to be part of the mix, particularly young workers who benefit from seeing disabled workers in a skilled environment?

The bill is founded on the principle that every person in receipt of social care has the right to make their own choice about how they receive that care and support. Sections 5 and 15 of the bill build on that. Section 5 requires the local authority to “take reasonable steps to enable the supported person” to choose their self-directed support option. It also requires the local authority to take “reasonable steps” to identify people who are able to assist a supported person who has a mental disorder or who has communication difficulties due to a physical disability. Section 15 imposes a similar duty on the local authority to identify people who are able to assist at an earlier stage, when a person’s needs are being assessed under section 12A of the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968. My amendments are concerned with the assistance provided by the people identified by the local authorities. Amendments 21 and 27 remove the qualification that the persons assisting need to have a prior interest in the care of a supported person. That is an unnecessary limitation on the people who may be able to help. My other amendments deal with the type of assistance that may be provided by such persons. As members will appreciate, there is a subtle but important distinction between making a decision and communicating a decision. Some people may have a mental disorder that makes it particularly difficult for them to understand and make decisions, whereas others may have a physical disability that makes it particularly difficult for them to communicate decisions. Capability Scotland has approached me with a view to making that distinction clearer in sections 5 and 15, and that is what my amendments seek to do. Their effect would be to make sections 5 and 15 clearly reflect the two distinct types of assistance that a person may give: assistance to someone with a mental disorder in relation to assessments and making decisions about self-directed support; and communication assistance in relation to those matters for someone with a physical disability that affects their communication abilities. I am grateful to Capability Scotland for informing me that those amendments would be beneficial. I commend them and my other amendments to the Parliament and invite members to support them. I move amendment 19.

I thank the minister for accepting the amendments in my name. Amendment 19 agreed to. Amendments 20 and 21 moved—[Bob Doris]—and agreed to. Amendment 8 moved—[Dr Richard Simpson].

I echo the thanks to the minister, his team, my fellow committee members and all those who gave evidence to the committee, who have helped to shape and improve the bill. I will reiterate what was said during the stage 1 debate about empowering those in need of care. A few of us mentioned then the evidence that Margaret Cassidy gave to the Health and Sport Committee. In the limited time available to me, I want to ensure that I put her views on the record again, because what she said is so powerful. When asked what life was like before personalisation and before she could direct her own budget, she said: “It was so-so. I will tell you a wee thing. One time I wanted milk and the woman who was helping me said that that was not her job. I was only asking for a pint of milk, but she said, ‘By the way, that’s not my job.’ I said to her, ‘What is your job?’ We had a falling out and I told her, ‘There’s the door. Don’t come back.’”—[Official Report, Health and Sport Committee, 29 May 2012; c 2358.] Margaret Cassidy now has a personal assistant and is doing wonderfully because she is directing the resource for her care that best meets her needs. That is what self-directed support is all about. Following today’s stage 3 consideration, during which we had constructive engagement—and some disagreements—on the best way to improve the bill, it is important to remind ourselves that we are all travelling in the same direction. The bill has been improved—not always in the direction that some would have wanted—but I think that we can agree that it has been improved. Putting to one side my amendments, which were agreed to, I listened with interest to what Jackie Baillie said about charging. I think, however, that we all welcome the proposed regulations. If the minister is correct—and I believe that he is—we will be in a far superior position on charging when the bill is passed than we were beforehand. That is what legislating in this place is all about. We have reinforced the principle of independent living and we now have greater transparency on the cost of the various options for self-directed support and the cash that follows that cost. That may not be in the way in which Richard Simpson proposed, but the Government has moved to improve the process. At every step of the way, the Parliament has come together to improve matters. However, we will need to ensure that the changes that we are proposing sweep through every local authority in the country and that we back the culture change that will be needed in local authorities to make the bill work. For example, in my local authority—I do not always agree with what Glasgow City Council is doing, but in making this point I am talking about not self-directed support, but the local debate on the best way in which services should be delivered—the personalisation budget for those who would receive a resource allocation under self-directed support has been cut by 20 per cent. I have consistently disagreed with that, but it was a local political choice; it is not connected to the principles of self-directed support. If members do not like what is happening in their local authority areas, they should challenge that and fight to improve the situation to make self-directed support work. However, no action that a local authority takes will undermine the principle of empowering people through self-directed support. The other night, I promised a constituent who came to my surgery that I would mention the reform of day centres for adults with learning difficulties that is taking place in Glasgow. The reform will reduce the number of day centres from seven to four. That is a move away from the traditional service, but my understanding is that there was no consultation at any point with the clients who use the day centres and that the centres are to be closed, possibly as early as January. If self-directed support is to mean anything in service redesign, there must be consultation with service users to find out what type of service they want. To return to the bill—

In my last six seconds, I will just say that the bill will be a step change in empowering people across Scotland.

1. To ask the Scottish Government whether it will make representations to BAE Systems on behalf of the Scottish shipyard sector. (S4T-00144)

I thank the cabinet secretary for his answer and for the efforts that the Scottish Government and others are making to retain those yards and the thousands of jobs that are associated with them. Scotland’s defence industry and its engineering capability are second to none and the Clyde shipyards are therefore in a strong position going into the review. Does the cabinet secretary agree that the greatest threat to the shipyards may indeed be needless political point scoring and that all politicians, no matter their political party, should put aside their differences and show a united front in the battle to save threatened shipyard jobs on the Clyde?

6. To ask the Scottish Government when it last had discussions with NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde and what matters were discussed. (S4O-01521)

I welcome the recent statistics that showed a 13 per cent drop in cancer rates in Glasgow. I also welcome initiatives such as Scotland’s detect cancer early programme, which was launched at Springburn health centre this February. However, cancer rates in the city still outstrip those in the rest of Scotland and, across a number of health indicators, the Glasgow effect shows the health of Glaswegians of all socioeconomic groups to be poorer than comparable people elsewhere. How is the Scottish Government working with NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde to tackle that effect?

I thank Nigel Don for bringing this members’ business debate to the chamber. Around six feature films a year are produced in Scotland, but Screen Academy Scotland believes that that is well below the level that is required for a stable film industry. At that level, the industry is far more susceptible to dramatic peaks and troughs than it is in comparable countries with a greater output. The Scottish industry tends to be quite top heavy and is often driven by one or two blockbusters. In 2006, Scottish films took £7 million at the UK box office, which was in large part due to Kevin Macdonald’s “The Last King of Scotland”. In 2005, however, Scottish films took only £400,000 in the UK. That kind of instability discourages investment, and that can lead to greater instability. Creative Scotland has noted that Scotland’s facilities for large-scale studio productions are fairly limited compared with those in similar countries and that they need to be improved. To compound matters, those countries often have more attractive tax incentives for investors. On that front, Ireland has often been cited as an example. Unlike Scotland’s average of five or six films per year, Ireland’s average is around 20, despite Ireland having a smaller population. Scotland has a globally recognised brand that is arguably more distinctive than that of countries such as Denmark, yet Denmark’s film industry is several times the size of ours. I welcome tax breaks that exist at UK level. For instance, film production companies can claim significant additional tax relief for films with a core expenditure of more than £20 million. Indeed, in the last UK budget, George Osborne announced that that would be extended in April 2013 to high-end UK drama, animation and video games. However, I see a structural flaw in that tax relief. It denies Scotland a specific competitive advantage and it denies Glasgow the advantage that it needs to become a creative centre of excellence. Whether we believe that an independent Scotland should be able to create bespoke tax conditions to attract the finest international production companies to Scotland or whether we believe that the UK Parliament should do that, we should all agree that it needs to be done, for the benefit of Glasgow and the benefit of Scotland’s film industry. The Scottish Government has sought to target tax support to Glasgow for the promotion of the Scottish film industry by designating Creative Clyde, which encompasses Film City Glasgow and Pacific Quay, as an enterprise zone for the creative industries. Businesses based there can claim 100 per cent business tax relief, which represents an estimated injection of £275,000 by the Scottish Government. Scottish Enterprise is also keen to attract a purpose-built film studio to Scotland that could rival the likes of Pinewood in England. I am sure that having enterprise zone status in Glasgow will give us the competitive edge in chasing that investment. I note that Creative Scotland is keen to contribute to that if it can do so. There are huge opportunities for Glasgow and for Scotland. Glasgow City Council is also keen to promote film within the city, to its credit. It founded Glasgow Film Office for the express purpose of attracting international investment, and it has been successful. We have heard about the investment, the money and the exposure that “World War Z” brought to my city. I believe that the Scottish Government, Creative Scotland, Scottish Enterprise and the city council are all focused on delivering film and production facilities for Glasgow and for Scotland. I am sure that Glasgow can become a film-making and production hub to rival any in Europe, but I ask the cabinet secretary, in her closing speech, to assure me that our Scottish Government is helping to co-ordinate those efforts. I look forward to a bright future for film production in Glasgow and across Scotland. I would like to think that, in the years to come, Pacific Quay will be mentioned in the same breath as Pinewood for its excellence in film production.

The Labour Party’s attack on universal benefits is deeply ill judged and dangerous. When Scots realise how ending universal provision might affect them and their families and Scottish society more widely, they will firmly support the retention of universality. I believe that that will happen, and that the false choice that the Labour Party has presented today will be exposed. I stay in Maryhill and represent Glasgow in the Scottish Parliament. If prescription charges still existed, an estimated 8,600 people in the Maryhill and Springburn constituency would have had to pay for medicine. In Glasgow, that number would be nearly 78,000. Is that really the sort of NHS that the people of Glasgow or Scotland want us to return to? I say to the Labour MSPs in the chamber today that that figure represents 600,000 people in Scotland—that is the number of people whom they want to tax when they are not well. I do not think that that is appropriate.

I will look for Neil Findlay’s progressive tax agenda when we have all the tax powers restored to this Parliament. I do not want a society in which constituents of mine and of Neil Findlay, who are on £16,000 a year, have to decide between getting medicines or paying household bills. That is no way to support the unwell in Scotland and it is no way to run an NHS that is free at the point of need. Parkinson’s UK—

Ms Lamont should listen to what Parkinson’s UK says. It believes that reintroducing prescription charges would be divisive and unfair, would be a false economy and would lead to higher care costs, including hospital and care home admissions. There are 10,000 people in Scotland who are living with Parkinson’s disease.

I want to talk about the extension of free eye tests, Ms Lamont. The cabinet secretary has already spoken about the benefits of those tests. Since the extension of free eye tests in 2006, on which there was cross-party agreement, there has been a 24 per cent increase in the number of eye tests that have been taken. The Association of Optometrists estimates that those tests represent a potential benefit of £440 million, as they alert optometrists and ophthalmologists to a number of potentially devastating health problems for individuals and prevent the need for expensive remedies to be provided by our NHS and wider society. Eye tests can diagnose diabetes, cancers and tumours, hypertension, strokes and MS, among other things. Catching those conditions early—through the universal provision of those tests—makes treating such conditions much easier, better for the patient and cheaper for society.

Is it on eye tests?

No, thank you. Sit down. The Scottish Government has built on that with the eye care integration project, which began being rolled out in 2010 and will be complete by 2014. That will lead to 95 per cent of all referrals to ophthalmologists and eye specialists in hospitals being done digitally. That is important, because it is an example of building service design on universal benefits. The position of the Labour Party in Glasgow is confused on universal benefits. It keeps saying that nothing is off the table. However, I congratulate Glasgow City Council, as SNP councillor John Letford did at the recent council meeting. He congratulated the Labour administration on its affordable warmth dividend, under which it gives £100 to all pensioners who are over the age of 80. It does not ask them how much money they have in the bank or what means they have of paying. It just gives the pensioners the money.

Is it on that point?

I am glad that the member mentioned the central heating programme, which has gone from strength to strength under the Scottish Government. I am talking about not just Labour councillors in Glasgow, but the deputy leader of the Scottish Labour Party, Anas Sarwar, who also supported the affordable warmth dividend scheme. Either the Labour Party agrees with universal benefits or it does not, or it just chooses what it believes in for opportunistic reasons. I said that I believe that what the Labour Party is doing is very dangerous, and I mean that. I appeal to the Labour Party this afternoon. If the Labour Party wants to take free prescriptions from the 600,000 people who benefit from them by reintroducing prescription charges, to put at risk the 77,000 people who will eventually benefit from free personal care, or to put at risk the 1.2 million people who get concessionary bus travel, it will alienate people from the welfare state. We are not talking about a something-for-nothing society; people pay their taxes throughout their lives, and they deserve to get something back from the welfare state for that. The Labour Party talks about a something-for-nothing society, and Ruth Davidson of the Conservatives talks about people not contributing to society. All of that makes for a perfect storm to undermine the welfare state. The first thread that the Labour Party has sought to unpick is universal provision. That is dangerous, and the SNP and the Government will have nothing to do with it.

Will the member take an intervention? It might be important.

I was going to let Murdo Fraser away with one inaccuracy, but as he has made the same point twice, I will correct it. The central heating programme had eligibility extended. It is now called the energy assistance package and it continues to go from strength to strength. Rather than have means testing, we have widened criteria.

It will not surprise Lewis Macdonald to hear that I do not agree with the content of his speech; however, I congratulate him on the way he conducted himself and the language and tone that he used. I must single his contribution out from others from the Labour benches and from some other members and say that he did himself some credit. Speakers in the debate have used expressions such as “not telling the truth” and “dishonest”; last week, we heard the phrase “straight as a corkscrew”; and this week we have already heard terms such as “snake-oil salesman” in the chamber. Quite frankly, I think that those who are prepared to say things in a television studio should be prepared to say them in the chamber or just haud their wheesht. Why not use the phrase “barefaced liar”? We seem to have bullish bravado in the TV studios and bottle merchants in the chamber. I am delighted, of course, that the expression has not been used in the chamber, given that it is unparliamentary and simply debases the entire political debate. The point, though, is that members should not be touring TV studios and radio stations, debasing the debate outwith the chamber. In any case, it seems clear that the tactic being employed by Labour and the better together group is to mount personalised attacks and a negative campaign. However, when Labour mounts such attacks and campaigns, the Scottish Government tends to come up trumps—and I have no objection to that. I congratulate Labour on focusing on the European Union, because it is important that we shine a light on the matter. Aileen McLeod has already mentioned the 120 or so Tory MPs who are openly campaigning to pull back from Europe. However, this is not just an issue for the Conservative Party. The Daily Mail, which I have to say is quite helpful for those who might be looking for right-wing reactionary comments—I apologise to the Daily Express for not using quotations from it—had an article that quoted “Labour MP John Cryer, a leading member of the party’s Euro-sceptic wing, who is in favour of holding a referendum on leaving the EU” as saying: “There has always been a strong streak of Euro-scepticism running through the Labour Party, which has been obscured by all the attention paid to the Conservatives.” His is not a lone voice; indeed, it is reported that up to 50 Labour MPs would associate themselves with those comments. Moreover, these Eurosceptics are no non-entities; they include the likes of former minister Frank Field and Kate Hoey. Willie Rennie referred to a step into the dark when he talked about conversations on the EU. However, I tell him and others in the better together campaign that it is time to shine a light on what the better together parties really believe about the EU.

I am sorry, but I want to make some progress. I do not think that their position has been exposed and, when it is, the people of Scotland will certainly—

To be fair, I think that we heard quite enough from the member in her opening speech. On the Edinburgh agreement, it seems eminently reasonable to me that only when an agreed process is in place should one look for specific legal advice. I freely accept that the Scottish Government and the SNP have said that they believe that a referendum would be legally binding in any case, but seeking agreement and consensus, as the Labour Party asked us to do, is the way forward. I would argue that, now that we have that agreement and consensus is the perfect time to take that legal advice.

The member has asked a number of questions, but what I can say is that I agree with Patricia Ferguson, Sarah Boyack, Jim Wallace and Henry McLeish, all of whom failed to say whether they had received legal advice or to reveal it. Consistency is important not only in government but in opposition. I would like to move on now to some of the issues for Scotland’s future rather than the processes, which Labour seems to be concerned with. I want Scotland’s future to be nuclear free, as do the Scottish Government, the SNP and the yes Scotland campaign, whereas all the better together parties are nuclear parties. As we heard earlier, Claudia Beamish was involved in a 2007 STUC report that looked at the benefits of a nuclear-free Scotland. That report estimated: “Up to 3,000 public sector jobs could be at risk. Of the current £153m annual operating costs approximately £50m comes back to Scotland in terms of wages for those maintaining Trident or the Scottish service personnel staffing Trident.” In other words, keeping Trident costs up to 3,000 public sector jobs. That is according to not me but Claudia Beamish. Those are the words of the STUC.

Do I have time, Presiding Officer?

I did not pull out some obscure part of the report; I quoted from the executive summary, which Claudia Beamish would have signed up to. Having taken that intervention, I have time to point out only briefly that we have heard nothing from Labour on welfare reform. I am not surprised about that, given that Labour MPs did not vote on the Public Service Pensions Bill last night. I had thought that that was because they were whipped to abstain or not to vote, but I understand that they had a free vote and were not whipped. They just chose not to turn up to defend the interests of Scottish public sector workers. That is a scandal, and that scandal will end with independence, when we will truly look after Scotland’s future.

Will the member give way?

6. To ask the Scottish Government what it is doing to promote healthy eating. (S4O-01391)

I was delighted to read that our new Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing recently reaffirmed his belief that free school meals have substantial health benefits, and I welcome the fact that the increased entitlement to free school meals that was given by the Scottish Government in 2009 has led to 44,000 children benefiting. However, will the minister ensure that there are cross-departmental discussions in the Government on how provision of free school meals can be expanded in future years, given the clear public-health benefits? I know that we are in difficult financial times, but planning for the future is essential.

I will say a little about the role of the accused in the process. I do not think that members have said much about that in discussing television exposure. The basic principle is that someone is innocent until found guilty. Donald Findlay asked the Justice Committee: “If someone is acquitted, why should they have their image blasted into every home by the television?” He also said: “The lives of people who are convicted or acquitted of serious criminal charges could be put at risk, because there are people out there who want to seek vengeance.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 2 October 2012; c 1781-2.] I associate myself with those concerns. I would also like to comment on the position of victims of miscarriages of justice. I have specific constituency experience of that from two cases in particular. At the times of the trials, there was significant media interest. A victim of a miscarriage of justice has a statutory right to appeal, and the appeal can again be subject to significant media interest. One day, with almost no support, the person is released from jail and told that they can walk free, yet they receive less support from society than someone who was guilty and has served their time. Such people are a tiny minority, thankfully, but their individual human rights need to be protected as well. Are we saying that their images should be blasted across the television? If we allow that to happen, it could create danger as well as compounding the miscarriage of justice. I have seen at first hand how such people’s mental and emotional wellbeing is damaged by the lack of support. I wanted to put that on the record while we are discussing media exposure. I want to say something about the vulnerability of witnesses. Detective Chief Superintendent Cuddihy said in his evidence to the committee: “When the due process of law results in judicial proceedings, we must ensure that victims, witnesses and their families are protected from the fear of intimidation and influence—perceived or otherwise—and that they are free to give evidence without any undue pressure being applied to them that may result in the integrity of the evidence, the trial and justice being compromised.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 2 October 2012; c 1793.] Again, I associate myself with that concern. Without going into any details, as that would be inappropriate, I am convinced that I have witnessed intimidation of witnesses in a courtroom simply by the fact the accused was in the same courtroom—never mind what would happen if greater exposure was shone on witnesses in the schemes and communities from which they come. I have significant concerns in relation to that. I have significant concerns about the concept of someone who willingly gives evidence being labelled a grass by a minority of people in some of our communities and how that plays out in those areas. We should be doing what we can to support people to give evidence rather than putting barriers in their path. I am concerned that, although we want to see as much transparency as possible in the judicial system, we might not meet the ends of justice for people who are vulnerable by shining more of a light on the system. On the other side, there is the issue of conniving witnesses. Not all witnesses go to court to tell the truth. If someone agrees to be a witness, there could be a concern that they will play to the audience when giving evidence. The criminal defence solicitor Aamer Anwar stated in his written submission that potential safeguards will do “little to tackle how the filming of witnesses will stop them embellishing their evidence or tailoring it, due to the fact that they will be judged by millions watching at home”. Indeed, witnesses may follow the trial via whatever media platform in advance of taking to the stand. That is another concern of mine. I am concerned about how things will play out in the reporting of serious and organised crime. I tend to think that those involved at the very top of serious and organised crime do not like light to be shone on their activities, as they can be quite secretive. However, their henchmen are not that secretive and have a swagger in some of our communities. At times, they have been quite impudent when they have been on the witness stand or, indeed, been the accused. The idea of giving more exposure to that behaviour causes me significant concern. The issue is reducing, but it is still the case that in some of our communities glamour is associated with the gangster—the person who derives an income from criminality. I worry that the more exposure those people get, the more antiheroes we may create in some of our vulnerable communities. I therefore have a series of concerns. Flipping completely on the issue, I go back to the core position that the more information we can get into the public domain about how the judicial system operates and the process of trials, the better. However, there is a huge array of significant issues, some of which I have outlined, which I am sure that the minister will consider when she weighs up her personal views on what will of course be an independent judicial review of the role of the media in the justice system.

5. To ask the Scottish Government how it supports people living with epilepsy. (S4O-01310)

I draw the minister’s attention to an initiative in Glasgow that I have helped to secure to raise awareness of epilepsy among those working in the licensed trade. Epilepsy Scotland will now deliver training to all staff in Òran Mór licensed premises in Glasgow and other outlets that are run by the proprietor, Colin Beattie. Will the minister meet me and Epilepsy Scotland to discuss how this innovative approach to epilepsy awareness and training can be rolled out not just to licensed premises across Scotland, but in other areas such as justice and education, so that those who deal with people who may suffer from epileptic episodes can make informed choices and support those people in the best way possible?

No, there is one here.

I thank everyone who spoke in the debate for helping to inform the Health and Sport Committee’s inquiry into support for community sport. I assure members that we will consider all the comments carefully and that they will help to form our final report. Due to time constraints, I will refer to only some of the comments that have been made. Our convener set the tone well by talking about hard-to-reach groups. Girls and a variety of other groups were mentioned, but one that was not mentioned was that of people with disabilities. Given the successful Paralympics that we have just had, it is important to put on record the fact that the committee will consider that group in some detail as well. Volunteering is a vital component, and the value of volunteering was a thread that ran through the entire debate. I was particularly interested in Gil Paterson’s point that many people are volunteers because their sons and daughters are involved in sport and sometimes, when their sons and daughters move on, the volunteers also move on. We have to think about strategies to maintain that volunteering. I am delighted that Patricia Ferguson supports my campaign to achieve a £2.2 million investment in the Pinkston paddlesport centre in Glasgow. Tim Baillie and Etienne Scott, the gold medallists in canoeing, were in the Parliament today, and I met them to discuss progress on the project, in which I know that the Minister for Commonwealth Games and Sport has taken an active interest. I thank the Parliament for the support that has been shown. There is an interesting balance between elite sports and community sports. Alison Johnstone spoke excellently about how the support for elite sports is mapped out. At the same time, it is important that we should not just be cheering people on when we see them at events or on television; we should be getting involved in sports and physical participation ourselves. PE was mentioned a lot. I will not rehearse those points, although I note that PE teachers are important. There has been significant progress in that area.

I am sorry. I do not have time. Sport must be a part of the whole-school ethos, not just that of PE departments. That is why the active schools network is so important. The Health and Sport Committee has received evidence from witnesses about the desire to achieve a closer and more integrated relationship between the NHS and sport, which various speakers referred to. I stress that much good work is going on in that regard, although it is thought that improvements could be made. I am delighted to see that there is a £100,000 investment from the Scottish Government to try to progress that further. One of the issues with the GP referral system is that there is sometimes little or no choice. Dr Cindy Gray, who is a research fellow at the institute of health and wellbeing at the University of Glasgow, agreed with that and said that a real choice for patients is vital. Dr Gray is an important person to hear when we are considering whether we can justify additional spend in this area, as she is currently analysing the football fans in training programme that is supported by the SPL Trust. The programme involves SPL clubs working in partnership with GPs and patients, and uses the clubs’ brands to get more people physically active. That sort of approach can be pursued not just in football but in basketball, cricket and rugby. We should roll out that model in community sports. Choice is key. The analysis that the University of Glasgow is doing is also key, because we have to justify spending taxpayers’ money. Early intervention and getting people physically active rather than leaving them to suffer from ill health is the way to go, but we have to quantify the benefits of that approach. I will finish with a suggestion of my own. During the evidence-taking sessions, there was much discussion of which sports gained benefit from cashback for communities and which did not. John Park mentioned apprenticeships and talked about the focus on that, as did Margo MacDonald. I suggest that we leverage a weighting of proceeds of crime funds into areas with great health inequalities. If we can invest more money in the areas and groups that suffer from health inequalities—whether through GP practices or community sports—we could make a real difference. Our committee might consider that issue. The debate has been excellent. The committee will consider in detail all the suggestions that have been made, and we look forward to reporting back to the Parliament in due course.

The minister touched on the idea that self-directed support should not be a cover for cuts. Would it be helpful to put it on the record that Glasgow City Council has cut its social work budget by 20 per cent in the past year, although its revenue budget was cut by only 3.4 per cent? [Bob Doris has corrected this contribution. See end of report.] What would he say to people who look for self-directed support in Glasgow and who might see the self-directed support model being used as a cover for cuts in that city?

Will the member give way?

Malcolm Chisholm raises a vexed issue—the expression “postcode lottery” is sometimes used—but does he accept that charging is sometimes directly related to the amount of money that local authorities decide to invest in their social work departments, and that that is a local democratic choice for them? The situation must be monitored nationally, but how much local authorities want to invest in their social work departments should be a real local democratic choice.

The convener of the Health and Sport Committee, Duncan McNeil, has already made clear one of the reasons why there is uncertainty about the finances behind the bill. The Scottish Government has clearly stated what it believes the proposals will cost and it has shown the workings behind that figure, but COSLA has simply made broad assumptions and will not share with the committee how it reached its figure. Does Siobhan McMahon agree that that is unsatisfactory on the part of COSLA?

10. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with the United Kingdom Government regarding the future of Remploy factories in Scotland. (S4O-01255)

The minister will be aware of my on-going concerns about the sales process for Remploy Springburn and how workers and unions have been treated. Does the minister agree that, with the new minister Esther McVey MP now being in charge of disability issues at UK level, the UK Government has the opportunity to rethink its approach, to guarantee workers’ rights under the Transfer of Undertakings (Protection of Employment) Regulations, and to reconsider the detrimental pension and redundancy conditions? When he meets the minister, will he make such representations to her, as I have done?

I am pleased to speak in this debate on the consultation on the proposed community empowerment and renewal bill. If the Scottish Government gets the bill right, I firmly believe that history will show that the legislation was the most empowering law for local communities for many years. As Scotland quite rightly seeks more powers for herself, it is only right that we should all consider how we can give other powers directly to our communities. I want to use two local issues in Glasgow to highlight how the bill could empower Glaswegians and ensure that councils across Scotland do better to ensure that there is real community planning locally, not just a tick-box exercise at the end of a process, once decisions have been taken. We must ensure that community priorities are implemented as a result of real consultation, at the start of the process, rather than there being consultation at the end, confirming a local authority’s view that it knew best all along. The two examples that I will use involve situations in which Glasgow City Council has not achieved a high standard, and I hope to show how the bill could help it to do better in future. In doing so, I do not intend simply to lambast the council for its past shortcomings; rather I intend to offer pointers on how we can work together constructively, so that it can do better in future. The first example concerns the more than 20 primary schools that the council closed a few years ago. The issues with that programme are well documented. There was no real consultation process; it was seen as a done deal—a fait accompli. Indeed, the only school that received a reprieve from the mass school closure policy was Ruchill primary school, which moved to a new campus a year or two later—the local authority had forgotten that it contained a co-located autism unit and that, if the school closed, the unit would be left sitting on its own. I do not want to open the can of worms of the rights and wrongs of the policy; I want to consider what happened to the school buildings that were closed. Most of them were deemed to be surplus to requirements and were demolished. In some cases, there was an option to transfer them to City Property, but the fact is that the consultation document that was issued at the beginning of the process presupposed that the schools would be demolished. Where was the community empowerment in that? St Gregory’s primary and Wyndford primary, on the Wyndford estate in Maryhill, were closed and were scheduled for demolition. However, such was the strength of the local campaign that the council decided to set up a task force for the area. The outcome of that was that one of the schools was relaunched as a community hub—indeed, it was nicknamed the Wyndford hub. It is now run by Glasgow community and safety services and it provides some vital facilities for local areas. However, to be honest, it is limping along financially. That is because it was set up as an afterthought in the community planning process. If community empowerment is to mean anything, communities should be engaged at the outset in issues around the school estate, such as whether schools stay open or close and whether their use should change. However, that did not happen in Glasgow. A similar situation may have happened in other local authority areas, too, and the bill will ensure that there is a statutory duty to ensure genuine community empowerment. Further, where possible, let us not have Glasgow community and safety services running a building; let us have it run and managed by the community. I will give another example of where Glasgow City Council took the wrong approach. All politicians would agree that the Cadder community centre has been run down over many years, first by Glasgow City Council and latterly by Glasgow Life, one of the council’s arm’s-length organisations. When, a few years ago, its doors were locked—again, a fait accompli, without any consultation—there was a local campaign to save it. I am delighted to say that the council listened, but it listened at the end of the process. I am thankful to community campaigners and Cadder housing association, who took on responsibility for running the building. If a community asset such as a community centre has been run down in a planned fashion over five, 10 or 15 years, which is why it is underutilised, why does the community have to wait until the local authority puts a padlock on the door before it is allowed to take it over? I believe that if the bill is to mean anything, a community should have a statutory right to take over a community facility if it does not agree with the council’s strategic plan for a community facility or thinks that the council is managing its planned decline. Further, that right should be followed up by funding—as has been said already, the policy should not be about disposing of community assets as part of planned decline and de-investment on the part of local authorities. Those two aspects are vital if local authorities are to get community empowerment and community planning right. Glasgow has not always got it right. I think that that is not because it does not want to get it right; I think that there is a cultural problem. We have to support improvements in that culture, and the bill is the way to do it. I commend the considerations that I have outlined to the minister as part of the consultation on the bill.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what it is doing to develop the infrastructure for, and encourage greater participation in, paddle sports. (S4O-01216)

I have been working with Glasgow Watersports on its ambitious £2.2 million project for a community paddle sports facility at Pinkston. The project will boost local regeneration, provide a major community paddle sports facility for youngsters from some of our most deprived communities and serve the elite youth paddlers who currently have to travel to England for suitable white-water training facilities. I request that the sports minister visit the proposed development and meet me, Glasgow Watersports and others to discuss how we can progress the project. If its vital £300,000 grant application to sportscotland is successful, that will bring the funds raised to more than £1 million and, more important, provide potential leverage for other grant awards and allow the first part of the project to commence.

It is a pleasure to take part in the debate, and I would like to help out the Labour Party. I thought that it was the job of an Opposition party to scrutinise the legislative programme, but Labour Party members have singularly failed to do that at any point over the past two days. I will talk about the legislative programme that is before us, unlike Labour members, who have been more obsessed with the constitution than SNP members have been, which is quite remarkable. We have 15 pieces of legislation before us. First, I want to look at the rights of children and young people bill. I welcome the bill and, in particular, how it will build on the 20 per cent increase in nursery provision for three and four-year-olds that has been delivered since 2007. It will guarantee a statutory minimum of 600 hours of childcare per year, which once implemented will represent a 50 per cent increase in nursery provision since 2007. That level of growth is remarkable, and we should all welcome and support it. Some people have levelled the accusation that there might not be a need for legislation, but I believe that it is because childcare must be practical and flexible to maximise the benefit to parents, to children and to the economy that we must legislate. We must ensure that, when local authorities deliver that childcare, they meet their responsibilities to provide it in a flexible way. That is why I believe that legislation is necessary. Therefore, I will follow that aspect of the bill closely, to ensure that such flexible provision is offered to our communities. I also welcome the move to include vulnerable two-year-olds within the ambit of such nursery provision. Labour members were shamefully disparaging of that move and demanded more provision without highlighting how any additional provision could be funded. It is not the job of the Opposition to do that. I strongly believe that expanding early years provision is the right thing to do and that the Scottish Government’s move to provide childcare for vulnerable two-year-olds should be welcomed. That move can, of course, be built on. I would be keen to know whether there is any prospect of the £18 million for families from the early years change fund that was announced yesterday being used to extend the provision of early years childcare for two-year-olds in some areas of the country. Another avenue that is open to the Scottish Government when it comes to identifying a potential funding stream is to consider using some of the European structural funds for the period 2014-20 to help to deliver additional care for two-year-olds—if Parliament chose to do that. I would be keen for such an approach to be piloted in a small number of deprived areas in Scotland, and I can think of areas in north Glasgow that would be ideal for such a pilot. I fully accept that, in difficult financial times, the lion’s share of such funds is likely to go to attempts to boost employment and infrastructure, but a long-term approach to early years investment could be partly funded from any pot of cash that is spent between 2014 and 2020. I therefore welcome the rights of children and young people bill, which, importantly, will also make provision for a new kinship care order. I will follow the bill’s progress through the Parliament and will help to scrutinise it carefully, which the Labour Party does not seem to be capable of doing. I also welcome the integration of adult health and social care bill, which is essential to break down the barriers to integrated provision that are often spoken about but not always acted on. Those barriers are often budgetary—I will come back to that in a second—and cultural. It is vital that the public money that is used to support our ageing population is used to keep people happy and healthy in our communities and in their homes for longer. Issues related to when older people are discharged from hospital—indeed, their early discharge from hospital—need to be addressed. Does cost shunting go on from time to time? Many people think that there is cost shunting between local authorities and health boards. The money that it costs to look after an older person in hospital, at home or in a residential care facility should ideally come from the same budget, and services and budget should be seamlessly integrated. Under the legislation, that will happen. Of course, community health partnerships were supposed to take that forward but, despite some efforts, there has been cultural resistance and progress has been slow. Placing such integration on a statutory footing is vital to drive change. With Scotland’s over-65 population set to rise by 62 per cent by 2031, and the cost of health and social care predicted to rise by an additional £2.5 billion over the next 20 years, it is important such integration happens, and happens very soon. There is no other option. I was genuinely disappointed that when the ruling administration in Glasgow looked at health and social care integration last week it was seethingly negative towards it. It identified two aspects that it did not particularly like, which were integrated budgets and accountable officers in charge of the money. It was shying away from those two things, which are fundamental to making the integration of health and social care work and on which Jackie Baillie—Labour’s health spokesperson in this chamber—agrees with the Scottish Government. I ask Ms Baillie and her national Labour Party colleagues to have a word with Glasgow City Council. We need that council to be on side for health and social care integration, or it will let down the constituents in Glasgow whom I represent, which would be simply not good enough. I hope that we have some positive and constructive scrutiny of the Scottish Government’s legislative programme. If Labour cannot provide it, I will be happy to do so. Labour should really reflect on its attitude over the past two days.

I congratulate Patricia Ferguson on securing the debate. It gives me an opportunity to relay the concerns of the lecturers in the sound and music department at North Glasgow College, who were pleasantly surprised to hear from my office that this debate is taking place today. I am delighted that we can move the issue forward on a cross-party basis. I have written to Mike Russell and Fiona Hyslop about my concerns. I have been in regular contact with lecturers in recent months and, having met them, I am well aware of how change at North Glasgow is affecting them. Nobody wants courses to be reduced anywhere, but duplication of course provision and cuts to the Scottish Government’s revenue from Westminster have led to tough choices. It is worth noting that the number of full-time equivalent courses at the college has increased since the Scottish National Party came to power. The college received around £8.5 million for course provision and student funding in 2012-13. Although that does not negate the current financial challenges that are faced by the college, some of which where outlined by Patricia Ferguson, it is important to put that investment on the record. I note gently that no other political party has proposed a different budget settlement on further education and that the FE sector is stronger than the one that was inherited in 2007 by the SNP Government. Once more, although that does not negate the current challenges, it is important to put it on the record. I want to look past party politics and to voice my specific concerns, following meetings with the sound and music department at North Glasgow College. I met the college’s principal, Ronnie Knox, and sought a clear explanation from him on the rationale for course alterations in the college. Many believe that with a reduction of around 10 FTE staff to around five FTE staff, the sound and music department has taken more than its fair share of course reductions. A final round of cuts was recently announced, and £45,000 worth of cuts was identified in the sound and music department. Staff were interviewed to find out which staff member may have to be redeployed. Staff were also informed that 20 places on courses would be reprovisioned to other colleges in the sector. However, staff were constructive and formulated an alternative business plan that would not only have allowed the department to maintain its current staffing levels and course provision, but would have raised additional revenue, including using money from individual learning accounts and other funding streams to make up the shortfall. Unfortunately, the college rejected the plan. I stress that all staff members in the department remain loyal and committed to the college and the students. I welcome North Glasgow College’s on-going commitment to a policy of no compulsory redundancies. There is an understanding that course reductions may be a reality in the short term. However, many people feel that the process has not been handled as well or communicated as effectively as it could have been. Ronnie Knox has assured me that he will provide additional information about how the process was taken forward. He has also given reassurances that the sound and music department has a future at the college. However, I would like to put on record why there have been concerns in that department in particular.

I really do not have time, Ms Ferguson. I apologise. A draft options appraisal document on college merger that was produced on behalf of North Glasgow College stated that “Areas of the curriculum North Glasgow College would be prepared to give up” include “Sound production”, which is part of a department that has received a £2 million investment from the Scottish Government and has state-of-the-art facilities.

Mr Knox has reassured me that that is not the Government position. We want some reassurances from the Scottish Government about the level of transparency around all course alterations—not only in North Glasgow College but across the country. We also want acknowledgment of the specific place of the sound and music department in North Glasgow College, given that Glasgow is the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation city of music.

It is clearly important that North Glasgow College, Stow College and John Wheatley College work together on this merger—and not just at a principal and senior manager level. Given my concerns that the staff and students are not being engaged in the merger, does the member think that the Scottish Government has a role to play in ensuring that we have a real and integrated process?

We have heard that the strain that the outbreak places on NHS Lothian may require other health boards to offer appropriate support, for example the use of ITU and high-dependency unit beds. Can the cabinet secretary give further details of that? Are there likely to be any knock-on effects, such as the postponing of patient operations outwith NHS Lothian to free up HDU and ITU beds, which would be understandable in the circumstances? More importantly, we will need to inform any affected patients of why that has happened. Communication will be important.

The cabinet secretary will have seen the comments of the former member of the monetary policy committee, Professor David Blanchflower, who stated that it is not unreasonable for Scotland to have a seat at that table. Will the cabinet secretary join me in welcoming those comments?

15. To ask the Scottish Government what it is doing to develop and maintain employment opportunities for disabled people. (S4O-01113)

I recently met the GMB in relation to the United Kingdom Government’s plan to close Remploy Springburn unless a buyer is found. The GMB expressed serious concern that significant constraints might have been placed on interested buyers by the tying into the process of R Healthcare. Given the commercially sensitive nature of the process, I do not want to say more. I have written to the appropriate UK minister, Maria Miller, to set out the concerns. I know that Mr Ewing takes an interest in the matter, so will he meet me urgently, given the tight timescales that are involved, to discuss what can be done to facilitate progress?

I very much enjoyed Duncan McNeil’s speech, in which he raised many key issues that the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee—of which I am a member—will look at in the future. I thank the clerks to the committee, the witnesses from whom it heard, the MSP colleagues from all parties who sidled up to me to give me their views on parliamentary reform, the Parliamentary Bureau, business managers and, of course, the Presiding Officer for all their work in driving forward the reform agenda. I make special mention of the committee’s convener, Dave Thompson, and his absolute dedication and focus in driving forward the reform process. It should not go unsaid that his work has been absolutely remarkable. Like others, I would like to provide some context for the debate. The Parliament is gearing up for additional powers. Those powers are coming anyway; there is no constitutional debate about that. The new Scotland Act 2012 is being put in place. Whether we are talking about devo plus, devo max or independence post-2014, there is a general consensus that this place will have substantially more power. Given that we will have greater powers, we must ensure that we scrutinise the work that is done in this place more effectively and that, as well as continuing to be topical and relevant, we are seen to be topical and relevant by the people whom we represent. I believe that the Scottish Parliament is held in high esteem across Scotland, but we should never be complacent. We must seek to enhance our structures to better meet the needs of the people whom we serve—the Scottish public. I want to comment on the issue of the topicality of Scottish Parliament debates. In particular, I mention the proposed topical question time on Tuesday afternoons, which I believe is a fundamental part of the reforms. The current outbreak of legionnaire’s disease in Edinburgh is a relevant example of the need for such a question time. I am pleased that a statement will be made to the chamber on that issue tomorrow, and I acknowledge that Tuesday was a public holiday, but—

Of course—when I have finished my point. The fact that there is to be a topical question time on Tuesday afternoons means that it will be possible for events that emerge over the parliamentary weekend—which begins on a Thursday evening—to be dealt with routinely. In addition, the current system of themed question time and general question time involves a seven-day lag between the submission of a question and the asking of a supplementary. Many MSPs take a punt on what will be topical in seven days’ time. I do not find that acceptable. Having the ability to lodge a question on a Monday lunch time that can be asked of a minister on Tuesday afternoon represents a substantial step forward for this place.

I am the deputy convener of the Health and Sport Committee, and I say gently to the committee’s convener that if I had intervened on him to make such a suggestion, he would quite rightly have chastised me and told me that the committee’s work should be decided by committee members at a committee meeting and not in an ad hoc way, on the basis of a knee-jerk reaction, in the chamber. I appreciate the member putting that proposal on the record, but I think that it is a matter for the committee to discuss. As Mr McNeil knows, due process is rather important. I turn to members’ business debates. I welcome the idea of having a third members’ business debate, which will be embedded in a plenary session rather than being an add-on at the end. I genuinely welcome that, although the slot after First Minister’s question time might be seen as an add-on in itself. We will have to monitor that. I am disappointed that the person who secures a members’ business debate will not have a right to reply after other members have had their say, but before the minister sums up. However, I take on board the Presiding Officer’s concerns that that might change the dynamic of members’ business debates, and that it would have to be handled quite seriously. I have one or two further comments to make. We will have a plenary session on Tuesday afternoons. Some MSPs do not come to Parliament until Wednesday, although it is not because they are not working; they are working in their constituencies. That can mean that Tuesday afternoons and evenings are a bit of a graveyard slot when it comes to wider engagement with the public and evening events. If more MSPs are here on a Tuesday afternoon, it might mean a more vibrant Tuesday evening and more engagement with civic Scotland. That could be a benefit. Paul Martin talked about holding ministers to account. The Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee’s report says that we favour fewer questions being asked of ministers but more supplementaries. If a member is dissatisfied after asking their question and their supplementary question, rather than another member getting to ask the next question, the original member could get a second or third attempt at a follow-up question. The Presiding Officer has said that she will consider allowing that in the future once the current reforms have bedded in. This is quite a dynamic set of reforms, which contains a lot of good news. Although I might wish the reforms to go further, it is important for the Presiding Officer and the Parliamentary Bureau to take a balanced approach. The reforms will deliver, not as an end in themselves but as an improvement to how we represent the people of Scotland.

20. To ask the Scottish Government how efforts to tackle youth unemployment in Scotland are being co-ordinated with the UK Government. (S4O-01088)

The UK Government’s youth contract scheme, which is active in Scotland, includes wage incentives for employers and voluntary work for young people. Given the work of Skills Development Scotland, the community jobs fund and the opportunities for all programme, and the £55 million that the Scottish Government has invested, I am slightly concerned about duplication of and a lack of co-ordination with the UK Government’s activities. Will the minister assure me that she will monitor the situation and seek to improve it where possible?

It has been said that the idea of a supermarket tax “is an example of town centre regeneration in reverse”, and that “it shows little or no understanding of the interests of Scottish business or workers.” Those are not my words, but the words of a Mr Andy Kerr, who was the Labour finance spokesperson in the previous parliamentary session, when opposing a £30 million tax brought forward by this Scottish Government on supermarkets. Mr Kerr also said: “Labour is not in a position to support this unacceptable policy”.—[Official Report, 2 February 2011; c 32875, 32876-7, 32876] What has changed? Andy Kerr is no longer here, but one thing that has not changed is Labour’s absolute hypocrisy in relation to the taxing of supermarkets and their profits. In Parliament, the Scottish Government has proposed a Scottish public health supplement. I am content that the £95 million that the largest retailers that sell alcohol and tobacco will need to pay in the next three years represents a balanced approach to ensuring that they make an appropriate financial contribution to society. Labour is now pointing to the Sheffield study in targeting the concept of windfall profits. Dr Simpson has sought to rubbish the Sheffield study at every turn, but he has spectacularly failed to do so. He now points to one part of it that he completely misunderstands. The Sheffield study does not talk about windfall profits but about potential increased revenue. From Dr Simpson’s contribution, we can see that he clearly does not understand the difference. Let us look at the potential increased revenue from a minimum unit price of 50p. Nowhere is £124 million mentioned, as Dr Simpson suggests. The figure is £98 million, but that is for both the on-trade and the off-trade. The supermarkets could get a share of £69 million but that figure will be reduced because of the small amount of off-sales and the small proprietors out there in the economy who will take additional revenue. It is additional revenue, not profit. I far prefer what Jackson Carlaw and Gil Paterson said. We must take a balanced view and approach to taxing supermarkets appropriately. The Government will seek to do that, and we will take no lessons from Labour, which is why members should reject Dr Simpson’s opportunistic and, frankly, deeply flawed amendment.

The arguments against minimum pricing on the basis of potential supermarket profits or increased revenues have been well and truly exposed this afternoon as deeply flawed. I do not take any personal satisfaction from that because, at times, that debate has got in the way of analysing the potential public health benefits of minimum pricing. In that regard, I make a concession to Jackson Carlaw. He has accused SNP back benchers a number of times of being overtly evangelical in promoting the potential benefits of minimum pricing. Perhaps at times we have been, Mr Carlaw. However, it is vital to state clearly the estimated potential health benefits that the Sheffield modelling work suggests, and to once more put the details on the public record. Those benefits include potentially 60 fewer deaths related to alcohol per annum, 1,600 fewer hospital admissions and 3,500 fewer crimes estimated in the first year. In 10 years’ time, the figures could increase to 300 fewer deaths and 6,500 fewer hospital admissions. Whatever the figures are, we have to accept that the health benefits that will be accrued from minimum pricing will be substantial. I accept that they may be a bit less than estimated but, conversely, they could be greater. If, in 10 years, an additional 250 lives are being saved every year by minimum pricing, and not the 300 that were estimated by the Sheffield study, that would still be a significant achievement. In 10 years’ time, society will not be talking about the distinction between windfall profits, revenue or whatever. The argument will have moved on. Whether it is in one year’s time or five years’ time, or whenever, the Labour Party will have to take a serious look at itself and ask why it was discussing a flawed argument on supermarket profits, when everyone should have been talking about how we could turn around Scotland’s relationship with alcohol. That is for Labour to answer, which it will have to do sooner rather than later.

It is not how I see it; it is what the evidence points to, which is that the most harmful drinkers will be most affected by these measures. That is what the evidence shows, and it is true across all income groups. The measure will have a “significant impact”—those are not my words; they are from the evidence that our committee carefully examined. We came to accept that as the most significant aspect. Do we have four minutes, Presiding Officer?

Oh dear. I will be brief. The health benefits of minimum pricing differ according to which group we are talking about. It is said that minimum pricing will have slightly less of an impact on younger people in comparison with the rest of the population but, as it will still have a significant as opposed to a negligible impact, it is a measure that is worth taking. In addition, it has been said that minimum pricing will not cut the frequency of binge drinking, but binge drinkers will drink significantly less during such episodes. Therefore, minimum pricing will bring health benefits across the board. Like Mr Carlaw, I hope that, as a Parliament, we can unite and put party-political considerations behind us and support the bill unanimously. I am delighted to have spoken in this stage 3 debate.

9. To ask the Scottish Government how the early years change fund improves childcare for pre-school children. (S4O-01007)

I thank the minister for that strong commitment. She will be aware of the recent suggestion by Children in Scotland about the possible use of future European structural funds for childcare provision. The funds could help to expand and integrate childcare with employability initiatives and work. Will the minister explore such matters with her Government colleagues in order to consider whether the area could be developed further?

4. To ask the First Minister what the findings are of the latest research on the effects of minimum pricing of alcohol. (S4F-00673)

Given the benefits to public health and the potential savings to the national health service, Labour’s continued opposition to minimum pricing is both opportunistic and flawed. Despite Labour, however, minimum pricing shall be delivered. Does the First Minister therefore agree that the planned independent review of the benefits of minimum pricing is crucial both to allow on-going parliamentary scrutiny in this place and to demonstrate to the wider public the significant health and social benefits that minimum pricing can deliver?

It has been an interesting debate. I learned lots of interesting things that I did not anticipate finding out this afternoon. For example, I now know what the baby diets of both Hanzala Malik and Nanette Milne were. I did not expect to learn that, nor did I expect to find out that Mark McDonald was a highly active person until he started obsessively tweeting Alison Johnstone, or that Gil Paterson’s real reason for being physically inactive is that he secretly watches “Hannah Montana” with his daughter. Much of what has been reiterated this afternoon was not alarming; many of the poor health statistics are more predictable than alarming, if we are honest about it. I welcome the tapering off of the decline in healthiness and of the increase in obesity, and the gradual increase in physical activity that we have heard about, but poor health and diets and low physical activity levels are not inevitable in Scotland. I am reminded of recent conversations about alcohol. Harry Burns has already been mentioned. He talks about a relationship with alcohol as not being inevitable and takes us back just a few decades to when Scotland was seen as a moderate nation in its drinking habits. He has significant information to pass on about how we can promote positive health outcomes in Scotland. He speaks about people not necessarily being born healthy, getting older and having their health decline, but about the need for Scottish people—indeed, all the people in the world—to nurture and develop their health as they go through life. That is vital as we take forward any initiative to tackle obesity and promote physical activity. I want to say a little bit about the work that goes on in schools. Other members, including Mark Griffin, have shared their school experiences. I concur with part of what Mark Griffin said. It is hard to believe, but I was quite a fit and healthy person at school, as I had a teacher who promoted Gaelic football—not football—in it. I bought into that and was a fit and healthy young man as a result. It is about giving additional choice in schools to young people rather than offering just traditional sports, which, for parts of the west of Scotland, seems to have always meant soccer. In that context, I will give a little mention to St Roch’s secondary school in Springburn, which has developed quite a successful rugby initiative, which is good to see. It diversifies the team sports agenda there, although much of the work is done on a voluntary basis by staff and parents. I would like to mention the success of the active school networks and the £12 million per annum investment to give a structured approach to physical activities in schools, not only the traditional sports. Excellent work is going on in schools. We have heard about the transition between school and later life, particularly for young females, who tend not to stay physically active as they get older. There is a similar but not identical trend for boys; it is just not as marked. The transition between school and the life of work is a key point and the Government has to find a way of taking more action to keep people physically active at that point. Physical activity is a habit that many people get into at school but do not retain, for whatever reason, once out in the world of work. It would be good to hear more about how we can take that forward. On the strength of community sports clubs, I have been remarkably impressed by the organisation of running clubs across Glasgow and Scotland. Earlier this year, I had the privilege of attending the Nigel Barge 10K race for Maryhill Harriers. I say to Patricia Ferguson that I did not participate in the race—I am impressed that she has done 5Ks regularly in the past few years—but a plethora of running clubs took part, and there was a junior section, which was fantastic to see. We have to find a way of promoting such things across Government. Many community sports initiatives have been supported by cashback for communities, which I welcome. I give a small plug for the twilight basketball initiative in Glasgow. I know that Glasgow Rocks has been quite heavily involved in that. Another fitness initiative that has been successful and which has received a lot of publicity recently is the football fans in training initiative, and I had the pleasure of visiting Parkhead to see it in action. I want to plug the general work that all football clubs do, not only with the FFIT programme, but in throwing open their doors and facilities to the wider community to promote a range of activities for young people in the local area and their staff. I think that Gil Paterson mentioned the world of work, and Dennis Robertson mentioned that the world of work does not sit well with a fit and healthy lifestyle. Whether we are talking about Glasgow city chambers, Parkhead, town halls across the country or large employers, perhaps workplaces must do more to promote fit and healthy options and lifestyles for workforces and the general public who stay in the area. They have the facilities. They can throw them open, and people can get benefits from them. Finally, the football fans in training initiative that I mentioned is carried out in partnership with the University of Glasgow. I hope to see for the first time real and robust data on the benefits of using sporting clubs as preventative spending champions in the positive health agenda to provide evidence for investing more in that. We should invest more in that approach, but I realise that we must get evidence to monitor its effectiveness.

6. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to promote the food and drink sector. (S4O-00994)

I am pleased that the Scottish food and drink sector is in a strong position. Does the cabinet secretary agree that the 2014 Glasgow Commonwealth games will give us a prime opportunity to showcase Scottish produce internationally? What steps are being taken to ensure that producers and other businesses in Glasgow and right across Scotland can make the best use of the 2014 Commonwealth games to further boost the sector?

I am in the same position as the majority of members of the Scottish Parliament who represent pro-independence parties. The logic is undeniable. We believe in Scottish independence and if more powers—however modest they are—are being offered to the Scottish Parliament by an anti-independence UK establishment, it would be wrong to reject them out of hand. However, two key questions must be considered. First, are the financial arrangements that underpin the new powers in the Scotland Bill designed to operate to the detriment of the Scottish people? In other words, are they designed to be a Trojan-horse cash-cutting exercise? When the provisions were first published, I thought that that was a possibility and I had significant concerns, but having heard from the Scottish Government I think that the danger has abated, because reassurances have been given. Joan McAlpine talked about that aspect of the issue. On that test, I can support the Scotland Bill, although I do so with no great enthusiasm. Secondly, will the Scotland Bill process sideline the move towards our independence referendum in 2014? The answer to the question is increasingly self-evident. If anything, the strikingly modest provisions in the bill have added fuel and energy to the drive for Scottish independence. History will show that the entire Calman process and subsequent Scotland Bill were a significant error on the part of the anti-independence parties, given the sheer lack of ambition.

I will perhaps give way to Mr Rennie later. For evidence of that error, we need only consider the current clamour from the anti-independence parties to present themselves as offering powers beyond those that are provided for in the Scotland Bill, if and only if Scotland votes no in an independence referendum. The Scottish people can smell a rat. The failure of the anti-independence parties to define further devolution is a significant weakness, which will be increasingly exposed as the months roll by and we draw closer to the independence referendum. The independence parties know what powers we want to be transferred to Scotland. Sovereignty and self-determination are clearly understood and respected throughout our nation. The devolutionists’ line of “thus far and no further”, which they take without offering a definition of “thus far”, is untenable—although we know that “thus far” takes all the anti-independence parties beyond the provisions of the Scotland Bill. We can describe the tactics and principles of the unionist parties as being designed only to offer devolution that goes far enough to scupper a yes vote on Scottish independence and no further. The devolutionists have no ideological position on which powers they want for Scotland; they just want to block Scottish independence. Such tactics have been exposed as inconsistent and opportunistic. On that note, I will take an intervention from Willie Rennie.

I am embarrassed by Mr Rennie’s intervention. The only thing that is shambolic is the unionist parties’ position. Mr Rennie was keen to talk about the process earlier. The reason that there will be an independence referendum in autumn 2014 is to put a clear choice on independence to the Scottish people. Mr Rennie will give them no choice. He will say, “Vote no and take your chances.” That is simply not tenable. I return to the idea of Scotland being in financial detriment if we give permission to the UK Government to pass the Scotland Bill. I have previously said that I believe that the Scottish Government has given reassurance on that, but I want to look at the idea of financial detriment from a different angle. We repeatedly hear about fiscal responsibilities, which it is important to gain. I understand why some people argue that the more responsible a Parliament is for directly raising its own income, the more responsibly it is likely to use those powers in governing and marshalling finances. On one level, I cannot fathom why a UK Government does not want to go further in giving Scotland even more borrowing and fiscal powers within the UK, as it would not shoulder any of the risk. The Parliament and Scotland would have to borrow. If growth did not come, the Parliament would shoulder the risk. However, some of the gains when unemployment fell and from income tax receipts, national insurance, VAT, increased fuel consumption and the related duty that would be collected, profits from businesses, and benefits that would come from growth would also accrue to the UK Exchequer. Therefore, why does the UK Government stand in the way of Scotland having more powers? There is an ideological objection to Scottish independence. We and the UK Government know that Scotland will be more prosperous and socially just with independence. Saying “thus far and no further” will not cut it, but, today, I will support the LCM.

I, too, welcome the Remploy staff to the chamber. It is unfortunate that I was unable to attend their event. I did not know that the demonstration was happening today, or I would have supported it. Remploy workers are not just angry about losing their jobs, but angry that some UK politicians are using the veneer of support for disability organisations to justify the closure plans. I hope to return to that later in my speech. In a tight funding environment, numerous organisations will be grateful for the cash that currently goes to Remploy, but that does not mean that support for disabled people will improve. It means that a finite resource will be used in different areas. Perhaps the question should be whether we are spending enough to protect disability rights and employability strategies more generally, rather than how we can spend the same inadequate pot of money in different ways. There is always a case for change and improvements to disability support arrangements, but Iain Duncan Smith’s statement that the Government should not be expected to subsidise “Victorian-era segregated employment” misses the point entirely. Ken Macintosh referred to that. Not only does it miss the point, but it is an almost unbelievable insult to the skilled workers of these 21st century manufacturing operations. Like most people in the chamber, I believe that the rights and opportunities of the most vulnerable people in our society should be protected, and that is why we are being defensive of Remploy, which provides those opportunities. If we view the Remploy proposals in the context of the UK Government’s wider approach to the disabled in our society, particularly in relation to welfare reform, it is pretty clear to me who is expected to pay the price in a Tory Britain for the failures of successive UK Governments on the economy—it is the most vulnerable in society. I would love to see all disabled people in mainstream employment of their choosing. Training, education and work opportunities should be open to all, regardless of disability. The Conservatives talk about focusing on the individual, but what about the individual who is best suited to supported employment in places such as Remploy? What about them? No Remploy worker has a preference for the dole, but that is exactly where many of them might end up if the plans go ahead. That is why I lodged a motion recently describing the Remploy closures as ill timed and ill considered. Let us put aside the debate on supported employment for one moment.

Let me make some progress, Ms Scanlon. Let us imagine for a moment that the plans were for the greater good. I do not believe that they are, but if that was the case, they would need to be actioned at a time that maximised the possibility for Remploy workers to access the mainstream jobs market. Every week, I speak to constituents in Glasgow who are frantically trying to find work. They are finding it increasingly difficult, given the UK austerity cuts and the state of the economy. Unemployment is high, and Tory welfare reforms mean that it might get far higher. Let us consider Springburn, which is where my local Remploy factory is based. There are already five jobseekers allowance claimants for every job centre vacancy that is advertised. Even the lowest-paid jobs are attracting multiple applicants. However, Citizens Advice Scotland estimates that the number of JSA claimants there is likely to surge by a further 31 per cent because of wider reforms and cuts to disability benefits. It is that jobs market and that environment that Remploy workers in Springburn and beyond will be forced to enter. John Pentland, who has left the chamber, made a similar point about his area. I am sure that some Remploy workers will carry themselves into mainstream workplaces by demonstrating their numerous skills and aptitude for hard work. Such success would demonstrate the success of Remploy itself and be a strong argument for retaining its factories. If the UK Government is genuinely determined to mainstream people into employment, it should retain Remploy as a gateway institution and social provider to process people into the main workforce.

Ms Scanlon did not take any interventions. She should sit down. Let us look at what we can do. There has been a lot of heat in the last few speeches about what previous UK Governments and the current UK Government have done. It was reasonable for Ms Adamson to set out the historical context; the UK Labour Party set the train in motion. However, on one level, that is now irrelevant. We are where we are and the majority of members want to find a way forward for Remploy factories. I am mindful of the £4,000 figure that Gordon MacDonald mentioned when he spoke about the profit and loss margins at Remploy Springburn. When we see such close margins, we must say to ourselves that there must be a way forward such as a plan or proposal that can sustain Remploy Springburn and others into the future. I want to be actively involved in helping to achieve that on a cross-party basis. Whether we are looking for social enterprise models, co-operative models, or better use of article 19, something has to be done. I say very gently to some members that just saying that the Scottish Government can step in every time that a UK Conservative Government messes up is not the answer to our problems. The answer to Scotland’s problems is to not have any UK Government messing up in Scotland, so that we can provide a better future for all our workforce.

I will work with anyone in any party, including Ms Eadie, to find a better future for all Remploy workers and all disabled workers in Scotland.

Patients want assurances that the inappropriate and unacceptable practices in Lothian have not been replicated elsewhere in the country. Will specific guidance be given on how health boards manage their internal audits of waiting times and will those audits provide reassurance to my constituents in Glasgow and constituents elsewhere that they will not be affected by the same culture as in Lothian?

I will start by paying tribute to Margaret Burgess for her speech. It was exceptional in outlining the devastating effects that these reforms will have and she correctly identified the fact that the landscape for benefits in Scotland is changing. Other negative changes are coming. For example, nearly 85,000 households in Scotland will no longer be eligible for tax credits from this April, and that is before one starts to mention the disability living allowance and incapacity benefit reforms. It is important that we view the housing benefit cuts within that context. As we have heard, there will be draconian sanctions such as the underoccupancy penalties, which will see the UK Government introduce cuts to the amount of housing benefit tenants can receive if they are deemed to have a spare room in their council or housing association home. That reduction will essentially mean that households deemed to be “underoccupied“—another term that I have issues with, like others who have spoken—will be charged a penalty as the reduced amount of benefit will become rent paid directly by the tenant through additional top-ups from any other benefits or incomes that they have. I will look at the area where I stay and at how these changes will affect people there. According to the SFHA, the average weekly rent charge for two-bedroom households in north Glasgow is £63.88 a week, or about £283 a month. For households that are deemed to be underoccupying a property by a single bedroom in that area, the proposed 14 per cent benefit cut equates to an additional £465 a year—the equivalent of seven and a half weeks’ rent—that they will have to find from their own resources. The Tories are actually saying that if people need a year’s shelter, they will pay for 10 months but for the other two months that person is on their own. That is not acceptable and we should not be accepting it in Scotland. In north Glasgow alone, the SFHA estimates that the change will affect almost 1,700 households. I will talk about a couple of constituents whose experience relates directly to this point, although I will not name them. One is about to reach retirement age and they are currently underoccupying their accommodation as they have a spare room. They are worried about their benefits being cut. They are also looking perhaps to go into sheltered accommodation but, because they have not reached retirement age, they are worried about being reassessed for personal independence payments and other benefits. They are unsure whether they should move to sheltered accommodation as they are worried on a number of levels about whether they will be able to sustain their income and stay there. It is not merely a question of the housing benefit reforms, but of how they will impact on other wider welfare reforms. Another constituent who came to see me just the other day needs a two-bedroom property but is seriously considering whether he should get one or not. His son, who sometimes stays with him, will be deemed not to be entitled to that bedroom and housing benefit will therefore not cover it. Those are real people who will suffer real and direct impacts from these ill-considered, inappropriate reforms. The UK Government has chosen to ignore exemptions in such areas and the most vulnerable people in society are likely to suffer. If someone’s partner has come back from hospital and needs a spare room because of their medical condition, they will not have that spare room. If someone’s child has been taken into care and they want that child to return to their accommodation, they might no longer have the benefits to support that child in their home. Those are the most vulnerable people in society, whom we should be defending. I will refer briefly to the Labour amendment, which talks about mitigation. From what I can see and from the search that I have undertaken, a lot of mitigation activities are already taking place. For example, in November, £100,000 of funding was announced to support three strands of activity involving the Chartered Institute of Housing, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and local authorities to see what they can do to mitigate the worst aspects of housing benefit reform and its impact on the most vulnerable people in society. Unfortunately, the key phrase is that we should mitigate “where possible”. Anyone in the Parliament who pretends that we can mitigate all the effects is in absolute denial. I say to the Labour Party that the only Trojan horse in the chamber today might be a Scottish Labour Party that is giving succour to UK Tory welfare reforms by telling us that if we mention independence and a better way we are not in solidarity with other people in the UK. However, if we could kill the reforms stone dead in Scotland, no one else in the UK would accept them either, so give us the controls now.

We will take forward the Alcohol (Minimum Pricing) (Scotland) Bill as a majority Scottish Government. That brings certainty to the process. However, I am pleased that the Scottish Government seeks to maximise cross-party support for minimum pricing, irrespective of that majority. That is significant. I welcome the backing of the Green Party and the Liberal Democrats for minimum pricing, and the more recent lending of support by Conservatives in Scotland. It is clear that nearly all the parties see minimum pricing as an opportunity to improve Scotland’s relationship with alcohol and to push forward with a much-needed public health initiative. The case for minimum pricing is so persuasive that even the Labour Party in England wishes to give it a go. That leaves Scottish Labour badly isolated, not just politically but in relation to almost every other group in society that has considered minimum pricing. Labour’s isolation is most dramatic in relation to the medical profession and the academic world. SNP colleagues will address various aspects of the bill in the debate. Jim Eadie will talk about the legal position; Richard Lyle will speak about how he was personally influenced by the committee’s evidence as it was taken; and Gil Paterson will talk about business aspects of minimum pricing, including alleged windfall profits.

The Scottish Government always takes a sensible approach to taxing the supermarkets—something on which the Labour Party has not been consistent. I want to discuss some of the evidence that has been used to underpin minimum pricing, much of which is contained in the work that was done by the University of Sheffield. The Sheffield study is not a single piece of evidence; it marshals a wide range of the evidence available to analyse the link between price and consumption, and between consumption and harm. All parties on the Health and Sport Committee, including the Labour Party, acknowledged that those links existed. Indeed, all parties agreed that the University of Sheffield’s modelling work was valuable and reliable. There is direct evidence from here in Scotland to demonstrate just how robust that work was. The university was asked to do modelling work for the Scottish Government’s alcohol multibuy ban before it was introduced. The results predicted that beer sales would fall by 8 per cent; they did. They predicted that wine sales would fall by 6.1 per cent; they fell by 5 per cent. They predicted that the sale of spirits would fall by 2.7 per cent; it fell by 3 per cent. It is clear that the impact of the multibuy ban closely mirrored the predictions. With that in mind, let us look at some of the predictions from the Sheffield study on the potential benefit of minimum pricing if the unit price is set at 45p in the first year. It is predicted that there would be 36 fewer alcohol-related deaths, 950 fewer hospital admissions and 310 fewer violent crimes, and that £36 million would be saved in related costs. Those are estimations of course—the real numbers may vary to a greater or lesser extent within a margin of error—but those are impressive statistics, which are backed up with robust evidence. Of course, no price can be put on the benefit to an individual whose life is not ruined by alcohol or to the family or community in which they live. The committee took evidence from Canada, where various forms of minimum pricing exist. Strong evidence from Canada is already starting to emerge, particularly with regard to a dramatic reduction in admissions to hospitals in British Columbia because of alcohol-related incidents. In giving evidence to the Health and Sport Committee, Professor Stockwell, who is assessing Canada’s experience, said that the Scottish system was far better than the systems in Canada and that we can expect to see positive results once the bill has been implemented.

I do not have time. I want to examine some of Labour’s misleading claims against minimum pricing, for instance in relation to binge drinking. The Health and Sport Committee heard that while minimum pricing may not reduce the frequency of bingeing, in all likelihood it will reduce the amount of alcohol consumed at each binge episode. Labour claimed that minimum pricing would not be effective with harmful drinkers. Not even the research that Labour cited substantiates that claim. The committee discovered that research from the Centre for Economics and Business Research did not look at the types of drink that each group of drinkers was consuming. It took no account of whether the drink being consumed was from the on-trade or off-trade, nor of the average price paid by each group for alcohol. Those are all key components of any modelling work. Even with all those research deficiencies in Labour’s evidence, it still predicted that there would be an impact on harmful drinkers, although slightly less than for other groups. Every other piece of evidence, including the peer-approved, robust and reliable Sheffield study, said that harmful drinkers would be the most affected. Labour is in denial about the evidence. In low-income groups, 80 per cent would be almost unaffected and only 20 per cent—the most harmful drinkers—may pay more. The price differential between those groups and higher income groups was just 0.7 per cent—a price worth paying for the social benefit that our deprived communities will reap from minimum pricing. Every party in the chamber except one is now on board for an opportunity to change Scotland’s relationship with alcohol. Now is the time for Labour to step up to the plate and support minimum pricing at stage 1 and throughout the bill process.

Will the member give way?

I thank the squabbler for taking an intervention. In relation to point scoring, if the Labour Party is so worried about supermarket profits, why was it against the retail levy that the Scottish Government proposed in the previous parliamentary session?

It is a privilege to sum up for the Health and Sport Committee in what, in general, has been a positive, informative and constructive debate. Indeed, that was the approach that our committee took to the inquiry into the regulation of care of older people. I thank the members of our committee for that approach. In my thanks, I would like to include the former members of the committee Mary Fee and Mary Scanlon, who served the committee well during their time on it. I also thank the clerking team, SPICe, all those who gave evidence, whether in written form or in person, and all those members who have made positive contributions to the debate, a number of which I will touch on. However, I will start with a more general point. Our committee system can make a powerful contribution to driving positive change. That is exactly what I believe the Health and Sport Committee has achieved in relation to improving the system of regulation of care of older people. When the committee embarked on its inquiry, we were determined to scrutinise the regulatory framework for some of our most vulnerable citizens in a rigorous, non-partisan and mature way, and that is what we did. Of course, our interest in the subject was raised by the tragedy at the Elsie Inglis home and the debacle surrounding Southern Cross, but it is worth stressing that our inquiry had at its core a significant degree of post-legislative scrutiny. There had been no rigorous review of legislation in the area since the implementation of the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Act 2001, since when it should be noted that the tragedy at the Elsie Inglis home and the Southern Cross debacle occurred. I am sure that fellow committee members will agree that increased post-legislative scrutiny by our committees would be beneficial to the Parliament. While admitting that our inquiry was prompted by public concerns about high-profile incidents, as opposed to being a pre-planned effort on the committee’s part, I believe that the regulation of care of older people is all the better for it. We should put on record the committee’s unanimous belief that the current system was sufficiently rigorous, but that that does not mean that there are not always various areas in which the system of regulation must be improved. It is also worth noting that there remains cross-party support for the use of a risk-based assessment process in the regulation of care of older people, that risk assessment should be robustly evidence driven and that the frequency and type of inspection should be proportionate to that risk. Indeed, the Health and Sport Committee made several recommendations specifically on those points. In his opening speech, Duncan McNeil rightly pointed out that there seemed to be a lack of clarity around whether inspections should judge care against two or four quality themes. It is a minimum of two and a maximum of four, based on a risk assessment. I draw to members’ attention the fact that the regulatory assessment tool—the tool by which one assesses the risk in the first place—has been reviewed by the care inspectorate and improved for the current year. I listened with interest to Jackie Baillie’s contribution, in which she rightly identified a dramatic drop in the quality of care at the Elsie Inglis nursing home. The committee accepted in taking evidence that that could happen under any regulatory system, no matter how robust it was. What is important is how effectively we pick up on those dramatic falls in care standards. We are all working on the same agenda, which is to improve the system. I mentioned the regulatory assessment tool because that is the way in which we collect the evidence to allow us to pick up on those situations in which the quality of the care service has dramatically fallen. Jackie Baillie also mentioned issues around procurement and the living wage. The committee was concerned about those matters, and I note that the Government has had further discussions with COSLA in that regard. It is only right that the committee will want to see where those discussions arrive at. The complaints process has been a common theme in the debate: it was discussed by members such as Malcolm Chisholm, Sandra White, Richard Lyle, Nanette Milne and Mary Fee, to mention just a few. The committee believes that the complaints process is vital but the process should be positive. An open complaints process drives positive improvement in care homes, and those that are up for the challenge should have nothing to fear. I note that Nanette Milne welcomed the guidance on confidential complaints that we are hoping to see in the near future, which links in with the concerns that we have heard about whistleblowing. It is important to mention Mary Scanlon’s comments on the use of psychoactive drugs, which were a passionate display on an issue that she has been following for a number of years. The Scottish Government has said that it is in discussions with the care inspectorate and the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland to improve those standards and link them to dementia standards. I sense Mary Scanlon’s frustration. Although that is the right thing to do, she wants tangible outcomes to show whether things have improved. I am sure that our committee will want to monitor that in future. Jim Eadie mentioned the duty of care for the wider health professional groups. I know that undergraduate training for doctors and nurses will be bolstered to remind students of that. Perhaps we should extend it to training for other health professionals. I will highlight one of the committee’s recommendations, which will, I hope, become common practice in a few years’ time. We identified that the inspection process for health and social care is not integrated. Ron Culley of COSLA told the committee that the current system of regulation was centred on general service provision and that we should move to a system that is more focused on individual outcomes. Geraldine Doherty of the Scottish Social Services Council agreed with that. As we progress further down the road of closer health and social care integration, it is particularly important that the care pathway for individuals is assessed in a meaningful way. I do not want to overplay the importance of that but, given the current legislative context in respect of closer integration, it is vital that we get it right. Joint inspections and closer working are vital if we are to make progress. When the care inspectorate—or whoever—enters a care home, it is reasonable to hope that the inspectors will examine the care journey for some of the residents and families who use the care home and how an individual came to be in that care home, whether they or their family believe that they could have been supported in their own home for longer and, if they had a stay in hospital before they arrived at the care home, what the quality of care in the hospital was like. The care pathway—the human journey—is where we must take the care system in future. Joint inspection work is one way to do that, and it is important.

I just want to mention some of the achievements that we have already made in relation to the regulation of care of the elderly. Every care establishment will now have one unannounced visit a year, and some will have more depending on the risk. At least two quality themes will now be inspected. The system of engaging with health professionals such as GPs and pharmacists has been beefed up. The training of doctors and nurses will be beefed up. The complaints process will be made more accessible and streamlined, with a single point of contact, and we will soon be reviewing the national care standards. All of that has come from our committee’s recommendations. We are driving change. This is what the committee and the Parliament should push forward.

I must say at the outset, for absolute clarity, that, given the process that surrounds consultations, the transport minister could not have been clearer that the Scottish Government has no plans to close any station. I look forward to that being confirmed once the Government has considered the consultation responses. I will be interested to know what various organisations have said about station closures once the responses become publicly available. People have been concerned about train stations, and the Evening Times has played an important role in voicing those concerns—a responsibility that I know the newspaper takes seriously. Glasgow MSPs have a responsibility to address any concerns that are raised, which is why I met the transport minister and gained the reassurances that I believed were important. However, MSPs also have a responsibility to suggest enhancements to our rail network—indeed, we were encouraged to do so. I therefore thank the Labour Party for so generously donating its debating time to me this morning; I will use it to draw to the minister’s attention once more some of the suggestions that I made in response to the rail 2014 consultation. One issue that I raised concerns service provision on the Maryhill line. I often use the line to go to meetings with constituents, and it has been a significant success. However, the service remains incomplete: it does not run on Sundays except occasionally at Christmas time. I will provide some examples of why a Sunday rail service is important. In Kelvindale there is a high level of car ownership, and 50 per cent of train tickets that are sold there are season tickets, which highlights the importance of the train for commuting to work. On Sundays, residents still wish to travel, and if they want to go shopping in the city centre, for example, they may well choose to use a car instead of the train for that journey. They may even skip the city centre altogether and take a car to the out-of-town shopping centres. A Sunday service could therefore have both economic and strong environmental benefits. At Gilshochill station, which is on the same line, passenger numbers have trebled in the past four years. The Cadder area of Glasgow that the station serves is not well served by alternative public transport links and has a lower level of car ownership. The train is an important service for that community, and extending the service to run on Sundays would meet local social need. Other stations on the line are in a similar position. I ask the minister to be cautious about any analysis that he may receive of passenger numbers for the four Sundays before Christmas, when First ScotRail occasionally runs trains as part of its franchise commitment, as those services have been subject to cancellations. In 2011, the service ran only on two Sundays before Christmas, and in 2010 it did not run at all. Uptake of such services depends on commuters being aware of them, and on strong service reliability. There is likely to be significant room for improvement on both counts. Consequently, any data that is received on demand for a Sunday service will be highly unreliable. I therefore ask that consideration be given to my suggestion that services on the Maryhill line be expanded to run on Sundays on a regular basis, and for that to be a potential condition of any future franchise. I am sure that the minister will want to consider the various suggestions that I made in my submission, including the feasibility of a train station at Robroyston, enhancements on the Newton line and greater connectivity in north Glasgow. I explored the idea of connecting the Maryhill and Springburn lines; the price for that was an eye-watering £40 million to £60 million, but in the medium to long term, we must take a strategic look at developing the rail network. Finally, it would be worth exploring the idea of a not-for-profit operator. I thank the minister for listening to my suggestions.

I start by thanking the Labour Party for drawing attention to public transport issues in Scotland. It does Parliament a service by bringing such a debate to the chamber. Even if I do not agree with the terms of the Labour motion, it is important to say that I appreciate its bringing up the issue. I was slightly perplexed by a lot of Elaine Murray’s speech. At one point, she said that she did not want to give money to the big bus operators, but then she bemoaned the fact that the bus service operators grant was being cut. Increasing the BSOG would give additional money to the largest bus operators, and it is fair to put that on the record. I would be delighted to hear what Elaine Murray says about that.

I am delighted that Elaine Murray has made that intervention, because she has just emphasised the contradiction in her thinking. I also want to look at the change from using the amount of fuel used by bus operators to the distance travelled as the basis on which payments are made. That is quite important. When I think about it, the idea of giving a fuel duty discount might have been slightly wrong-headed. Why should a Scottish Parliament have to give a tax break to bus companies to provide a public and social service when the huge oil and fuel revenues and taxes flow down south to London? It is simply wrong-headed. Perhaps the Labour Party should look at itself and take a deep look at that issue. I point out that forms of bus regulation already exist, and I note that the minister is looking at ways of implementing further regulation where appropriate if it is needed. I commend my parliamentary colleague George Adam, who spoke about the statutory quality bus partnership success in Paisley. I am aware that similar proposals are being developed in Glasgow, and I hope that they will come to fruition shortly. Indeed, I hear talk that part of that regulation might extend to the fastlink scheme that is being supported with £40 million from the Scottish Government. I do not think that we should pretend that no regulatory levers are being used currently. That said, I want to be reasonable. I hear that Patricia Ferguson is going to introduce a bill on bus regulation. I supported her bill on factoring, so I will look at her bill on bus regulation. However, I am deeply worried about the unintended consequences of the steps that the Labour Party would take, so I would take some convincing. I want to look at the community transport aspect of the Labour Party’s motion.

I want to develop my point. Labour mentioned rural community transport but, in Glasgow, it is inconsistent on community transport. In the north of Glasgow, which is in the region that I represent, the main community transport provider, the North Area Transport Association, has had its funding cut by £48,000—a 100 per cent cut—by the Glasgow Labour Party.

Absolutely.

I have heard from disability groups in north Glasgow that are worried about the success and future of the service. Primary schools are also worried. Perhaps the best way of finishing off is—oh, I have lost it. Perhaps I will intervene on Ms Ferguson—oh, I have found it. A small child—

I apologise, Presiding Officer. When a small child sends me a picture, which I have here, of the local bus company, which has lost £48,000, and the child is worried that they will not be taken to their playgroup, I say that Glasgow Labour should be consistent on community travel. It is clear that it is not.

I will return to some of Patricia Ferguson’s comments during my speech. I thank her for raising the issue of rail services in Glasgow and welcome the opportunity to put my views to the minister, Keith Brown, this evening. I have already had discussions with Mr Brown, which I will mention later. This will be an opportunity for me to reinforce my views to the minister, as I have reinforced them to Transport Scotland directly. I am keen to see the retention of all rail services in the area that I represent, and I am reassured that that will happen. I refer to the Maryhill line, in particular, as I know it very well and I am a frequent user. As we have heard, that line has been a success story, and it will continue to be a success story long after the consultation has closed. If we look at the Ashfield, Gilshochill, Kelvindale and Maryhill stations, all of which are mentioned in Ms Ferguson’s motion, we see that there has been a 275 per cent increase in the entry and exit passenger numbers since 2006. That is an additional 200,000 journeys—a success story indeed. In my discussions with the minister, I put directly to him the success story and the importance of the train line, and I was reassured that the Scottish Government has absolutely no plans to close any station or to erode train services on that line. On the contrary, I was encouraged to engage positively with the rail 2014 consultation. To view the consultation as being only a defensive exercise would be to miss a central opportunity for me and my constituents. The rail 2014 consultation should be used to enhance provision in Glasgow, and on the Maryhill line in particular. I believe that the Anniesland to Queen Street train service should be extended from the current six-days-a-week service through the introduction of a Sunday service. My constituents would benefit from a seven-days-a-week rail service through Maryhill, and I have written to First ScotRail to make that case ahead of the 2014 rail franchise retender. Many of my constituents believe that there is a demand for that service, and I agree with them. It was that proposal that I put directly to Transport Scotland and to the transport minister. I am delighted that local SNP members were out campaigning for train stations locally in Maryhill and Kelvindale. I was also delighted to inform them of my discussions with the minister. They now support my campaign for a Sunday service, and they are equally reassured.

I am well aware of the leaflet that Ms Ferguson is holding. Presiding Officer, can I get a little more time if I allow the intervention?

Thank you.

I hope that the member will go back to look at the Official Report and see that I did not say that I am unaware of the leaflet. I am aware of two leaflets going out in Kelvindale—one campaigning for the train stations and the second one expressing delight at the positive response that I received from the minister Keith Brown. For accuracy, I ask the member to listen to the words that are used and not to make up her own story when she intervenes on me. I also say to the member that this should not be a turf war. We should be working together to deliver for our constituents. That is what I intend to do. I will finish by talking about delivering for our constituents. I have found out that, only today, Labour-controlled Strathclyde partnership for transport has said that it will take away concessionary rail travel for commuters in the evening as well as in the morning. How many pensioners on the Maryhill line will no longer be able to travel because of that SPT decision? I hope that, on a cross-party basis, Ms Ferguson and I can object to and campaign against a cut that will affect vulnerable people in our constituency.

The member has now mentioned me twice. Obviously, I am quite proud of the local SNP for fighting for services on the line in question to be expanded to include a Sunday service. Would the Liberal Democrats support expanding that service to seven days a week?

On the referendum franchise, I ask the First Minister about a strategy to ensure that habitual non-voters and those who are not registered to vote are fully engaged not just in the consultation process but in the independence referendum itself. Those people often come from the most deprived communities, which, in my opinion, will have most to gain from Scottish independence.

Will the member take an intervention?

I will follow on from the comments of the committee convener, Duncan McNeil. As the deputy convener of the Health and Sport Committee, I was privileged to take evidence from the voluntary sector organisations that represent many vulnerable citizens who will be affected by the UK welfare reforms. Whether they were representatives of single parents, of disabled people or of people who rely on social housing, they spoke passionately about the people whom they represent, and knowledgeably about the damaging impact of the proposed reforms to Scotland. I want to find ways of supporting individuals back into employment and I want to identify anyone who unreasonably refuses an employment opportunity that is open to them and which would be affordable and of benefit to them. I want to ensure that the complicated web of welfare and benefits support that is given to individuals, whether they are in or out of work, is simplified. The same is true for the organisations that represent disabled people and other vulnerable groups. On that basis, the concepts of a universal credit and personal independence payments could have been welcomed. However, the reality of the proposed reforms bears no relation to those aims and objectives, which is why Parliament must reject them. The UK Government seeks to use welfare reform as a crude attempt to reduce the UK budget deficit at the expense of some of the most vulnerable groups in Scottish society. To mask savage cuts to the benefits of our most vulnerable citizens as an attempt to support people back into employment is fundamentally wrong. Both the UK coalition partners—the Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats—should be ashamed of themselves. It is equally unacceptable that we, Scotland’s Parliament, do not have the powers over welfare and benefits that would allow us to prevent such damaging Westminster reforms from sweeping across Scotland. However, I will move away from the constitutional element of the debate. I have spoken to many of those who will be affected and know that they want the parties in Scotland to work together to do all that they can to prevent such harmful UK reforms, so I am pleased that SNP and Labour members are in agreement that the UK welfare reforms are not fit for purpose. That is the message that Scotland’s national Parliament sends this morning. The overwhelming majority of Scotland’s democratically elected politicians will reject these damaging welfare and benefit cuts. Either the UK Government must listen to that voice or Scotland must be able to decide on welfare and benefits for itself. I will look at the details of how the proposal to move from disability living allowance to personal independence payments, which will begin in 2013, will impact on Scotland. When a change in the payments system is proposed, it is reasonable to ask what its purpose is. Is it a change in name only, from DLA to PIP, or does it have substance? If we scratch beneath the surface, we find out that everybody of working age who receives DLA must be reassessed from 2013 onwards. The UK Government has set a target of reducing the benefits bill by 20 per cent. The UK Government expects the bill to reduce by that amount as people who receive DLA are reassessed and moved on to personal independence payments. If assessments are conducted sensitively and appropriately, they can be fine. However, the UK Government is, in effect, saying that at least one in five disabled people of working age in Scotland will be impacted negatively by the reforms. That means that 230,000 of the most vulnerable people in Scotland are in the UK Tory firing line and might experience a damaging impact from the cuts. The Tories and the Lib Dems have shown their hand, and the result will be a 20 per cent cut. They have predetermined the results of reassessment of people who receive DLA, and have undermined any credibility in the process at any point.

I would like to give way, but I cannot because of time constraints. The UK Government has form; we see alarming trends in appeals against detrimental decisions after employment and support allowance assessments for those who received incapacity benefit. The UK Government accepts as being accurate a 9 per cent initial assessment overturn rate—that means that money is returned to 9 per cent of those who have lost it. If we scratch below the surface of that, we find out that 40 per cent of people who appeal and turn up in person for their appeal win their appeal. If someone turns up at an appeal with a person from a citizens advice bureau, that figure rises to 70 per cent. Seven in 10 people are wrongly assessed, have decisions overturned on appeal and get their money back. The UK Government should work on improving the deeply flawed assessment process for employment and support allowance rather than terrify an additional 230,000 disabled Scots in our nation. That is unacceptable. The Welfare Reform Bill is not fit for purpose. I wish that when Parliament votes down the elements that relate to universal credit and benefits reform, it would kill the bill stone dead, but we in this place do not have the powers for that—although we should have.

I have thoroughly enjoyed this high-quality debate so far, and I echo the comments from John Mason and Patricia Ferguson about how inspirational some of the new infrastructure has been. As a Glasgow MSP, I, too, have visited some of the facilities that are coming on line, in particular the velodrome and the related indoor arena. They are part of a spectacular transformation of the east end of Glasgow with which I am proud to be associated. It is a million miles from the old perceptions of Glasgow: the “No Mean City” tag that existed previously, and the Victorian sandstone gloom across the city. Modern-day Glasgow is far from that. The partnership work between the Scottish Government—and the previous Scottish Executive under Jack McConnell—and Steven Purcell at Glasgow City Council has been quite powerful and successful. It shows exactly what we can do when all parties work together. The Commonwealth games will take Glasgow the brand to the next level and cement the city’s position as a global player. I will touch on the previous attempts to improve Glasgow’s image, which Sandra White mentioned. Those initiatives were to be welcomed—and I still welcome them—but many of them were city-centre based, with shiny new buildings and conference facilities on Clydeside. They seemed a million miles away to many deprived communities just 1 or 2 miles down the road, which did not think that the Glasgow regeneration was for them. That is not a criticism of previous regeneration attempts, but we must acknowledge that they were city-centre based and isolated some of our most deprived communities. The difference with the Commonwealth games is that the investment is not so much in the city centre, but directly in some of our most impoverished communities. That is very different from what has happened before. It is an infrastructure legacy that is very real and direct to many vulnerable groups, and not remote from them as previous regeneration attempts may have been. We have the games village, the velodrome, the M74, the Clyde Gateway, the Tollcross international swimming centre—the list goes on and on. It is a meaty list of successful projects that are coming on line. Indeed, there is a financial boon too: 82 per cent of all contracts that were offered were successfully tendered for by Scottish companies. I take on board Hanzala Malik’s reasonable points about small and medium-sized companies. The meat behind the infrastructure is £523 million of investment. There is £344 million from the Scottish Government and £80 million from Glasgow City Council—which is an 80:20 split—and the rest is made up from television revenue and other sources of income. All in all, there is £1 billion of related capital investment in and around Glasgow, which will sustain an additional 1,200 jobs. That is good news in these exceptionally difficult times, and we should commend the successful partnership work between the Parliament and our partners in Glasgow. Around 6,500 athletes will be coming to the city from 71 countries, and there will be many more thousands of visitors. I hope that, instead of making a one-off visit to Glasgow and the rest of Scotland, they will be repeat visitors because of the positive experience that they have had, and that they will take that good news and their good experience of Glasgow back overseas. Hanzala Malik talked about communities other than the indigenous white communities benefiting from the games. I am working closely with the African and Caribbean Network in Glasgow, at the African and Caribbean centre in the merchant city, which is already looking to build links with the Namibian and Zambian training camps that will be based in Glasgow for the 2012 Olympics. It wants to forge close links with the people from that part of the world who will be coming to Glasgow, including members of athletes’ families, to give them a positive cultural experience right across Glasgow and Scotland. That is happening now, and I would be happy to chat to Hanzala Malik about how he could work in partnership with me to promote that work further. That is a really good success story. Lots of good things are happening. I commend Glasgow City Council’s Commonwealth graduate fund and its Commonwealth jobs fund, just as I commend the additional 1,000 apprentices that were announced for the Glasgow Commonwealth games back in 2009, with another £2 million of investment from the Scottish Government. That is all just the public pound. When Glasgow and the Scottish Government do something good, it is the same public pound that funds it. It is called partnership funding. It is not about who has leveraged in the most cash; it is about working together as a team. I want to think about how we can take that further forward and build on the legacy. We have heard about the 15,000 volunteers. I have made this point to David Grevemberg and he has taken it completely on board. Let us make sure that those volunteers are not the same people who volunteer at every volunteering opportunity for the sake of their curriculum vitae. How can we reach into the deprived communities and ethnic communities and get those who are not the usual volunteers to volunteer? That would be something. In the little time that I have left, I will mention the cashback for communities scheme. Who knows how much money will be available under that scheme in the future? By definition, that will be based on how much money is confiscated from criminals. I ask that the fund be monitored, reassessed and re-evaluated, with some of the money put into our most deprived communities to support youth workers and youth coaches to ensure that people in deprived communities do not just watch the Commonwealth games on television but are inspired by local coaches, youth leaders and facilities. We must have joined-up thinking so that the legacy is not just the buildings, the repeat visitors to Glasgow and the jobs that are created. We must reach into the heart of our deprived communities and ensure that there is a real Scottish legacy. I commend the debate as one of the finest that I have been involved in at the Scottish Parliament during the current session.

The final sentence of the Health and Sport Committee’s report to the Finance Committee on the health budget this year reads: “The settlement for Health and Sport has been generous: it is beholden on all involved in these two sectors to demonstrate that in return they have placed quality and efficiency at the heart of their thinking.” I am glad that that statement received unanimous, cross-party support at the Health and Sport Committee. It acknowledges not just the generous settlement but the more important point that how much money is put in does not necessarily dictate the quality of the outcomes. Today’s debate is all about ensuring that we get the quality outcomes that are essential. Despite the generous settlement, we face financial and demographic challenges. By 2031, the number of people over 65 in Scottish society will have increased by 62 per cent, and every year over the next 10 years there will be an additional 10,000 people who are 75 or older, so it is clear that the Scottish Government is right to have a focus—although not an exclusive focus—on integration of health and social care for the elderly as we go forward. If someone is to have the best possible life journey as they get older, they need to be supported in their own home, with community health interventions as appropriate. The worst journey would involve unplanned admissions to hospital, prolonged hospital stays, delayed discharge and admission to residential care at an earlier stage than might otherwise have been necessary. We can all agree on that. As we drive change, we are right to acknowledge that structural change as an end in itself will not achieve what we want and will be a costly distraction. What we need is cultural transformation in health and social care, underpinned by structural change where appropriate. That is why I welcome the statutory reform of community health partnerships, changing them into health and social care partnerships. We can see that that underpinning is necessary if we look at the Glasgow experience, where a pilot project did not work because people would not get out of their cultural silos. I am therefore glad that we are taking that direction. We have talked about pooling budgets, but I hope that that actually happens. It is easy to talk about pooling and sharing budgets, but we must insist that it happens. I believe that the mechanism that we have will help to achieve that. In the change fund for older people, which is £300 million over four years, the mechanism is that not one penny can be spent unless it is agreed by local authorities, the NHS and the third sector. That is an excellent model to ensure that change is driven. Ahead of the debate, we received various submissions from voluntary sector organisations. The Princess Royal Trust for Carers stated: “We ask for your support to ensure that the impact of these changes for Scotland’s unpaid carers is fully recognised and that the needs of carers are a central focus in the development of the new integrated structures and the legislation which underpins this work.” The trust wants to ensure that it is “directly involved” in the formation of the new legislation and the guidelines that will help to underpin it. I am sure that the cabinet secretary will be able to give reassurances on that. Given that 20 per cent of the change fund will be specifically for carers, it is clear that the Scottish Government is mindful of that issue. In future, the environment for carers will become more challenging. I am delighted that the Government is tackling the challenge of self-directed support, which will change the cultural landscape of care at home. The changes will affect the individual’s choice and how money is spent to support them in their homes. The issue is how we ensure that there are quality care standards at home and how that approach fits into the Scottish Social Services Council’s qualifications framework. We are mindful of those challenges.

That is a reasonable point. People cannot work in silos in relation to self-directed support. We are talking about integration of services. We must tease out that issue as we make progress on the legislation, although we cannot take it as a given—we must test the evidence. We have heard about cost-shunting issues. I believe that, in years to come, the fact that different institutions are being precious over their budgets will be seen as foolishly myopic. To understand that, we need only think about the elderly person who is at risk and who is not suitably supported in the community. It leads to greater overall costs if that person has an unplanned admission to, and a prolonged stay in, hospital. That is not the best use of our money or the best outcome for our elderly population. My final point is on inspecting the care pathway and having an integrated care pathway for elderly people as they go through the care system. Perhaps in future, the health inspectorate and the care inspectorate will investigate not only care in hospitals at home and in residential accommodation, but—jointly, or perhaps as one organisation—the care pathway as people go through an integrated service. That might drive further change and reform.

Hugh Henry is quite right: this is about the direct human experience. However, he mentioned delayed discharges. We have to monitor outcomes somehow. Does he believe that it is reasonable to measure unplanned admissions and delayed discharges to see whether the approach is having an impact?

8. To ask the Scottish Government how its capital investment in Glasgow will assist in both sustaining and creating employment. (S4O-00496)

I welcome particularly the long-term approach that the Scottish Government is taking to capital investment in Glasgow; that approach is illustrated by the £285 million upgrade to the subway by 2019, for which I have long campaigned, and the new City of Glasgow College, which will get £200 million of expenditure and which will be completed by 2016. When work begins as a result of significant capital investment in Glasgow, will local companies and my constituents benefit through contracts being awarded, jobs being created and skills opportunities such as apprenticeships being developed?

The best way to attack the Tories on the damage that they are doing to Scotland is not to fire bullets at the SNP but to combine with the SNP and turn our focus on the UK Tory-Liberal Democrat coalition. The approach that John Pentland takes makes the Labour Party apologists for the savage cuts that are coming to Scotland. That is not a fig leaf that Labour can hide behind. We could agree that the autumn budget statement was too little, too late. However, John Pentland is not willing to accept that. I want to look at the autumn statement not in terms of capital expenditure but in terms of the piecemeal and fragmented nature of the announcements that were made. For example, the UK youth contract, which Mr Rennie mentioned, will receive £940 million over the spending review period, but only £6 million a year will accrue to Scotland in Barnett consequentials.

That is not my understanding of the situation. I checked, and Scotland will receive £6 million in Barnett consequentials as a result of the spending on the UK youth contract, although I am willing to be corrected on that. If we scratch the surface of that youth contract, we see that it will provide 160,000 wage subsidies across the UK—I point out to Mr Rennie that that is a UK-wide figure—to encourage the private sector to take on young employees. Each subsidy is worth £2,275. Although that could be welcomed, the initiative raises a number of questions. Will that merely be a wage subsidy for a job that would have been created anyway? Will it artificially create jobs that are not sustainable? How long will a young person need to be employed before the cash payment is made? Will there be a clawback if that subsidy mechanism is abused by employers? Will there be any training requirements? Those are all reasonable questions to ask if we want to ensure that the policy stimulates economic growth, and I hope that those issues can be resolved. I contend that it is the Scottish Government that is best placed to resolve those issues in Scotland. I believe that it has a track record in the area. It already has experience of providing a £1,000 subsidy to encourage employers to take on apprentices whose apprenticeship has ceased because of the UK economic crisis. In 2010-11 alone, that has benefited 1,295 apprentices and companies. In April 2011, £2.5 million was announced for an extra £1,000 subsidy for companies in Scotland that employ fewer than 50 staff and have particular challenges in taking on extra employees. That is already happening in Scotland, under an SNP Government. Also worth noting is the hugely successful small business bonus scheme, which has helped 85,000 of our very smallest firms to the tune of £1,500, on average—some have received several thousand pounds more than that. If we add to that the opportunities for all scheme for all 16 to 19-year-olds as well as the 25,000 modern apprenticeships a year, it is undoubtedly true that the Scottish Government has created a dynamic network of support for those who are out of work and for our small business sector. Therefore, when more money is being directed at that area, I would suggest that the Scottish Government is best placed to direct how that money is spent. I say that not because I want to start some constitutional turf war but because it just makes sense—it is the right thing to do, because the Scottish Government has the appropriate track record. Of course, we can only do so much to stimulate growth. That is why many of the SNP speakers this afternoon have been talking about capital expenditure as a lever to stimulate growth. Again, Scotland has a track record in that regard, and everyone should listen to the facts. When the Scottish Government accelerated capital expenditure in the construction sector, there was a 22 per cent increase in employment in that sector in Scotland when the equivalent figure was falling by 5 per cent across the UK. Capital acceleration and expenditure works, and the UK Tory-Lib Dem Government should learn that lesson from the Scottish Government. I am delighted that we have put our ambitions out there for £60 billion of capital expenditure in the next 20 years. To those who say that that money is not being spent just now, I say that they should learn the basics—

I am in my last minute. They should learn the basics of economics. Gavin Brown rose—

I will give members one example: £285 million has been invested to fully modernise the Glasgow subway system, but that work, which has been going on for years, will not be completed until 2019. That is how major infrastructure investment is designed and carefully planned. The Scottish Government has a track record in creating employment and stimulating economic growth. If only we had the real powers to borrow to raise that capital expenditure and stimulate the Scottish economy, then my goodness we would be in a better place.

8. To ask the Scottish Government how VisitScotland’s new corporate campaign, the winning years, will link to major events such as the 2014 Commonwealth games in order to bring maximum benefit to Glasgow. (S4O-00446)

I am delighted that VisitScotland is taking part in on-going activities. In relation to large events such as the Commonwealth games, will new facilities such as the national velodrome help to drive not only new tourist interest in Scotland but new corporate opportunities to maximise benefits to the citizens of Glasgow, whom I represent?

I will comment on teachers’ pensions. I was a teacher for 10 years and am still a member of the Educational Institute of Scotland. I draw to Mr FitzPatrick’s attention a few facts about teachers’ pensions. In 2006-07, there were reforms to the cost base of those pensions, based on projected affordability towards 2050. The UK Government was supposed to undertake an evaluation in 2010-11 to nail down how effective those changes had been. I inform Mr FitzPatrick that it cancelled that evaluation and, instead, decided to increase teachers’ pension contributions by 50 per cent. Will Mr FitzPatrick condemn that move and support teachers in Glasgow and throughout Scotland in taking action today? Does he believe that this Parliament is best placed to defend the pensions not only of teachers but of all public sector workers?

Members across the chamber agree on the need to recognise carers’ role further in Scottish society. We have spoken about respite care, on which the SNP Government made progress in its previous term. That progress was substantial, but we recognise that it is still not ample. I could spend the next few minutes comparing different Administrations’ records, but I will not. George Adam rightly reflected the debate’s useful tone. It is important that, although the minister said that the target for respite weeks had clearly been met, he did not shirk the challenge of the nine local authorities that did not do what they should have done. It is important to have clarity about that and a focus on where changes must happen. I have scribbled out a whole bit of my speaking notes about Jackie Baillie’s comments on respite care in the press in the past week or so. The best thing that I can say is that I praise the Labour members who are present for showing what constructive opposition is all about. We have identified that things are going quite well in some areas of Scotland but are rather poor in other areas. My local authority area, Glasgow, is one of the poorer areas, as Glasgow City Council has presided over a 3,000-week reduction in respite care provision. I do not say that deliberately to lay the blame at the council’s foot. The reasons why some local authorities have not met their targets could be many and varied. However, political leadership to deliver for carers must be not just national but local. Every local authority must have such leadership. Perhaps my local authority has not had that leadership in the past. I will say a bit about how the older people’s services change fund links to the wider preventative spend agenda and to carers. Demographic changes account for a huge amount of the challenges that carers face in relation to primary care issues currently and in dealing with family members’ long-term needs. When the budget is shrinking and cuts are being made, it is still important to look at the bigger picture and to use the money that we have most effectively to change the structure of the support that is available and to improve standards for people who are cared for and carers’ life experience. I am delighted that the change fund for the elderly will be £80 million in 2012-13 and that £80 million and £70 million will be available in the subsequent years. I am particularly delighted that 20 per cent of the fund will be targeted on carers for the elderly. I want to think about what that should mean and how a quality outcome from that can be proved. I know that that is difficult to determine, other than through how an individual carer’s quality of life has improved, which is powerfully important. However, can we expect referrals to acute services in the NHS to reduce because those who are cared for are better supported at home? Can we expect speedier in-patient discharges, as those who are at home are more able to care for loved ones when they leave hospital? Is that a tangible outcome that we can measure? Richard Simpson touched on the following issue. When an elderly loved one eventually moves to residential accommodation because they cannot be supported in their own home, will that happen later, after they have had a better quality of life for longer? Can we gather evidence to prove that the change fund money has been well spent? That brings us back to using money to drive change and not just to fill the gaps of overstretched services—many members have talked about that. Monitoring outcomes is important, as is the link to self-directed support. I wanted to say quite a bit about kinship care. I am delighted that comments on kinship care have moved on and that we all support the agenda. I tell newer members that a bit of a bun fight took place over kinship care—Labour said, “The SNP ain’t doing enough,” and we said, “Labour didnae do anything.” The debate is no longer about that; it is now about all of us working together to deliver in kinship carers’ best interests. We must deal with what can be a postcode lottery. Supporting kinship carers is not just about the money. It is about giving them access to local psychological services and supporting the cared-for person as well as the carer. Without adequate psychological support, a carer’s anxiety for their cared-for child, for example, can be quite stressful. We should acknowledge that kinship care payment is a benefit. Through local authorities, the Scottish Government is funding a benefit that will impact on universal credits, perhaps personal independence payments and other benefits. We will have to monitor the effects of that very closely. I finish off as we have all done by congratulating members on the consensual tone of the debate and for not shirking the challenges that lie ahead.

I commend Jim Eadie for bringing the debate to the Parliament at a timely juncture, while the matter is being discussed in other places. Reform of the institutionalised discrimination that is the Act of Settlement has been a long time in coming. Let us not forget that that piece of legislation predates the country in which it applies and that it exists for the self-described purpose of ensuring the Protestant succession to the throne. One could be forgiven for feeling some hope at the prospect of reform when Prime Minister David Cameron announced changes to, as he put it, “some of the out-dated rules—like some of the rules of succession” that “just don’t make sense to us any more”, and said “this way of thinking is at odds with the modern countries that we have become.” Sadly, we are perhaps not as modern as David Cameron would like us to be. The Westminster Government will not deliver the far-reaching reforms that are required, nor will it analyse in a meaningful way the place that the monarch has in society and their relationship with all citizens—importantly, with the taxpayer. Instead, Westminster ultimately has disappointment in store, as far as I am concerned. I take on board what Hugh Henry said about progress still being progress but, as a Catholic, I see the reforms as disappointing. Not only do they fail entirely to address society’s concern about the monarchy’s arcane rules of operation; they are dressed up in a language that pretends that they are doing so. I am no monarchist, but I accept that the monarchy exists. To put it bluntly, if we want equal rights in relation to the monarchy, we either support equal rights for Catholics or we do not. We cannot have a partial human right—we have it or we do not. The reforms will mean that Catholics across the UK or wherever will not have equality of status with people of other faiths, and that is just wrong.

I will not be drawn into the detail of that because of the short time that I have left. In an independent Scotland, where the Queen would be the head of state and the same relationship would still exist, it would be for the people of Scotland, not the rest of the UK, to decide Scotland’s future relationship with the monarchy. We are currently powerless to make that decision. The difference between me and Mr Findlay is that I would let the Scottish people decide, whereas he would give that responsibility to another place. I find that unacceptable, but I take his comment in the spirit in which it was intended. It is important to realise these things as factual. I note that the Scottish Parliament has come together as one before to say that the Act of Settlement is wrong and should be repealed. Personally, I do not believe that there should be such a relationship between the state and a church. We should have a secular Government—that is important to me. I will touch lightly on the bill that the Parliament is considering to deal with sectarianism and discrimination. The Act of Settlement does not directly impact on that, but we all stay in communities. It would be wrong to say that people do not ask why the country in which we live bars Catholics from being the monarch or marrying the monarch. I am not saying that people aspire to that, but the situation is symbolic for many people and has been so for generations. Until the Act of Settlement is completely repealed, we will not achieve integration and equality in society.

I begin by telling the Labour Party a few home truths about this morning’s debate, if the cabinet secretary has left me any to give following her opening speech. I hope that by the end of my speech I will, unlike the Labour Party, have made a few constructive suggestions on the NHS. The Labour motion alleges: “the declining trend in Scotland’s NHS workforce began prior to 2011-12, at a time when the overall Scottish budget was rising”. Labour does not tell us that the budget settlement from the UK Labour Government at the time the motion refers to was the worst ever settlement to Scotland since devolution. Labour fails to tell us that fact. I also acknowledge that Labour’s fellow London-based colleagues have since given increasingly damaging cuts to Scotland. I am disappointed that the Lib Dems are not here this morning to share the blame. That point is vital for a number of reasons. First, at the last election, the Labour Party in Scotland refused to commit one additional penny to Scotland’s NHS, despite being asked repeatedly and directly to do so in interviews with Iain Gray, the party leader. I thought that he, and not Jackie Baillie, spoke for that party. Perhaps she is making a belated leadership bid—who knows? The SNP Government, however, promised to give NHS boards a real-terms increase and to pass on future Barnett cash consequentials in full. That is why the NHS has seen a 2.5 per cent increase in cash terms and a 0.5 per cent increase in real terms. I shall return to NHS inflation later in my speech, if I have time. I appreciate the challenges faced by the NHS, including nurses. My wife is a nurse and she leaves me in no doubt about the challenges that she faces daily. Let the message go out loud and clear, however, that despite the continuing pressures and challenges facing the NHS in the years ahead, the position would have been significantly worse had Labour been re-elected. That is simply a fact. More nats, less cuts. Woe betide us if Jackie Baillie’s party was in power and she was in charge of the health department, as who knows how many fewer nurses there would be. Do not take my word for it, take Iain Gray’s, as he refused to pledge any extra cash. The same element of Labour’s motion highlights a second deficiency in Labour’s thought processes as it focuses on the NHS head count before 2011-12 without giving any thought to the reconfiguration of NHS services. The staff reduction will have been due at least in part to forms of service reconfiguration. That shows that there is an underlying and complete misunderstanding of the workforce management complexities that are at play when we move NHS provision away from acute service delivery into community delivery.

I wish I had longer than four minutes, but I do not, so I will continue. In effect, we are talking about NHS staffing levels that are roughly comparable with those when Labour left office in 2007. Does the Labour Party believe that, when it left office with staffing levels unsustainably low, the NHS was in crisis? Labour presided over eight years of failure of the NHS—thank you, Jackie Baillie, for putting that on the record—[Interruption.] I know that Ms Baillie does not like the truth, but she should put her listening ears on. Let me try to highlight a couple of positive elements. NHS inflation is notoriously difficult to calculate, and the problem that the Scottish Government has is that the Barnett consequentials from London do not take it into account. I wish that they did. I wish that Labour was saying that they should, so that we could build a consensus to challenge the UK cuts, but whenever the Scottish Government challenges the UK’s spending commitments, Labour runs feart and terrified that that will open up more powers for this Parliament. Labour would rather put—

That is why I cannot support the motion this morning.

Will the member take an intervention?

May I intervene?

There are still two minutes left.

I thank Mr Kelly. Earlier, during the debate on healthcare, Labour front benchers were suggesting taking money away from justice and giving it to health because there is a new responsibility for healthcare in the prison service. Does Mr Kelly agree with other Labour front benchers that money should be taken away from justice and given to health? If so, how much should it be?

3. To ask the Scottish Government what the impact will be on devolved services if £2 billion is taken from the Scottish economy because of the United Kingdom Government’s welfare reforms. (S4O-00340)

I draw the cabinet secretary’s attention to the social housing sector and the housing benefit reductions in relation to the underoccupancy rules that the UK Government is bringing forward. Some 44 per cent of households would need one-bedroom properties, but only 24 per cent of households are currently in such properties, so the approach will cause rent arrears for vulnerable tenants and indebtedness for families. It will also seriously undermine housing association and local authority finances. Does the cabinet secretary agree that that will undermine the public policy intent of the devolved Scottish Parliament? Does he think that not just the Scottish Government but the Scottish Parliament must have on-going scrutiny of the damaging effects on Scotland of savage UK welfare reforms?

12. No pressure then, Presiding Officer. To ask the Scottish Government what role it envisages for community colleges under its skills and employability strategies. (S4O-00319)

I briefly inform the minister that I recently met Ronnie Knox of North Glasgow College in Springburn, who wants to engage constructively with the Government on college measures but fundamentally on Government commitments on provision for 16 to 19-year-olds. Does the minister believe that colleges such as North Glasgow College, given that they are in areas of significant deprivation, have a vital role in that delivery? To see at first hand how proactive the colleges are being, I invite the minister to visit the campus and see the good work that is taking place.

No matter what people’s views on the bill are, Mr Findlay’s speech has done more to polarise the debate and divide society than anyone else’s speech has. He should think about that. I will tell members where I am with the bill: it is challenging. I will tell members where I expected to be: I had expected to prepare for a raft of amendments from Opposition parties that I would pore over and on which I would listen to reasoned arguments. What I genuinely do not like about the amendment is that it says, “Let’s kill the bill off now.” That is not responsible, which is why I cannot support the amendment. If we are honest, the bill is challenging not because of how it is drafted—if there are ways to improve it, let us hear them, as I genuinely want to be constructive on that—but because of the subject matter. However, the sensitivity on the issue is not a reason not to act. I would rather take society in a direction that I believe in and towards a Scotland that I want, even if it means having to walk on eggshells, than not take a single step to make progress.

I want to make progress, but I will take an intervention later if I can. We have had a debate about what some people think are the negative aspects of the bill, but I want to talk about positive aspects. I begin by listing some of the existing legislation on the issue. I am not an expert on that, so I got the information from the Scottish Parliament information centre briefing on the bill. We have the common-law offence of breach of the peace; section 38 of the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Act 2010; the Public Order Act 1986, which is used when there is a racist element; section 74 of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2003; and section 96 of the Crime and Disorder Act 1986. If somebody quizzes me on those provisions, I will fail, but I know that none of them is specific to the offensive behaviour at football matches that the bill tries to address. None of those other pieces of legislation shines a focused light on the specific problem that we have at football matches and in wider society.

I thank the member for that intervention, as it illustrates my point perfectly. When a person is convicted under those pieces of legislation, that is not recorded as a football-focused public disorder crime. The new legislation will let us correlate data about offenders. That dossier will be important in considering measures such as football banning orders and how to tackle the problem more seriously.

I want to make progress, but I will take one more intervention. I will take one from Margo MacDonald, with apologies to Patrick Harvie.

I am sure that the member does that. She gets to the crux of the matter, but the other pieces of legislation that I highlighted have similar issues and challenges. We have to consider the guidelines, have a test of reasonableness and build in a bit of common sense, just as has to be done in relation to all the pieces of legislation that the Tories and others want us to use more effectively. A second positive aspect of the bill is the important provision to enable the conviction of football supporters for misconduct abroad. I will talk about issues to do with Rangers supporters abroad although, if I have time, I will mention comments from Celtic supporters, to try to be as balanced as possible. In 2005-06, UEFA fined Rangers after a match with Villarreal abroad. That was for the breaking of a team bus window but, at the time, UEFA said that the discrimination in the songs that Rangers supporters sang was a Scottish problem and that it would not take action because Scottish society should do so. If we fast forward to 2006-07, we find that Rangers were fined €12,000 after a game with Osasuna in Pamplona after evidence was found on YouTube. UEFA changed its approach. It no longer said that Scotland should deal with the issue; it decided to step in and deal with it. On 10 March 2011, charges of discriminatory behaviour and a €40,000 fine were upheld in relation to a match against PSV Eindhoven. I stress two points. The vast majority of football supporters, including travelling Rangers football supporters, behave impeccably. The reason why I make the point is that we currently have no powers to shine a light on the behaviour of Scottish football supporters abroad, no matter which club they support. I am not willing to have UEFA act when Scottish society and the Parliament can do so. We have a responsibility to do that. That is a positive aspect of the bill. I have been lobbied quite a lot about a discussion between Christine Grahame and Professor Devine at the Justice Committee on the distinction between political views, support for terrorist organisations and religious sectarianism. There was a feeling that the bill would target Celtic supporters more than it would target other supporters. I have read that debate and sought clarification on it, and I can say that that is not the case. If I thought that the bill was designed to target one set of supporters over another, I would not support it. The bill is not about targeting supporters but about targeting the problems of discrimination, bigotry and sectarianism in Scotland. Even at this late stage, I hope that the Parliament can come together to do that.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

I am grateful to James Kelly for bringing the motion to the chamber and allowing us to debate this continuing and serious problem. I am sure that he expects much more consensus in this debate than there was in the previous one. I commend his fortitude in leading from the front bench in that debate while having this members’ business debate before him. From my examination of the issue, I see that rogue trading has a fairly set pattern: it involves enticing people into spending money on work that is unnecessary, of poor quality or overpriced. We have known about this widespread problem for a number of years, probably mainly thanks to exposé television shows, which have a great track record in exposing the practice. There has been some action by the Scottish Government and the United Kingdom Government, but there is always room for improvement. That is for sure. I know that James Kelly agrees with me that every member of the Parliament has an interest in tackling rogue traders. They are the cause of one of the more common complaints that we get from our constituents. It does not surprise me that home improvements—in particular, roofing—still top the list. They were the subject of 30 per cent of complaints about rogue traders in the UK to the Office of Fair Trading in 2010. I have heard of one company quoting a cost of £5,000 for roof repairs that another quote said would cost just a few hundred pounds. Very few of us have the expertise to argue about the validity of a contractor’s claims. Of course, it is usually sensible to shop around and to look for a number of quotes—perhaps three—to avoid being ripped off. We must all give out that clear message, particularly to vulnerable people, who are more at risk from rogue traders. As we have said, the elderly need to know whom they can and cannot trust when they look for key works to be done in their homes. Rogue traders are ruthless and make good money through profiting from other people’s misery. They must be stopped where we can do that. Hard selling has become normalised in the sales culture. Sometimes, there is a fine line between a hard-nosed salesperson at the door who is a bit too pushy and inappropriate selling by rogue traders. I put in that mix energy companies that look for people to switch tariffs, which might fall into the rogue trader category—we must think about that. We must find a way of forcing the adoption of best practice and not just hope for it. I thank James Kelly for securing the debate. Members’ business debates are important to awareness raising at large. Public vigilance can sometimes do much more than Government or local authority action can to stop rogue traders, so it is important to publicise what can be done. We must be mindful that consumer protection is an important policy area that the Parliament does not cover fully and over which it does not have full control. I assure Mr Kelly that I will not use the debate as an excuse to talk about constitutional wranglings, but it is fair to say that not all the powers to improve the situation lie with the Parliament. I will leave it sitting at that. We must raise public awareness. There is nothing legitimate about traders who are just after a quick buck, but there is everything legitimate about traders who just want to do business. That is why we must consider accreditation schemes. The existing ones are voluntary, but we must consider a compulsory accreditation scheme. I am not one for regulation for regulation’s sake, but we have moved to formal regulation of a variety of other matters, such as factoring and tenancy deposits, when the evidence has supported that. I thank Mr Kelly for bringing the debate to the chamber. I might not be able to stay until the end, so I apologise if I have to nip off. I hope that the debate creates positive publicity so that consumers are better informed.

5. To ask the Scottish Government what funding is available to support the repair, retention and community use of architecturally and historically significant buildings in Glasgow. (S4O-00282)

I draw the cabinet secretary’s attention to Springburn’s historic burgh halls and winter gardens, which have been left to go to wrack and ruin for decades under Glasgow Labour. I contrast that with Maryhill burgh halls, which have been supported by the Scottish Government, brought back into use and recently reopened. Given the moneys that are available, can the cabinet secretary outline the ways in which Historic Scotland advises and works with local authorities, such as Glasgow City Council, and other interested organisations to maintain Scotland’s historic building environment, and pushes local authorities such as Glasgow City Council to meet their responsibilities?

Unfortunately, that is not normally how I conduct myself, Presiding Officer, but I shall do my best. This debate is a vital one in which we all have a moral duty to speak out, even if this Parliament does not yet have the full legislative power to act on the issue. A legislative consent motion will come to the Health and Sport Committee—of which I am deputy convener—as lead committee on the bill. I very much welcome the cabinet secretary’s view that the Welfare Reform Bill is not fit for purpose and would be rejected. I want to highlight some of the potentially devastating harmful consequences of the benefit reforms that the UK Government is bringing to Scotland. In doing so, I thank the many voluntary sector organisations whose excellent briefings have been helpful. The Citizens Advice Bureaux Scotland briefing provided case studies, one of which is the example of a 40-year-old man in Glasgow who is claiming incapacity benefit and disability living allowance at the lower rate and is in receipt of housing benefit for a social tenancy. If that man is considered fit for work following reassessment and is also affected by housing benefit cuts, he could lose anywhere between £60 and £120 every week, which is not small change in any one’s book. The reforms will have absolutely horrific consequences if they go through as they stand. There are over 190,000 incapacity benefit recipients in Scotland, who have every right to be worried by the reforms. The UK Government is introducing a cocktail of cuts with its Welfare Reform Bill, and its ingredients amount to a savage attack on many of the most vulnerable groups in our society. We must do all that we can as a Parliament to fend off those cuts in Scotland, although in reality this Parliament is not fully equipped to do so. The Welfare Reform Bill started from a UK Government position of cutting cash at any cost, and the attack on the most vulnerable in our society was a price worth paying for it. Let me be clear: it is not a price worth paying for the SNP or for Scotland. To base any reform of disability benefit on a view that there should be an automatic cut of 20 per cent in that budget is not even a remotely subtle way of disguising the cuts as reforms—it just does not wash. As disability benefit is changed to personal independence payments, a combination of a 20 per cent cut and the removal of entitlement from those on lower-rate DLA is estimated to mean that 75,000 people—one in three working-age claimants—will lose their entitlement. That figure was provided by Inclusion Scotland, which is particularly worried about the damage—

I am sorry, but we are tight for time. Another aspect of the reforms that worries me greatly is the reform of housing benefit. The under-occupancy penalty that is proposed for someone renting in the social rented sector and which will mean a cut in their housing benefit if they have an empty bedroom will affect as many as 95,000 households in Scotland and see between £27 and £65 a month lost to them. Some may say that an unoccupied bedroom is not an efficient use of resources, and that reducing housing benefit is a way to encourage tenants to find a more suitable home, but I fundamentally disagree with that. That imposed benefit cut from Westminster takes no account, for instance, of the fact that 44 per cent of tenants in the social rented sector require a one-bedroom house but only 24 per cent stay in one because the housing stock does not actually exist. The figures just do not stack up. The proposed reforms could, for example, force a long-standing tenant in Springburn with a disability to move out of their home and seek a smaller property, perhaps in Castlemilk at the other end of Glasgow. That is just not satisfactory. They would lose their spare room, in which perhaps a carer would stay to provide support. They would also lose their entire support network of family and friends and would face social isolation. That is, of course, if alternative accommodation even existed. As has been clearly stated, it just does not. Housing benefit reforms will mean that disabled people and others will have to use a greater chunk of shrinking benefits to pay for rent—that is not an acceptable choice. It will leave social housing providers in the invidious and horrible position of either dropping their rents, which they would not be able to afford to do, or pursuing vulnerable tenants for rent arrears, which is not a position that anyone should be in. However, the UK welfare reforms will bring that position to Scotland. We must prevent that. I am delighted that we will give robust scrutiny to the LCM at the Health and Sport Committee, although I wish that we did not have to do so. Such is the detail of scrutiny that is needed that perhaps, as voluntary sector organisations have suggested, we need an ad hoc committee of the Scottish Parliament to be set up, in order that we have an adequate vehicle for scrutiny of the devastating proposals. We will have to wait and see, but we certainly have a moral duty to speak out against the UK benefit reforms and the direct impact on Scotland of changes to housing benefit, council tax benefit, the social fund and the use of passported benefits to gain access to devolved entitlements. The matter is complex and should be dealt with by the Scottish Parliament. My heart sinks when I think that however much Scottish Parliament committees scrutinise the proposals and say how wrong they are, we will have no power to stand against them. That is something that we must change. We can do so only through Scottish independence.

Does the member want further education students to pay in Scotland?

I am confused. Mr Macintosh mentioned the “merger by fax” comment, but I understand that, last week, he asked the cabinet secretary to tell us which universities and colleges face merging. If the cabinet secretary did that, he would negate his own consultation process, which does not end until 23 December. What is it to be? Does Mr Macintosh want merger by fax or to buy into the positive consultation that is taking place?

3. To ask the Scottish Government how its refreshed economic strategy will assist in boosting job creation in Glasgow. (S4O-00186)

I know that the minister knows that I believe that an enterprise zone for Glasgow would be a positive way forward for job creation, but that is not the substantive point of my supplementary question. On the guarantee of an education or training place for every 16 to 19-year-old in Scotland, what will be done to create real jobs at the end of that education or training period for my constituents in Glasgow?

I thank Jamie Hepburn for bringing this motion to the chamber, as it raises a very worthy issue. I also thank Save the Children and the Daycare Trust for their excellent report, “Making Work Pay—The Childcare Trap”, which I think everybody should look at in some detail. From reading the report, it is clear that there really is a trap—Malcolm Chisholm and Jamie Hepburn have put much about that on record. I want to deal with an issue that Jamie Hepburn touched on in his opening speech: the UK Government’s cuts to the working tax credit, which have been a real attack on many families and have further damaged those who are trying to stay in employment and meet childcare needs. Those who previously received the 80 per cent support were most likely already experiencing in-work poverty, even with 80 per cent of childcare costs being met. We can see very quickly what the impact of cutting that support to 70 per cent will be—Malcolm Chisholm fleshed that out with some figures. I hope against hope that the UK Government will look again at that matter and realise that the long-term effects of what it proposes will be completely counterproductive, both socially and economically. Save the Children believes that to guarantee 80 per cent of childcare costs under the universal credit would cost £405 million across the UK, which would represent a mere 0.45 per cent increase in the total welfare budget. I suspect that that would be a wise investment, given the long-term effects of having children grow up in fully benefits-dependent households. We are only too well aware of the damaging intergenerational poverty that can be created. There are communities in Scotland that are still benefits dependent because no support was put in back in the 1980s. We do not want to see that happen at this time of crisis in the UK economy. That is an important thing to say. In the information provided by Save the Children, one of my constituents describes better than I could the problem that parents face. They say: “I feel that the government is making it extremely difficult for ordinary people with children to earn an honest living. The current situation is encouraging people to give up work and go onto benefits as many people are better off that way. This is surely not the correct way to go about things. I enjoy working and would not be happy on benefits, however this is becoming increasingly difficult to manage.” If that individual finds themselves on the dole, perhaps their grandchildren will think that being on the dole is the normal existence for human beings—it is not the normal existence; we have to support people in employment and into employment. There are challenges not just for the UK Government, but for the Scottish Government and for this Parliament. I do not deny that the extension of entitlement to two-year-olds is a huge challenge in the current financial climate, as is providing out-of-school care for five-to-14-year-olds. However, something that we could achieve more speedily is getting the commitment to provide 15 hours a week for three and four-year-olds to work better. I do not think that local authorities are flexible enough in their approach and I do not think that they use partnership nurseries as effectively as they could do. Some people just cannot take up the entitlement because they cannot put their son or daughter into a nursery at 10 o’clock in the morning, leave their job and pick them up again at half past 12. That just cannot be done, particularly if people do not have wider family support. We must look at reforming that area to make it work better for families. I will finish by looking at the cost of childcare. Costs are too high, but I was interested to learn that costs in Scotland are higher than they are in the rest of the UK. I have spoken to Save the Children about the issue, and I wonder whether we are comparing apples with oranges rather than apples with apples. I want us to look at the quality of the childcare and the educational experience that are provided for children when they start to follow the childcare pathway. It might be the case that the like-for-like costs are quite similar, but that, because of the involvement of more highly skilled staff, a better outcome in qualitative terms is obtained in Scotland. That might explain the differential, but more efforts need to be made to look into that. I again commend Jamie Hepburn for bringing the debate to the chamber.

Will the member give way?

I do not doubt Mr Kelly’s sincerity in pushing for more cash for justice, but we have also just heard Jackie Baillie making an impassioned speech asking for more money for health. I am the deputy convener of the Health and Sport Committee. It would help me with regard to our budget scrutiny if Mr Kelly could tell us whether Labour wants more money for health, for justice or for both, and where that money will come from. As I scrutinise the budget, I want to be sure that I am not hearing empty rhetoric from Labour members and that they have something meaningful to say.

So, you do not want more money—

Will the member give way?

Do you want more money for justice?

I start by thanking Bill Kidd for bringing the motion to the Parliament’s attention by debating it in the chamber today. It is important that we recognise the 30th anniversary of the international day of peace. It is no surprise that the motion has been brought by Bill Kidd, who is the main reason why I want to speak in the debate. He takes an international approach to the promotion of peace and does his bit to seek an end to nuclear proliferation. He has been tireless in those efforts over the years, whether at the United Nations or through the variety of networks across the globe in which he has been involved. I never thought that I would say it, but he really has gone global. We should never underestimate the amount of time that he puts into those roles, and in that respect he is an excellent ambassador for the peace movement. Such is the extent of his travels that he is also an excellent ambassador for Scotland. I will back off now; that is enough praise for Bill Kidd. I will move on to some other stuff, but I thought it was important to get that on the record. My first real hands-on experience of nuclear weapons came about because I come from the Vale of Leven, and Faslane is within those general environs. I remember very well campaigners such as Les Robertson and Jim Bolan at the Faslane peace camp doing their bit on the local front line. Irrespective of what people think about nuclear weapons—the majority of members are against them but a minority still support them—we should never forget the selflessness of people who protest against weapons of mass destruction every day, even when it is not fashionable to do so. I put on record my praise for those individuals. I want to talk about peace and nuclear weapons. I know about the hypocrisy whereby we think it acceptable for certain nations to have weapons of mass destruction but are hell-bent on preventing others from having theirs. Of course, the answer is that no one should have them at all. The more important point for me as a Scottish person is that we do not need nuclear weapons to start a war, although they represent the worst-case scenario and are the driving force behind a lot of wars. On the power to go to war, as a Scottish citizen, I feel that it is a moral dereliction of duty that the decision whether Scotland should engage in a war is not in the Scottish Parliament’s hands. How can we promote peace when we cannot prevent our Scottish sons and daughters from going to war, whether illegal or otherwise? I know that there is no constitutional consensus in the chamber around independence. I strive not to be political about that. Although it would be possible for an independent Scotland to be involved in illegal wars—independence is not a magic wand—I believe with all my heart that we are best placed for that not to happen should we become independent. Irrespective of their constitutional views, I pay tribute to members of all parties in Parliament for what they have done to promote peace. John Finnie made the important point that it is not enough just to object to wars; we have to positively promote peace both to ensure that we have stable communities, a stable country and a stable international community, and to make wars less likely to happen. That is about the nurturing of peace, which is vital. Who is to say that Libya, pre-conflict, was a peaceful nation? Who is to say that Afghanistan or Iraq is peaceful? Who is to say that Libya, post-conflict, will be peaceful? Who knows what human rights abuses might continue irrespective of which regime or Government is in charge? Indeed, that very point has already been well made. The best thing this Parliament can do to promote peace is to have a big vision of connection with the international community. The more barriers we break down as internationalists and the more connections we make with other countries and other organisations across the globe, the more we will get an international understanding and international co-operation. We can promote peace in this Parliament if we keep lifting our eyes to the bigger picture. I once again thank Bill Kidd for securing the debate.

2. To ask the Scottish Government whether the selection criteria for enterprise zones will favour areas with long-standing high unemployment and deprivation. (S4O-00145)

Although we all welcome the recently published Scottish unemployment figures, which contrast starkly with the United Kingdom figures, unemployment endures in some parts of the country more than in others. Is the cabinet secretary aware that three Glasgow constituencies are in the top five for unemployment claimant count, with Maryhill and Springburn, where I stay, having the highest? Does he agree that there is a strong case for enterprise zone status in those key areas? Does the Government agree that there is a moral duty to use economic interventions to improve opportunity for people in the worst-hit parts of Scotland, not merely to maximise economic growth more generally?

Does the First Minister agree that it is hypocritical of Murdo Fraser to try to claim that the Scottish Government intends to penalise the whisky industry with its widely supported minimum pricing policy when his own party at Westminster refuses to do anything about its unfair and discriminatory tax regime, which sees whisky taxed at 185 per cent higher per minimum unit price than cider?

I welcome the cabinet secretary’s statement and her eventual consideration of the Health and Sport Committee’s inquiry into the regulation of care for older people. Will she consider giving a greater role to general practitioners, pharmacists, physiotherapists and allied health professionals in informing SCSWIS—or the care inspectorate, as it shall now forever be known—so that they have more formal input when there are inspections, and other methods of input when there are not inspections, should they have concerns about care home performance?

Scotland is changing and is moving forward. Significantly more powers will be delivered to benefit our nation. I firmly believe that every member in the Parliament works to benefit Scotland, but I accept that we will have disagreements along the way about how best to do that. As Scotland moves forward, the debate will be about whether the end point of additional power is Scottish independence. The people of Scotland will of course decide that in a referendum. However, I believe that, short of the independence issue, there is more agreement between us than we sometimes care to admit, and perhaps more than the amendments or some of the speakers in the debate have been willing to admit. If truth be told, I suspect that the issue of devolving corporation tax powers to the Parliament is one on which we can finally reach agreement. Agreement is not that far away, despite some of the speeches that we have heard, such as that from Mr Rennie. As a signpost for him, I point to the Steel commission. I commend the Scotland Bill Committee in the previous session of Parliament for agreeing that, if corporation tax powers were extended to Northern Ireland, they should be extended to Scotland. That is a clear admission that if one component part of the UK varied its corporation tax, it would potentially gain a significant competitive advantage over the other parts. Therefore, the issue is simple: Scotland’s Parliament should ensure that Scotland has a comparative advantage over other parts of the UK to boost our economy and drive job creation. The question that is before us is whether we should be reactive to UK economic developments, rather than proactive. Do we wish Scotland to be ahead of the curve or playing catch-up?

Given the time constraints, I am afraid that I will not be giving way. It could reasonably be argued that London and the south-east of England have an inbuilt structural advantage over other parts of the UK. London is a powerful global city and an international hub with exceptional links to the worldwide market. Its competitive advantage has developed through many years of UK economic policy. I make no bones about that, other than to say that I do not believe that it serves Scotland as well as it could. The clear UK economic policy of bolstering the city of London and the south-east economy was not designed to damage Scotland, but it certainly does not help Scotland. The barriers in Glasgow to encouraging business growth and relocation are very different from those in London, and completely different from those in places such as Lerwick. Britain is a varied place and our economic policies should respect that. It is reasonable to suggest a different set of economic policies in Scotland, because we have a different set of economic conditions. Those who believe in the retention of the UK and who want to make a positive case for it should embrace the ability of a Scottish Government to take macroeconomic decisions for the benefit of our country. In considering corporation tax, I think that it is important that we have a factual base. When UK Government modelling work suggested that reducing corporation tax in Scotland to 12.5 per cent would cost £2.6 billion, many people simply did not believe the statistics, which, as we have heard, were greeted with a gasp of disbelief. After all, £2.6 billion is the total corporation tax take, so the figures suggest that a 12.5 per cent corporation tax rate in Scotland would not raise one penny. That is simply mockable—it is laughable. There is no credibility for those who would cook the books to preserve a no-change agenda.

I do not have time. Perhaps unsurprisingly, the UK Government has very different projections for the on-going cut in corporation tax across the UK to 24 per cent by 2014. Its Office for Budget Responsibility has estimated higher corporation tax revenues by 2013-14 than those at the pre-recession peak. It is staggering that, when the UK Government examines cutting corporation tax at a pan-UK level it does an analysis that builds in the benefits of growth, but when the work is done on a purely Scottish basis, the UK Government scurries around looking for a worst-case scenario and stretching the credibility of its projections to breaking point. Therefore, let us have a look at some other projections. Scottish Government modelling work has indicated that setting corporation tax at 20 per cent can create 27,000 jobs and increase economic output by 1.4 per cent, with a 2 per cent uplift in overall investment. It has been suggested that Northern Ireland’s model will create 58,000 jobs, which is very powerful indeed. If Northern Ireland is to have those powers, why not Scotland? Recent work by the American Economic Journal shows that, in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries, a 10 per cent reduction in corporation tax has typically raised investment rates by 2 per cent and boosted company registrations by 20 per cent. So why not in Scotland? There is compelling evidence that the power to vary corporation tax levels can be a significant economic boost. Rather than debating whether we should have the economic powers, our nation’s Parliament should be debating how we use them once we have them. That is the debate for this place. To suggest that we should not have the power to do so is clearly constitutionally incompetent and underlines the democratic deficit that we face in trying to take Scotland and our economy forward. That is the debate on which Scotland’s Parliament should be expending energy; we should not waste energy in resisting the delivery of real economic powers that will make a real difference to the people of Scotland. I commend the Scottish Government’s motion.

I am glad that Mr Rennie thought that my speech was considered. One aspect that I considered was the fine piece of work that was the Steel commission. Dynamically, it suggested the devolution of corporation tax. Does Mr Rennie now distance himself from the Steel commission?

I have.

I remind Neil Findlay that the savage Tory cuts that he referred to are simply savage Labour cuts rebranded with a Tory rosette on them after the last election. Political amnesia will not wash with the Scottish people. It is all right to be sanctimonious, but members have to know their facts in this chamber.

Perhaps we could have a fact now.

Only one of the two of us is working out logic just now, and Mr Findlay is certainly not him. We get a block grant—that is what we want to change and that is what he stands in the way of. I am delighted that the First Minister in his statement on our programme for government saw that big picture, even if Mr Findlay did not. It was important that the First Minister made a unified case across the chamber for more powers for this Parliament while keeping central the bigger picture of our preferred option of independence—more powers to grow our economy and to reinvest that wealth for the betterment of all Scottish people. I caution people who would go only part of the way towards more powers for Scotland—the Calman generation, if you will—that having the financial powers to grow our economy, even in a very limited way, without the ability to collect the wealth that would flow in the face of a shrinking block grant would lead to financial ruin. There is no point in our having the powers to grow the economy unless we can collect the wealth that we generate. All that we would have would be a shrinking block grant and debt to pay off as a result. So, let us be careful when we consider the powers that Scotland should have and let us ensure that we get them right. The big picture is important to our day-to-day lives—we have only to look at housing to see that, as we heard earlier. As a member of the Government, of course I want to talk about our successes in housing. I want to mention the £1.7 billion that was spent on affordable housing between 2008 and 2011. I want to talk about the right-to-buy restrictions that have helped, about the national housing trust and about the £100 million that has been spent on the more than 3,000 council houses that have been built under this SNP Administration compared to the six that were built under the previous Labour-Lib Dem Administration. I also want to talk about progress. I want to talk about the council tax levy on empty homes and the potential £30 million that that could raise for local authorities besides having the benefit of bringing more homes into use for affordable housing. I want to talk about independence and more powers for Scotland. If we had the borrowing powers, we would not be just tinkering at the edges of affordable housing but would deal with our social housing problem fully. We cannot do that without those full powers. Let us look at what borrowing powers can do. When we saw the front loading of capital investment for housing in this country, we also saw an 11 per cent fall in construction unemployment at a time when the level of unemployment was rising in England. That kind of investment works, but it is sustainable only with the real powers of an independent Parliament. People who tell me that independence does not matter to the people of Scotland should tell that to the plumbers, the sparkies, the brickies, the joiners and the labourers whom we put into work using the powers that we have. They should tell that to the people who are currently on the dole queue whom we could put back to work if we had independence for this country. That is what the big picture is all about. Our day-to-day programme is important, although we are delivering with one hand tied behind our back. Another aspect of the programme before us is care for the elderly and other vulnerable groups. Jackie Baillie talked about regulation of care homes. None of us would ever make light of the tragedy that happened at the Elsie Inglis care home or, indeed, of the financial meltdown that happened at Southern Cross Healthcare. We should try to find a consensual way in which to pursue those issues. There is a strong need to analyse the financial assumptions that underpin private sector nursing homes. There is also a strong need for a presumption that care homes will continue to operate irrespective of those financial assumptions, whereby the state or the voluntary sector steps in to ensure that the care is still delivered. However, there is a real danger that, if we try to regulate on that, we will impinge on reserved issues relating to trading and other matters. When a business goes belly-up, the banks will have the first call on its assets unless we can change that. We must consider the overlapping reserved issues and we cannot act with one hand tied behind our back: even if Jackie Baillie is nodding to say that we could, we could not. Fiona McLeod spoke yesterday about the proposed bill on self-directed support, which I very much welcome. There will be challenges in it and some local authorities will have to consider how to disaggregate some provision—certainly, the ones that have been more reluctant to deliver self-directed support. If a local authority provides a service in someone’s home for three hours a week but that person tells the local authority that they want to opt out of that service and the local authority has hundreds of care workers who are the default providers of that care, self-directed support can be seen as being threatening to local authorities that do not go in the right direction. However, they should see it as an opportunity to deliver for the people who most need that care. I heard Fiona McLeod’s speech yesterday and I know that she has direct experience of that. I hope that we can come together as a Parliament on that proposed bill on self-directed support. I also hope that we will continue to come together as a Parliament to tackle the scourge of sectarianism. Politicians cannot legislate to end sectarianism, but neither can we stick our heads in the sand. I do not know whether the bill that is going through Parliament will transform Scotland by tackling the scourge of sectarianism. What I do know, though, is that it is not enough not to try. For too long, Parliament has buried its head in the sand. I hope that we come together to sort that. The recent jury judgment for a high-profile case points to the way in which we have to change cultural attitudes—and not just west of Scotland cultural attitudes. I thank you for your patience, Presiding Officer.

The Health and Sport Committee has just announced that it will conduct an inquiry into how care for the elderly is regulated, which is a serious attempt to play its part in improving that care, as opposed to engaging in the cheap point scoring that we have just heard. Will the First Minister encourage all those who have concerns to submit evidence to that inquiry and, more important, will the Scottish Government take into account any conclusions that are drawn from it to inform policy and reform?

9. To ask the Scottish Executive whether it considers that the 2014 Commonwealth games in Glasgow offers an opportunity to promote multiculturalism in Scotland. (S4O-00100)

I work with many communities from various ethnic origins in Glasgow as part of my constituency casework. Recently, I worked with the African and Caribbean community in Glasgow. I should declare an interest, as I am a referee for a live funding application for the African and Caribbean Network. I would be delighted if the minister would come along and visit its centre in Glasgow to see what worthwhile role it could play in promoting multiculturalism and getting a legacy for the diaspora from the 2014 Commonwealth games.

I would like to check something with the member. If the social rented sector were to get involved in mid-market rent and make a profit, then reinvest that in social housing, would the member welcome that? That is what the Scottish Government would like to happen.

I hoped that I would never see the day in this chamber when Labour, in the form of Mr Kelly, would use our sectarian problems for party-political point scoring. In his speech, Mr Kelly suggested that the SNP had come on board late to tackle the scourge of sectarianism. His comment was unworthy of our debate and I thought that we would struggle to exceed it, until I heard Mr Lamont’s speech. Denominational schooling does not foster sectarianism, but intolerance of denominational schooling can do so. We witnessed a little of that intolerance in Mr Lamont’s speech this morning. I stress two other points in relation to tackling sectarianism. First, despite some of the comments that we have heard in the chamber today, sectarianism is not specifically a west-of-Scotland problem—that is just wrong. Secondly, sectarianism at football grounds does not occur only with some Celtic or Rangers supporters—it happens to varying degrees with different football supporters at different clubs across Scotland. Margo MacDonald got that wrong. Margo MacDonald rose— I am sorry, but I have only four minutes. I do not have time to take an intervention. The speed of the bill process and the degree of scrutiny to which the bill is subject have been hot topics, to say the least. There is a balancing act to be performed. Do we have the bill on the statute book before the start of the new football season, or do we afford greater time for consultation and scrutiny? There is a reasonable debate to be had about that, but there is no black and white here—it is a judgment call. On balance, I agree that we should be fleet of foot and act quickly to get the bill on the statute book before the start of the football season. On balance, that judgment is correct. We need to focus on the start of the new season. That is why the bill has been introduced now. I turn to how the police and the courts will use the bill—specifically, its interpretation. I strongly believe that having a list of approved or proscribed songs or actions would be unworkable and unhelpful, no matter how long we take to scrutinise the bill. That is why there are no specific lists for breach of the peace. Under common law, breach of the peace is “conduct which presents as genuinely alarming and disturbing, in its context, to any reasonable person.” There are no specific lists of conduct that falls into that category. We must proceed likewise in the bill. However, as we have heard, there will be guidance.

I have only four minutes. I ask Margo MacDonald to sit down.

The specifics of the bill relate to how some people in our society use football as a vehicle to peddle sectarianism and hatred. Although there is other relevant legislation, there is clearly a legislative gap on the specifics of football. This emergency bill seeks to fill that gap and I support it for the reasons that I have given. I ask for reassurance that there is robust post-legislative scrutiny and follow-up legislation if need be. I name-checked Mr Kelly at the start of my speech. Mr Kelly suggested other ideas for future legislation, which we should not rule out. I listened carefully to what he had to say. I apologise to Margo MacDonald and other members for not being able to take their interventions, but time has been rather short.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what support is available for the victims of a miscarriage of justice. (S4O-00065)

I know that MOJO Scotland is grateful for the on-going financial support. It also believes that victims of a miscarriage of justice often suffer from post-traumatic stress syndrome, yet those who are guilty of crimes get far more support on their release from prison to reintegrate into the community. MOJO Scotland feels that the balance is wrong. Will the cabinet secretary use his good office to take a cross-cutting approach with the health minister to see what can be done to support the victims of miscarriages of justice on their reintegration into society? Those people have committed no crime.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what impact it considers the recently announced increases in domestic energy prices will have on its efforts to eradicate fuel poverty. (S4O-00022)

I am sure that the minister agrees that, without the power to regulate our energy market, what our Scottish Government can do to tackle fuel poverty is restricted. However, given the clear success—which he mentioned—of our groundbreaking energy assistance package, which focuses Scottish Government support on those who are most at risk of being in fuel poverty, what further steps will the Government take to continue to target support on those people and to mitigate where possible the worst effects of the unacceptable price hikes?

It is essential that politicians of all parties state clearly and categorically that we will provide active and vocal support in Scotland’s fight to tackle sectarianism and anti-Irish racism. My members’ business debate relates to how those social ills impact on our national game and how they sometimes create havoc in our communities. However, just as important, it is about how society works together to cure Scotland of those social ills. It is an opportunity for MSPs to take an active stand against sectarianism and racism and to pledge to do all we can to take Scotland forward. It might seem to some that public condemnation of such unacceptable behaviour is stating the obvious, but those people are wrong. My constituents in Glasgow—our constituents across Scotland—will rightly ask us as individual MSPs to speak out against bigotry and racism wherever and whenever they raise their head. To stay silent plays into the hands of the bigots and the racists. I know that legislation from the Scottish Government on this matter is imminent. It is only right that we give that legislation a fair wind. This debate is not about the legislation. All I will say on that is that I accept that such legislation must be focused and fleet of foot for the purpose of having it in place for the start of the new football season. However, I would welcome further, more detailed legislation at a later date if it became apparent that it was needed. We should not tolerate it when professional football managers in Scotland are sent bullets through the post; there is no place for such behaviour. Were bullets sent to Neil Lennon because he is from Northern Ireland, because he is the Celtic manager, because he is a Catholic or because he is clearly a passionate former player and now an equally passionate football coach? Were they sent because of flashpoints in previous football games? On one level, it is absolutely irrelevant why the bullets were sent. No person going about their job of work brings on themselves the threats and abuse with which Mr Lennon has had to cope. There are no mitigating factors to justify bigotry, racism, threats and intimidation. It makes no difference whether it is directed towards high-profile individuals or ordinary members of the public. Likewise, our former Deputy Presiding Officer does not encourage threats towards her person because she wears a football top on her last day at work in the Scottish Parliament. There are no mitigating circumstances. However, I have heard some in wider Scottish society make comments such as, “I know it shouldn’t happen, but what do they expect if that’s how they behave? They bring it on themselves”. If we are honest, we have all heard those comments. No one—absolutely no one—brings that on themselves. I reiterate once more that there are no mitigating circumstances when abuse—verbal or physical—is directed towards any other human being. We must not unwittingly give succour to the bigots and racists. My motion stresses partnership working. On that front, I very much welcome the on-going work that has followed the anti-sectarianism summit. However, I want to ensure that the partnership working does not involve just the usual suspects talking to one another, as well intentioned as that clearly is. It must be wider and reach every part of civic Scotland. I believe that bigotry and racism often overlap. We live in a society in which—wrongly—the distinction between, for example, a Pakistani and a Muslim person often blurs. In Scotland, that overlap and blurring sometimes relate to Catholicism and Irish ethnicity, and that is also wrong. For me, prejudice is prejudice, irrespective of the label, and it must be stamped out with equal vigour. For instance, why is it that we rightly celebrate the cultural traditions of third-generation Pakistanis or Bangladeshi families as enriching Scottish society, and yet some in Scottish society do not extend the same welcome to our Irish diaspora? We must not shy away from those awkward questions. Of course we need a strategy to tackle those issues as they present themselves in and around football, but we need a wider social strategy. We need to ensure that any discussion is inclusive and challenging. This is society’s problem, not football’s problem. That is not to say that football does not have to put its house in order: it does, and I am confident that it will. Football is a key part of the solution because that sport unites us more than it divides us. That is why the Show Racism the Red Card charity has been vital in challenging racism throughout Europe and working with football effectively to do so. I hope that its sister organisation, Show Bigotry the Red Card, will be able to do likewise—indeed, it is giving a presentation in committee room 2 after this debate, and I hope that some members will be able to come along. I said that this debate was about taking a stand—a clear public stand—against bigotry and anti-Irish racism, and it is, but I also said that it is about partnership working. I am proud that our Scottish Government is showing leadership, but that leadership is a personal responsibility for every one of our MSPs in our constituencies and regions throughout Scotland. Just as it is unacceptable to ridicule someone because of their colour, it must be unacceptable to ridicule someone because of their religion or their Irish ethnic background. If we say “Zero tolerance” and we live and believe that in our communities, we can truly change Scottish society. That is a responsibility that I am proud to shoulder for the next five years, and I ask my fellow MSPs to do likewise.

I am pleased to speak in the first debate in the new parliamentary session to have a focus on Scotland’s cities. I am also pleased to see that there will be a stand-alone debate on that specific issue early in the new session. I welcome Nicola Sturgeon, our Deputy First Minister, to her role as cities minister. I also welcome the elevation of Michael Matheson and look forward to working constructively with the front-bench team. It is important that Nicola Sturgeon has health as well as cities in her portfolio, and it is particularly appropriate given the significant health needs and inequalities that are faced by many in our home city of Glasgow. It is important to say that health is improving in the round, but significant inequalities endure. For instance, men in Glasgow’s north and east community health partnership area still live for eight years less than those in East Dunbartonshire, which is not acceptable. I therefore read with great interest the submission from the British Medical Association, which is keen for additional support to be given to general practices in areas with the greatest need. I am keen to hear more about how the Scottish Government seeks to ensure that there is an appropriate resource balance in relation to healthcare provision between general practices in communities with very different health needs. I very much hope that, as cities minister, Nicola Sturgeon will look at whether further positive health and social care interventions can be made in order to close the health inequality gap, building on the work that has already started with the equally well initiative. I know that work is in progress in that area. The reintroduction of minimum pricing legislation will be particularly important in addressing health and wider social concerns in our cities. As a new recruit to the Scottish Parliament’s Health and Sport Committee, I look forward to working constructively on that legislation as it progresses through Parliament. I welcome the SNP Government’s commitment to a £1 million family-nurse partnership in Glasgow: further information on how that will be progressed would be welcome. It will provide the young mothers and fathers I know in deprived areas of Glasgow with intensive support for six months before their baby is born and for up to two years afterwards. It has been successfully rolled out in Edinburgh and Dundee, and I look forward to hearing more about what will happen in my city of Glasgow. Turning to the regeneration of our cities, I believe that it is true that our cities are drivers of the country’s economic wealth. For instance, I welcome Glasgow’s key role as Scotland’s premier retail and conference destination and its growing significance as a financial and renewable energy centre. However, in seeking to ensure that Scotland’s cities are key drivers of our economy, we must not forget the long-standing communities outwith the city centre that suffer from the significant health inequalities that have already been mentioned, as well as from high levels of unemployment that are way above the Scottish and UK averages.

I completely agree. Unfortunately, however, I have to point out that the unemployment rate in Glasgow east is 7.7 per cent, in Glasgow north-east it is 7.5 per cent, in Glasgow south-west it is 6.7 per cent and in Glasgow north-west it is 6.4 per cent. Those are the four worst areas in the country, and three of the four are in the north of our city. That is simply not acceptable, and the cabinet secretary now has a crucial cross-Government remit in ensuring that appropriate investment is made not just in Glasgow’s city centre but in the outer areas, such as those in the north of the city that I have mentioned. I have two suggestions for the cabinet secretary. First, I am keen to discuss with her how Glasgow can get an appropriate share of the £50 million of the joint European support for sustainable investment in city areas—or JESSICA—fund, which is specifically for urban regeneration. Such moves will be crucial not just to regeneration and anti-poverty strategies but in promoting a pro-health approach in our city. Secondly—and perhaps more significant—I understand that John Swinney is currently considering four new enterprise zones for Scotland, a matter that has been brought into sharp focus by the UK Government’s decision to progress 21 such zones in England. I fully appreciate the complexity of ensuring that in such zones there is a balance between attracting new businesses to locate and grow in the area and displacing business from elsewhere in Scotland, but I have every confidence that John Swinney can iron out such complexities. Given her cities remit, I seek the cabinet secretary’s support in ensuring that deprived areas in Scotland’s cities get an opportunity to be designated as one of those enterprise zones. Given the very real problems of ill health, deprivation and unemployment, I believe that the case for exploring the prospect of north Glasgow being one of the four enterprise zones is powerful, and I am arranging for early meetings with John Swinney and Glasgow City Council to explore the idea further. By tackling poverty and joblessness we can promote positive health in our communities. Our cities are central to economic prosperity across Scotland, and we must ensure that our deprived communities share in the wealth creation that is evident in our city centres. Such moves are vital to public health. I very much welcome Nicola Sturgeon’s new cities remit, I look forward to working with her and her front-bench team in the years ahead and I hope that we can make progress with the issues that I have raised this afternoon.

In this debate, we will hear much from all sides of the chamber about whether the Scottish Government’s methods of focusing on economic recovery and job creation are working. That is only right. I am sure that the Scottish Government will welcome that scrutiny. I want to ensure that we look not only at what we can achieve in the short term in relation to the issue but at how much we could achieve given the right conditions. For absolute clarity, I note that the right conditions include additional powers for the Parliament. I will say more about that later in my speech, but I want to begin by saying a bit about the here and now. I am delighted that the cabinet secretary has reinforced his commitment to the small business bonus scheme. I see the scheme’s effect on the ground locally—in Maryhill Road in Glasgow, in Springburn shopping centre and in the town centres of Rutherglen and Cambuslang. I could list business after business that has stayed afloat simply because of the scheme. There are 64,000 businesses that no longer pay rates. The scheme has made a real difference in difficult times. I am delighted that the cabinet secretary’s commitment to it has been reiterated here this afternoon. I am also delighted that we are going further. The small business jobs plan seems rather exciting. It is eye watering to think that there are 200,000 one-person companies in this country. Think of the jobs that would be created here if just a small fraction of those individuals were able to take on a second employee. I am delighted that the small business jobs plan will look at ways of supporting them to do that by showing them how to get through the complexities of the tax system, how to design and frame contracts, and how to get additional finance to make a business grow. The plan is an essential job creation measure. I am delighted to see it. I am also delighted to see the re-emphasis on investing in our skills base and the 100,000 training opportunities per year that the Scottish Government will roll out. Of course I am delighted by the 25,000 apprenticeships, but I am also delighted to hear more information on flexible and non-age-specific apprenticeships and other training opportunities, which are vital. In the past, some people have felt frozen out of training opportunities. It is important that we widen the possibilities and opportunities that are available to them. I will be closely following the progress of the proposed procurement bill. It is important for local authorities and the public sector throughout Scotland to get best value through the procurement process. I am reminded of the Scottish Futures Trust’s first annual outturn report, which said that, over the lifetime of contracts negotiated in the first year, there would be a saving to the taxpayer in Scotland of £100 million. It is important to get procurement right, and the procurement bill can do that. The procurement bill can also do much more. We can ensure that local jobs form a key part of the procurement process. I hear time and again—from the construction industry and right across the board—that, because of procurement rules and European regulations, some people are squeezed out when attempts are made to fill vacancies locally. It would be good to get more information on that. We need to do more to leverage in cash. Tax increment finance and joint European support for sustainable investment in city areas are exciting developments, but mention should also be made of the work that Alex Neil did as a minister in leveraging additional cash into the housing sector. I hope to hear good news soon about UK pension funds investing in the Scottish social housing sector. I am sure that the whole Parliament can get on board and support a can-do attitude on the part of the Scottish Government in that regard. We must think ahead for the longer term. We must ensure that, when the economy grows—and grows strongly—again, everyone in society benefits. Parts of society never benefited from the previous good times, and inequality endured. As we create wealth for all in society, we must ensure that everyone can access it. We must be honest: the majority of members believe that the UK Government has taken a wrong-headed approach to economic recovery in this country: where it would rather cut to bolster the economy, we would rather invest. Joe FitzPatrick illustrated how such investment works. For the financial year 2010-11, £3.3 billion of capital projects have sustained or created 50,000 jobs in the Scottish economy. Investment works. However, with UK cuts coming to Scotland and with our desire to invest, the existing funding gap is accentuated. We must borrow to invest, and I am delighted that members on all sides of the chamber now agree—I think—that we must go further than the Calman proposals on borrowing. The thing about borrowing is that the money that is borrowed has to be paid back. My question is: who retains the wealth that is created when we borrow to invest? The Scottish Government will take the borrowing risk, but who will get the borrowing reward? Every time the Scottish Government invests and takes someone off the dole or stops someone going on the dole, that brings a cash benefit to the UK Exchequer. Every time someone is put into employment, they pay tax and national insurance into the UK Exchequer. We borrow to invest, and we bring a cash benefit to the UK Exchequer. Every time someone feels confident enough to spend an extra pound in the shop, the 20 per cent in VAT—part of their spending power—brings a cash benefit to the UK Exchequer. Every time someone fills up their tank with petrol—because they can now afford to—it brings a tax benefit to the UK Exchequer.

I am afraid I do not think that I have time. There are increased profits from increased economic activity due to our decisions to invest in our economy. A hundred jobs at £20,000 a year for people who would otherwise be unemployed means a £1 million saving through tax, national insurance and dole money for the UK Exchequer, but not one penny comes back to Scotland. Let us secure more borrowing powers and encourage job creation. We have the rights and we want the responsibilities—and, when we create the wealth, let us ensure that this place retains that wealth to invest further in the future.

I want to talk about ways in which we can make bus services more responsive to the needs of the communities that I represent in Glasgow. By more responsive I mean not just better service provision in general, but also an integrated system that will promote modal shift from car to bus and other forms of public transport. I will illustrate my point using the example of my commute. On my return from Parliament in Edinburgh, I get off the train at Queen Street station and have a variety of choices of ways in which to make my way back to my home in Maryhill. I can go for a 10 or 15-minute walk to the bus stop and wait in the city centre for an indeterminate period of time for a bus that will provide a debatable quality of service. Alternatively, I can jump in a taxi—in bad weather, when nights are dark and when time is short, I have done that, but for many of my constituents that is an unrealistic option, due to cost, and, further, it does not meet our desire to effect a modal shift in commuter culture. My third option is to get on the subway at Buchanan Street, disembark at St George’s Cross and get a bus to Maryhill from there—indeed, when I am not pressed for time, that is my preferred option, and it represents joined-up and clever public transport provision. That option best sums up an integrated transport network—a journey using train, subway and bus seamlessly. That is the vision that we all strive and aspire to achieve. However, the issue with that option is that the infrequency and the overcrowding of the subway service make it an undesirable option for many. However, that will all change, and I am proud that an SNP Government has committed public funding to the full modernisation of the subway system. I am proud of how the SNP has delivered for Glasgow on that front. That financial commitment will deliver new rolling stock, refurbished stations and an integrated ticketing network across all public modes of transport. That will drive integrated provision, with buses at new key interchanges, such as St George’s Cross, and buses being taken outwith the city centre and not having to start their journey in the city centre in the first place. That is what this is all about. I see progress already, with Glasgow City Council and SPT moving to introduce a statutory quality partnership scheme for all bus services within the city boundaries. It will consider routes, waiting areas, emissions and air quality, under the current regulatory powers that exist. We all need that can-do attitude to public transport. When Labour MSPs were standing outside underground stations with petitions for subway modernisation, I was meeting the former transport minister, Stewart Stevenson, with that can-do attitude, and when they were putting out alarmist press releases, I was meeting the new transport minister, Keith Brown. When they were talking complete nonsense, I was meeting the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth, John Swinney, to discuss how we could secure financial funding. When they were full of bluff, bluster and alarm, we were delivering on public transport for Glasgow. The SNP has a can-do attitude, and we will deliver further using the regulatory powers that we have and by working in partnership with bus companies and representatives of other forms of transport. I urge members to support the amendment in the name of Keith Brown.

I, too, thank Graham Blount for his work in conjunction with the Scottish Government to alleviate fuel poverty. We remain at the mercy of rising energy prices and a United Kingdom Government that seems determined to punish the poorest through welfare changes. Does the First Minister agree that, if the Liberal Democrats are seriously committed to reducing fuel poverty, they must persuade their UK colleagues to take action on those fronts or to give the Parliament the powers to act for the poorest in society?

I start by saying something that I think that we all agree on: the private rented sector must become increasingly important in the provision of good-quality, affordable housing. Given the significant cuts of £800 million that have been made to Scotland’s capital budget in the coming financial year alone by the United Kingdom Government, it will be ever more difficult to meet housing need within the public sector alone. We do not want it to be that way, but we have to acknowledge that it is. Therefore, we need the private sector and we have to work in partnership with it. As has been pointed out, most private sector landlords are excellent. Our discussions with the Scottish Association of Landlords show that those at the top of their game in the private sector can be a power for good in meeting housing need. That is why the bill must ensure that we regulate effectively to achieve the highest standards. Regulation under the bill will allow us to move a significant way towards doing that. The lack of prosecution of unregistered landlords has concerned us all for a while. The only prosecution that we have had of an unregistered landlord resulted in a derisory fine being handed out. The issue has been mentioned, but it is important to reinforce the point that there is a need for better and more effective prosecution and more significant fines. I therefore welcome the increase in the maximum fine for unregistered landlords to £50,000, which I hope will drive change, although time will tell on that. I look forward to seeing the guidelines that the minister has talked about on best practice in securing prosecutions and engaging in enforcement. Fines that are given to unregistered landlords should be retained in Scotland and used to pay for enforcement and the regulation of the private rented sector. The money should not simply flow to the London Exchequer, as currently happens. To put it bluntly, why should Scotland’s local authorities have to pay to enforce regulation while any profit—if I can use that terminology—from court fines travels south? Perhaps that is an argument for another day, but if prosecutions become increasingly successful, as we all hope that they will, that situation would surely stick in the craw of Scottish councils. Regulating the sector is hardly inexpensive, but local authorities get no cash benefit to reinvest in that area. I draw the distinction that the cash benefit would not cross-subsidise anything else; the money would come back to pay for effective regulation of the sector. I welcome the introduction of landlord registration numbers, which should be a driver for consumer change, as I have said previously. I would hope that no one would buy a car that was not MOT’d, so why do people move into houses that are unregistered and do not have all the safety features that they should? We must drive that consumer change and ensure that there is consumer responsibility. I would like to know more about how the tenancy deposit scheme, which would secure deposits for tenants should they leave a landlord, will work. I am interested in whether registered landlords will be the only people who will be able to opt into that scheme. I would also like to know how the benefits system will interact with landlord registration. The minister has spoken about considering greater tenancy security for social tenants in the private sector to meet affordable housing need. There is a lot of work to do as we move forward. I cannot say whether the housing minister in the next Scottish Government will be male or female, but I am content with the one that we have. Of course, I suspect that appointing the next housing minister will be Alex Salmond’s job as First Minister.

I just want to add to the list the Home Owner and Debtor Protection (Scotland) Act 2010, under which all evictions for mortgage arrears must call in court, which is another powerful success.

There is much in the tone of the Liberal Democrat motion with which I am naturally sympathetic. The centralisation of service provision is indeed something that should be avoided in order that local accountability, which the motion alludes to, is enhanced. However, the Liberal Democrats cannot have it all ways. They cannot devote as much energy as they have done to keeping the Parliament subjugated to the authority of Westminster and simultaneously claim to be both democrats, which they have proven themselves not to be, and decentralists. Neither can they so enthusiastically prop up the most damaging policies of excessive, too-deep-too-fast, public sector cuts that we have seen in a generation from the Liberal Democrats south of the border while blocking moves to save millions of pounds on administering out-of-date systems for fire and police boards, each with its own bureaucracy. They cannot cut and then refuse to cut the bureaucracy. They cannot have it both ways. I understand why the Liberal Democrats want to make their points—as a symbolic, easy-hit campaign tool a few weeks ahead of a Scottish election—but I do not accept that their intentions carry anything even remotely resembling the Scottish national interest. The Scottish Government stands for the Scottish national interest above all else, which is why, in the face of serious budget cuts, plans to amalgamate police and fire services seem immeasurably preferable to the alternative loss of front-line services and the damaging effect that it would have if the Lib Dems had their way.

We cannot have a consultation process while working out the final details and then micromanage savings. Mr Brown should get on board with the consensus and be part of the solution, not part of the problem. Given the choice between an organisational structure in Scottish policing that fits the admittedly attractive-sounding philosophy behind the Liberal Democrat motion and the maintenance and expansion of the SNP policy of extra police, I will choose the extra police every time. It is the sign of a good Government that priorities are decided on the results that make Scotland a better place to live in, and with recorded crime at a 32-year low, I tend to think that most people in Scotland would prefer policies that focus on protecting their rights as citizens to live free from the horrors of crime over cutting police. The crime statistics tell me that there are about 1,100 extra police officers since 2007. They are simply not expendable, so a responsible Scottish Government has to take steps to maintain those numbers. I welcome this debate, as it is of course the stated intention of the Government to listen and to consult widely before enacting any proposals. However, it is clear that there will be savings for the public purse. The interim report of the sustainable policing project estimates annual savings of £197 million for a single police force. Opponents are free to argue that that is not the case and that no savings will be realised, but I do not think that that position is objective. Any politician who seeks to oppose such plans on ideological grounds will have to explain any figures that they have sourced and where they would get their money from. There are problems with the Liberal Democrats’ motion on a number of levels, but I will elaborate on just two. First, the sheer alarmism of the wording makes me think that the Lib Dems’ main interest is to create headlines for the election campaign, not to offer the constructive input that the Parliament needs. It is not often that the Labour Party, the Conservatives and the SNP all get together to seek the interests of the Scottish people, while the Lib Dems are left standing on the sidelines. Let it be noted that the Lib Dems are on the sidelines this morning. On social work, for example, the motion states that we will be “destroying those successful local initiatives that are already in place”. The Lib Dems need to name them and tell us why they will be destroyed. Serious concerns need to be aired as part of a process of constructive politics, but when the policy intention is clearly to protect services in difficult times, it is simply not good enough to create even more fear and alarm without explaining in convincing detail what could be made worse or suggesting how to make matters better. The Lib Dems are offering nothing in this debate except service cuts on a cheque signed off from their Government at Westminster.

I could not hear all of that, but let me tell the member about local knowledge in Strathclyde, where there is already devolution of decision making, despite the large size of the police force. In Possil in Maryhill, there are dispersal orders in place as a result of the local knowledge of local police officers and local decision making on the ground. If that is happening in Strathclyde, why cannot it happen within a national structure? The Lib Dem position is completely untenable. [Interruption.] Mr Purvis may wish to intervene.

Quite the opposite, Mr Purvis. I am taking part in the debate because I remain to be convinced on what the best structure is and because I want to inform myself. This morning, I have had information from the Conservatives, the Labour Party and the SNP Scottish Government, but I have had absolutely nothing from the Liberal Democrats. Perhaps the best structure would be a national force; perhaps it would involve two or three forces. I do not know what the final solution is, but I know that it is necessary to be part of the solution rather than part of the problem. When it comes to the final framework for the police force, the ink is not even on the paper as yet, never mind dry. I urge the Lib Dems not to seek headlines, but to pursue the interests of the Scottish people by getting on board and joining the consensus in the chamber.

As I did at stage 1, I put on record my thanks to fellow committee members, the clerks and everyone who gave evidence to our committee during the scrutiny process. In particular, I put on record my thanks to Patricia Ferguson, the member who has driven the bill forward, and the Minister for Housing and Communities, Alex Neil, for the way in which they have conducted themselves, in particular at stage 2, when the bill was improved in a positive fashion, with partnership between the Government and the member in charge. This afternoon, at stage 3, Patricia Ferguson’s amendments have once again involved working constructively with the Government to make the bill as good and watertight as it can be. That is to be welcomed. There has been such consensus on the policy intention behind the bill that a feeling of déjà vu will arise during this afternoon’s debate, as certain themes will come up again and again. Given the level of consensus, it is puzzling why new legislation has taken so long to reach the statute book—as it will, I hope—as Patricia Ferguson said in her opening speech. I want to use the short time that is available to me to mention a few of the strengths of the bill. The bill will do a number of things. Rogue factors will now have a choice: they will need to shape up or they will have to ship out. I know from my constituency casework that many people who approach me with factoring issues are factored by social landlords, with the Glasgow Housing Association, in particular, featuring among the complaints that I receive. It is vital that social landlords, as factors, are covered by the bill. There are drivers to achieve change in the bill. Under section 12, factors that fail to register as such can be fined £5,000. Under section 9, factors that are deregistered or that fail to register will not be able to recover charges and costs that they have levied or incurred from owner-occupiers. I note the partnership working, once more, on amendment 11 earlier this afternoon, which allows for the on-going recovery of costs for actual works that have taken place. That sums up the way in which the bill has progressed through the parliamentary process. The powerful sanctions that are contained in the bill should mean that cowboy factors will leave the business and that others will drive up their standards. Driving up standards is indeed an important issue. Most factors are not bad factors. They might be complacent or sloppy, but they are not necessarily bad. We must shine a light on better customer service, which has perhaps been neglected by many a factor in taking their core business for granted. They should not do that. I note that deregistration is viewed as a last resort under the bill. That relates to driving up standards, rather than driving people out of the sector. We have now opted for a private rented housing panel and private rented housing committee over the alternatives that were presented. The future will show whether or not that is the right decision, but let us monitor the mechanism and get it right. The principle that underpins it is the idea of mediation and negotiation before escalation and deregistration. It is about factor and consumer working together to reach a positive solution that makes everyone happy. There is a responsibility, within that, on home owners. I am able to help out nearly every home owner who comes to me raising issues about factors, but there are always one or two people who are simply unwilling to pay, and who will use any procedure to avoid paying. We have to ensure that a bureaucracy of the non-paying is not created under the bill. I am sure that early monitoring of the bill’s implementation will be most welcome in that regard. I want to finish by talking about one final group, who I mentioned at stage 1: those who get factors’ bills and cannot pay. I seek not to make a party-political point but merely to state on record that there are many people who bought their properties under right-to-buy legislation in the 1980s and who now receive huge factoring bills, but who could never afford to maintain their properties. Those people must be assisted in meeting their responsibilities to make repairs on their properties. I commend the bill to the chamber.

The minister knows about my on-going interest in subway modernisation, as I have met him and the previous transport minister to discuss the matter. I will meet the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth this afternoon to discuss the matter further. Does the minister agree that another key reason why subway modernisation is vital is that 100,000 extra passengers frequented Glasgow’s subway in December last year during the period of bad weather while overground transport was seriously hampered?

I start by thanking the current convener, the previous one, Frank McAveety, and all members of the committee for providing a positive and constructive forum for my constituents who have petitioned them in recent years. I also thank them for their willingness to let my constituents and me raise important issues with them in person, face to face and sometimes at some length, and for the patience that they show as a committee with an extremely big workload before them each Tuesday afternoon. I have been involved in various petitions with my constituents, from parents objecting to the school closures consultation in Glasgow and the restrictions placed on volunteer coaches by national governing body coaching certificates, to others pushing for a change in fatal accident legislation to lift the legal barrier that prevents fatal accident inquiries from being held into the deaths of Scots overseas. It is a varied casework indeed. I will devote the bulk of my speech to the fatal accident inquiry petition. I never knew my constituent Colin Love, who died on 29 January 2009. I wish that I had known him, because by all accounts he was a fine person. However, I now know his mother well, as Julie Love petitioned the committee following his death. He drowned in the waters by a beach on Margarita Island in Venezuela—Playa El Agua, a notorious drowning spot. He was not the first to drown there and, by all accounts, he certainly was not the last. There were no warning signs or lifeguards. People have continued to drown there following Colin’s death. Had Colin died in the waters at a Scottish beach, in all likelihood there would have been a fatal accident inquiry. Had he died in the waters off the English coast, there would have been a coroner’s inquiry. If a person normally resident in England had died off the coast of Margarita Island, there would have been a coroner’s inquiry. The difference in the case of Colin Love’s tragic death is that, because he was from Scotland, a fatal accident inquiry was not legally allowed. Not only is that crazy; it is wrong. Julie Love, co-petitioner Dr Kenneth Faulds and I have all given evidence to the committee on the issue. The committee gave Julie Love the voice and platform that she rightly deserved and provided me as her MSP with a focus for my efforts to push for reform to the law. I thank the committee for that. I worked with Julie Love to make a submission to the Cullen inquiry on fatal accident inquiries, calling for the lifting of a legal barrier that prevents FAIs into overseas deaths. Cullen agreed, and a response from the Scottish Government to the report is now pending. The committee has continued Julie Law’s petition until the Scottish Government responds—I understand that that happened just yesterday. If I am privileged enough to be re-elected in May, I pledge to bring forward a member’s bill to reform fatal accident inquiries and to lift the restrictions that prevent investigations in Scotland into overseas deaths. I pledge to do that unless whoever forms the Scottish Government in May 2011 acts otherwise and lifts that bar. That is the position that we are in—, Julie and I, and the workers in my office, who have done much work on the issue. Julie Love has a powerful motive for pushing for fatal accident inquiries. FAIs give recommendations, such as that travel companies should not send travellers to an island where people die, that there should be lifeguards or that the British Foreign Office should do things better in handling overseas deaths. They are powerful recommendations and drivers for change. Julie Love is fighting not just for Colin Love but for all the people who are resident in Scotland but who die abroad in future. I thank the Public Petitions Committee for working with me to help to achieve our aim.

The budget that is before us today is £1.3 billion less than the budget that was passed in 2010. I believe that the 2011 Scottish budget cuts are a product of Labour’s disastrous handling of the UK economy and of the Conservatives in London cutting too quick and too deep. However, we are where we are, and political parties in Scotland need to move beyond the blame game and towards fixing the problems that we face. That is what the Scottish public expect. As a minority Government, the SNP must, as a matter of political reality, seek consensus and compromise. That is how we seek to govern, and always have done. The fact that Labour appears to have done all that it can to block a budget that is in Scotland’s national interest tells me that it is not fit to govern after May this year. I never wanted £1.3 billion-worth of cuts, but there is still £30 billion to be spent, and we should never forget that. Despite that, what we hear from Labour is constant negativity. Andy Kerr made it crystal clear that Labour lacks vision and has no ideas. I would like to speak about how we are using some of that £30 billion, which is a significant amount of cash. Before I do so, I note that Labour cannot even suggest how it would transfer even one single penny of it. I am proud to see the SNP Government delivering a record number of apprenticeships for 2011-12. Those 25,000 apprenticeships will give our young people vital training opportunities, which will be welcome in Glasgow and across Scotland. The SNP has a strong track record in the area. Through the four budgets that we have had passed, we will have delivered 76,000 new apprenticeships. I note that that contrasts rather favourably with Labour’s last four years as the Scottish Executive, during which it delivered 73,000 apprenticeships. We should remember that the Labour Party delivered fewer apprenticeships during a time when the budget was rising significantly, and that we are delivering more apprenticeships during a time when the budget is shrinking drastically. The facts speak for themselves. I genuinely urge Labour to support the Government’s budget. Do Labour members really want to vote against a record number of apprenticeships? That is the question that is being asked this afternoon.

I hear a Labour member saying from a sedentary position that they want more apprenticeships. I ask her why Labour delivered fewer apprenticeships when it was in government and had more money than is available to the SNP Government, which is delivering record levels of new apprenticeships with less money. Do Labour members want to vote against a council tax freeze that will support under-pressure pensioners and hard-working families? Do they want to vote against Scottish students from poor backgrounds and attempt to deny them access to an additional £15 million and 1,200 extra student places? I hope not, although we will find out at decision time this evening. I praise the NUS for organising the hundreds of FE students in Glasgow who have contacted me with concerns about bursaries, and I look forward to telling those students that the SNP has worked across party lines to address their concerns and to deliver for them.

I do not have much time. I am sorry. I want in the time that I have left to talk about the large retail supplement. This budget does not include everything that I wanted, as an SNP politician, because I wanted it to include an additional £30 million. I suspect that Labour did not, because it cannot say how it would spend one penny. I ask the cabinet secretary to say whether, if the SNP is re-elected in May this year, the Government will continue to progress the idea of having a large retail supplement. I certainly have ideas about that, including about finding ways of allowing large cities to retain more of that levy, and I am happy to work with the Christie commission, my own party and across parties to flesh out those ideas. We are standing up for small businesses in this budget, so I am delighted that the Conservatives have belatedly come on board in relation to that. I thank them for their constructive work on the £10 million fund to support small and medium-sized enterprises and employability. The budget and the help that 74,000 small businesses get through the small business bonus will be received with enthusiasm in the streets of Glasgow, in places across the city such as Maryhill Road, Springburn Way, Dumbarton Road and Victoria Road, where we are standing up for small businesses and not kneeling before the large corporations, as Labour would have us do.

I start as other members have done and thank Joe FitzPatrick for securing the debate. It is timeous, because it has been a while since I have been to my local science centre, Glasgow Science Centre. I assure the staff and patrons of the science centre who are here today that I will ensure that I visit the centre again in the near future. The debate will reignite my interest in the centre. I apologise to them for not being as active in following their successes as I could have been. I want to talk about the role of science in my life. I drifted into teaching modern studies—social sciences rather than science. However, two of the most exciting lessons that I had as a child were science lessons. In one lesson, I stood in a plastic tray with one hand on the Van de Graaff generator and the other pointed at a Bunsen burner, and lit the Bunsen burner. It was great fun. On another occasion, we were taken down to the local rugby field, where we watched children in the distance banging their cymbals and we had to time how long it took the noise to reach us. It helped us to understand the speed of sound. Those are two little examples of curriculum for excellence methods of teaching that have always existed in Scottish schools. It is the kind of good practice that the curriculum for excellence is recognising properly for the first time. Glasgow Science Centre—and, I am sure, the other science centres—ignites that kind of excitement and imagination in young people. That is why the centres are so important. We must continue to invest in them because they capture the imagination of people who might otherwise not have been interested in science. In preparation for the debate, I looked at some recent data for Glasgow Science Centre. I was hoping that it would be good. It was not good; it was fantastic. Here are some basic figures to begin with: 24 per cent of those who visit Glasgow Science Centre are from Glasgow itself but, as Willie Coffey has rightly pointed out, many, many more come from other parts of the west of Scotland. However, 24 per cent of visitors are from overseas, which shows that, for many people, it is a premier tourist attraction. It is also not the case that the same people in Glasgow and the west of Scotland go time and again, because 59 per cent of those who go to the centre are first-time visitors. Moreover, these are not people who have always been interested in science; the evidence indicates that 37 per cent of those who go through the centre’s door consider themselves as knowing almost nothing about the subject. They have gone to learn. Finally, in the last year for which figures are available, 104,000 schoolchildren accessed a positive learning outcome via the centre. Traditionally, science has been seen as a male-dominated field. That is certainly not the case according to the figures for Glasgow Science Centre, where half the visitors are female. The service that it provides is not gender specific. On every access, delivery and outcome point, the centre is delivering for people. I also noted in the recent report on Glasgow Science Centre that it carried out a survey on what it could do better—Jeez, if we politicians asked what we could do better, the list would be very long. However, half the people who were surveyed could not think of anything that they wanted to be done better; in fact, 67 per cent of people thought that the service that they had received from the science centre was what they had expected or better. What politician would not want that sort of minimum two-thirds approval rating?

Apparently, two thirds of people have never heard of Jamie Stone. That is not science. I welcome Joe FitzPatrick’s debate and congratulate Glasgow Science Centre on the good job that it does. I will certainly revisit it in the very near future.

Like other members, I start by thanking the clerks, SPICe, fellow committee members and all those who gave evidence, written and oral, to the committee for their assistance in helping us to reach the stage 1 proceedings today. For many people listening—if there are many people listening, that is—this is a rather dry and dusty debate, but that does not make it unimportant. It is vital. Michael McMahon and Patricia Ferguson rightly pointed to the 2007 elections debacle as the reason why action is needed. I do not think that anyone should forget Professor Ron Gould’s comments that in the whole process the voter was “an afterthought”. I will come back to that point. We should remind ourselves of the problem areas: combined elections, spoiled papers, electronic vote counting and the single ballot paper design. The problems went on and on, but at their heart was fragmentation—in the planning, the powers involved, the responsibilities and the accountability. Who was to blame? Where did power lie? Where did the buck stop? Since then, action taken by the Scottish Government—in a consensual way with parties across the Parliament—has dealt with some of those problems. The Parliament supported the decoupling of Scottish Parliament and local authority elections, which is to be welcomed. When we look back on today’s debate, we will see it as the point at which we started to deal with the fragmentation in the system. Whether or not that is seen as the motivation today, the bill is about dealing with fragmentation. Putting the interim electoral management board on a statutory footing is vital in the process. Also vital is the independence of the board from Government. It will not be accountable to ministers, although its annual reports will be scrutinised. The minister said that the annual report will relate to the board’s activities and not its competence. I would like more information about that. How will we drill down to scrutinise the effectiveness of the board, and what will the parliamentary procedure for that be? Nevertheless, I welcome the bill and think that it brings a coherent structure to the expertise in running Scotland’s elections that clearly exists throughout the country in the returning officers, the deputy returning officers and the various council officials who have generations of experience of running good elections. None of us should forget about that. The bill will allow information sharing and the sharing of best practice right across our nation and will provide a powerful framework for all elections—not, I hope, just council elections. I will finish on the broad, cross-party consensus that we have achieved today. The Secretary of State for Scotland has intimated that the Government is poised to give the administration of Scottish elections to the Scottish Parliament, and the minister has said that he would speedily change the provisions in the bill to ensure that that was within the competence of the electoral management board. However, I would go further than that. We need full legislative competence over Scottish elections, and administrative competence in relation to UK elections. Of course, I would rather have the great efficiency saving of eradicating UK elections altogether—of not having any. I mentioned the idea of fragmentation because, as far as the bill goes, the buck still does not stop in the one place. We must ensure that we have one Government, one minister and one management board with direct responsibility for all Scotland’s elections. That is the only way in which we will get direct accountability and drive up standards in the process. In terms of a respect agenda, it is an absolute farce that the Scottish Government—never mind Scottish voters—was not consulted on whether an AV referendum should be held on the same date as Scotland’s elections. We should never forget the main reason for the problems with the AV referendum: in UK law, the chief counting officer for the UK determines certain things at 1 pm on the Friday, and certain other things must be done with the AV referendum at 4 pm. That shows complete disrespect to the Scottish Parliament, to Scotland and to democracy. However, we cannot deal with the AV referendum just now. The bill deals with what we can process and I welcome its principles at stage 1.

I will consider landlord registration as contained in the bill. My lasting impression of landlord registration is of how committed and professional the vast majority of landlords in the sector are. The vast majority of landlords—those who contribute significantly to addressing housing need in our country—sign up for registration. The landlords’ representative body, the Scottish Association of Landlords, typifies the professional and constructive approach that registered landlords take to meeting housing need. However, the registration scheme’s strength should be its ability to tackle rogue landlords who do not bother to register and who provide accommodation for tenants that we would not consider to be safe or acceptable. I suspect that we all agree that the enforcement power against unregistered rogue landlords is a muscle that has never properly been flexed. I am well aware that barriers exist to potentially successful prosecutions by local authorities and I know that the minister has a working group that is looking at such matters. I would very much appreciate more information about progress on that. As we heard earlier, the City of Edinburgh Council put effort, time, finance and commitment into securing the conviction of an unregistered landlord. The court imposed a derisory fine, which must have left the council thinking that there had been little point in pursuing the prosecution in the first place. Ironically, such an example is a real disincentive to local authorities to prosecute unregistered landlords. The bill will increase fines to a maximum of £50,000, which I welcome. There is now a potentially strong, financial incentive for rogue landlords to register. I say “potentially” because if convictions are difficult to achieve and rarely occur, and the fines that are imposed are tiny, raising the maximum fine to £50,000 may make little difference. However, I take a far more positive view than that. I believe that increasing the maximum fine will send a clear message to courts about how seriously we expect them to treat cases involving rogue landlords. We must ensure that courts perceive landlords who refuse to register as being guilty of serious criminality. After all, councils indulge in prosecutions of unregistered landlords not as a first action but as a last option. When councils are aware of a potentially unregistered landlord, they encourage the landlord to apply for registration, to register and to meet the minimum acceptable standards for private rented properties. The question that courts should ask themselves when prosecutions take place is why the landlord did not register in the first place and what a landlord who refuses to register has got to hide. What other forms of criminality might that landlord be involved in? Are some landlords trying to avoid the light that registration would shine on their business? That is why I welcome the bill’s extension of the fit-and-proper-person test criteria. Our courts and our sheriffs need to be aware of such matters. Sheriffs who do not regularly deal with housing-related matters may not be aware of the social context and the damage that is done by rogue landlords—the misery that they can cause to tenants and the wider community, which we heard about from several members. The fine increase should emphasise to sheriffs the importance that Parliament places upon the offence. Reform of the system of prosecution may also help. It has been suggested that we could have special housing courts involving people who are experts in the sector. Such courts could deal more appropriately and swiftly with a range of offences and disputes, including unregistered landlords. Perhaps that could be considered by the Government if it is re-elected. I seek the minister’s opinion on that. We should make it socially unacceptable to use unregistered landlords. I accept that there will always be vulnerable sections of society, such as exploited immigrants or people who, for a variety of reasons, have chaotic lifestyles, that end up renting from unregistered landlords. That is unacceptable, but the rest of us, as consumers, should never knowingly accept accommodation from an unregistered landlord. Consumers would not knowingly buy a dodgy motor or a gas boiler, so why should they rent a dodgy flat? Consumers must exert a degree of responsibility for themselves. Indeed, the example of a dodgy boiler is quite pertinent because there is every chance that that is exactly what someone might end up with if they choose an unregistered landlord. However, we can expect consumers to make an informed choice only if they are given the correct information, which means a public awareness-raising campaign and the possibility of checking whether a landlord is registered. I would appreciate information on that from the minister. I would also appreciate the minister’s views on whether newspapers should be allowed to advertise the properties of rogue landlords. Our newspapers can be great campaigning forces for social good, but they also have a social responsibility, which should extend to not advertising the properties of unregistered landlords. I am not suggesting that we require legislation on that, rather that we have a voluntary code and partnership with the newspaper industry. I have no reason to believe that the press would not sign up to that—in fact, I am sure that it would welcome such a code. There is much more that I wanted to say but, given the limited time available, I will leave it at that. I will be delighted to support the bill at decision time.

I have championed the campaign for that for some time, and have written to Michael Moore about the issue, but the response that I received was not positive. Perhaps I can give Alex Neil that response, and he could redouble our efforts to persuade the Government on the matter.

I will focus on the relationship between electricity market reform and microrenewables and how it may affect funding for Scotland and jobs in my constituency. I make an appeal to members at the start: I would not normally speak on subjects such as this so, as I tiptoe my way through the issues, I hope that they will be gentle with me.  I have a direct constituency interest in the subject. When we talk about the opportunities in harnessing Scotland's green energy capacity, we tend to think about electricity generation in rural and offshore settings. However, fabrication, supply and maintenance of equipment are also required, and there are a number of spin-off benefits that will establish our urban areas as key players in the Scottish renewables revolution. Just before Christmas, I met the chief executive officer of Gaia-Wind Ltd at Port Dundas, in Maryhill, Glasgow, which has just announced an initial investment of £5 million in an assembly plant for small wind turbines, which will create at least 50 high-value jobs. Scottish Enterprise and the Scottish Government have been praised for their approach in bringing in that investment ahead of other European locations that were going for that business. I also met last week the head of Ofgem in Scotland. Both meetings were incredibly interesting and have given me a real sense of how mistakes in energy policy at this time could have serious consequences for the growth of the sector as well as for the future sustainable growth of the Scottish economy. Members will recall that there was a closure announcement not that long ago in Port Dundas, with more than 200 jobs going from Diageo. That gives an idea of why I am keen to get jobs to that part of my constituency. That is my direct constituency interest, and I would like to see Gaia-Wind and others like it investing not just in Glasgow but right across Scotland. I believe that energy policy—particularly reform of the feed-in tariffs—may impact on that. Gaia-Wind produces small wind turbines that are eligible for the feed-in tariff at the level of 26.7p per kilowatt hour. There was broad political support when that was introduced in April to promote the development of microrenewables, and it has made it more economically viable for small producers, such as farmers and community initiatives, to invest their capital up front in the technology. However, I understand that there are concerns that the scheme is being highly subscribed to by larger commercial interests, particularly in solar panel electricity generation in the south of England. That is not in keeping with the policy intention to boost microrenewables production throughout the UK. David Cameron has also mentioned that in the press recently. With fixed budgets for that FIT scheme being drained, that could have access implications not just for Scotland but for other parts of the UK. I cannot comment on the matter in detail, but I have written to the Department of Energy and Climate Change for more information, saying that I believe that the administration of that scheme is a potential concern and needs to be scrutinised fully by that UK department.

I welcome that. I was about to say to the minister that I hope that the Scottish Government will work in partnership with the UK Government to achieve that outcome and to address the possibility of uneven access to the FIT scheme for microrenewables across the UK. Although I am delighted to see renewables investment in all the nations and regions of the UK, as I have just said, I want to ensure that Scottish tax pounds go to foster that market, particularly in Scotland, and that we get our appropriate share. Also, if there is any dubiety about the affordability and long-term management of the FIT scheme because of administration issues or other factors, investor confidence could drain from the scheme, which is not what we want. The sector needs certainty in relation to that. FITs for microrenewables are to be reviewed again in 2012, but the current review may impact on that. We have already heard about ROCs and a FIT subsidy for wider, larger-scale electricity investment, and there are direct links there. The FITs must be reviewed, and we hope that that review will move the situation forward. The current level of uncertainty is not helpful, which is why I have written to Chris Huhne on the matter. It seems to be sensible to look at feed-in tariffs across the sector. Another aspect of the feed-in tariff subsidy is how European law, as interpreted by the UK Government, affects feed-in tariffs in the nations and regions of the UK. For example, if a farmer or small community-based housing association wanted to build some small wind turbines to lower their carbon footprint and cut electricity bills, they could do that but would perhaps need to find grants for it. Highlands and Islands Enterprise may be in a position to provide a partial grant to help, and the Scottish Government's climate fund could perhaps provide a partial grant. Under the UK's application of European law, however, it would not then be possible to apply for a feed-in tariff. Scotland would be using its block grant to lower carbon footprints in communities, but feed-in tariffs would be squeezed out. I am not suggesting that I want individual owners of turbines to get a double subsidy, but I want to consider how feed-in tariffs are accessed across the UK and whether Scottish block grant investment could divert some of the feed-in tariff subsidy from Scotland.  Those are a couple of issues that are of interest to me—to be fair, they have only recently become of interest to me because there are 50 new jobs coming to my constituency—and, as I feel my way ahead in the dark and try to get a grasp of the subject, they are the issues that I would like to be developed and which I believe the minister should consider.

I welcome to the public gallery my constituents from Glasgow's Irish community, as well as Susan Conlon, head of the Irish consulate in Edinburgh. Scotland is rightly proud of how migration has shaped our nation, as it has shaped that of other countries, for the better. Scotland has been enriched by immigration, just as its people have enriched other countries across the globe. Indeed, homecoming Scotland in 2009 welcomed our Scottish diaspora back to our shores to celebrate that cultural heritage and identity. It is only right that Scotland pays tribute to the many races and nationalities from across the world that have made that similar contribution to Scotland. My members' business debate pays tribute to one such group, which is Scotland's Irish community. There is no typical Irish immigrant, but it would be remiss not to mention the mass immigration from Ireland during an gorta mór or the great hunger, which is better known today as the potato famine. For instance, in just 10 days in August 1847, more than 11,000 new immigrants arrived in Scotland fleeing the great famine. However, the Irish came to Scotland's shores to settle for many years before that and they still do so in modern times for a variety of reasons. Irish immigrants often provided blood, sweat and toil to help fuel the industrial revolution here. In Garngad in Glasgow, which has been renamed Royston, the area was transformed by Irish immigration. Whether it was digging the Monkland canal basin at Garngad Hill in 1790 or building the  St Roch's to Stepps railway in 1831, the impact was massive. Indeed, the area became known as little Ireland. Scots know something about culture and identity forged in adversity from our experiences in history. We all know about the thirst that Scots the world over have to preserve our culture and traditions. From Burns nights to St Andrew's days and from highland games to music and dance, there is a strong positive national identity that has been undiluted by passing generations and distance from the homeland. The Irish in Scotland are, rightly, no different. As a teenager, I played Gaelic football with a club that was formed by a proud Irish immigrant. I thank all those who were involved with the club, as that experience benefited me as a child. In the city of Glasgow, Tir Conaill Harps provide similar opportunities for youngsters today to play sports such as Gaelic football, hurling and camogie. I pay tribute to the club's work and to the work of others who do good jobs with young people, sometimes in the most deprived parts of my city. I often attend Scottish National Party meetings at St Columbkille's church hall in Rutherglen, where at the same time the David Smith School of Irish Dancing is training. I have to say that the Irish dance is often far more enjoyable than the meetings that I attend. The passion, commitment and enthusiasm of the dancers are clear. I congratulate them on their high rankings at the world championships, which were held in Glasgow last year. Such dance classes thrive across Glasgow and beyond. The thriving music scene in Scotland is also hugely enriched by our Irish communities. Many of us will enjoy this month's Celtic Connections festival in Glasgow. Irish musicians are well represented at the festival and Glasgow's Irish musicians tell me that they are keen to perform at future Celtic Connections with their distinct flavour of Irish music. I am sure that the festival organisers will want to promote that in future years. Whether it is traditional Irish sports, music, dance or important community work, Glasgow and Scotland are more vibrant, colourful and better places because of our Irish communities. We have no idea of just how many Scots of Irish descent there are in Scotland. At the last census, just under 50,000 people living in Scotland were identified as white Irish. However, Scots with an Irish heritage had no way of expressing their ethnic identity. As Scots, we should be proud of and embrace our multiple layers of identity. I am pleased to say that, for this year's census, we will have that option for the first time. For the first time ever, people will be able to express their Scottish and Irish identity in an ethnicity section, which has an Irish category. Irish groups in Scotland will  rightly campaign to raise awareness of the Irish ethnicity census question. They want to urge people to tick that box. I support that campaign and I encourage all Scots of Irish descent to tick that box with pride. I touched earlier on the history of immigrants to Scotland. History is important, but people in Scotland's Irish community are very much looking forward, as active citizens within Scotland, proud of their commitment to our nation of Scotland, but rightly unflinchingly proud of their Irish ethnicity and their roots. They are proud of their multiple layers of identity, which is as it should be. The Irish Government, even in the current financially challenging times, continues to invest in and support its diaspora right here in Scotland. It has four development officers who support projects in sport, music and dance. I thank Danny Boyle, Ciaran Kearney, Evin Downey and Patrick Callaghan for their hard work in serving the community. They are all based in Glasgow and paid for by the Irish Government. I pay tribute to the Irish Government for providing that support. I support plans by Glasgow's Irish community to establish an Irish centre in the city that would act as a hub not only for the city's Irish communities but for Scotland's Irish communities. Such a hub could have facilities for Irish sports, music, dance and a variety of other cultural activities; serve the wider community; provide real educational benefit to our schoolchildren; and be at the forefront of wider efforts to integrate the various migrant groups that now call Scotland their home. It could also be a force for good in tackling bigotry and sectarianism. Plans are at an early stage but I ask the Scottish Government to provide what support it can. I assure the minister that this is not an early bid for cash in the face of United Kingdom cuts—at least not at the moment; it might be at some point in future—but it is a genuine appeal for the Scottish Government and Glasgow City Council to meet representatives of the Irish community to find out what support can realistically be provided. In welcoming the Scottish Government's plans for a diaspora strategy, I ask that it contact the Irish Government in order to create a distinct strategy for working in partnership to support Scotland's Irish diaspora. The plans for an Irish centre could be core to such a strategy and I would be keen to be involved in that work. I could have focused in my speech on specific health needs in the Irish community, given that it has one of the highest levels of certain types of cancer of any minority ethnic group in Britain, or on the poverty that has endured over generations in some Irish communities in Scotland and, indeed, in Britain. However, those are matters for another day. Today is all about welcoming the contributions that Scotland's Irish diaspora has  made not only to Glasgow, the city that I represent, but right across Scotland, and I am proud to sponsor this evening's debate.

In relation to the aborted mass school-closure proposals in Argyll, does the cabinet secretary agree that it would have been ridiculous and untenable for any candidate in the forthcoming election in Argyll to stay quiet on such a matter, apart from the candidate from the Labour Party, who might not have wanted to draw attention to the fact that their party was responsible for the savage closure of 20 primary schools in Glasgow?

I welcome the fact that Johann Lamont has secured this members' business debate. As she mentioned, I amended her motion. Peculiarly, I amended it not by deleting a single word but by adding to it. That addition talked about progress since 2007. Whenever I have spoken about such progress, I have said that it has happened because kinship carers lobbied effectively and empowered me and other politicians to promote their message. Therefore, the credit for everything that has been delivered since 2007, whether by the Scottish Government or any other body, goes to the kinship carers who have lobbied relentlessly. There is consensus, which I welcome. A year or two ago, we had a kinship care debate that was purely party political. It turned off every kinship carer who watched it, and every party that participated in it shares the blame for its being party political. However, things have moved on. We have had a Scottish National Party Government since 2007. We have a Labour Opposition, and the Conservatives are present. I welcome the fact that Elizabeth Smith mentioned the concordat, as imperfect as it certainly is; I will talk about that. We are united across all parties and, I hope, at all levels of government on getting a better deal for kinship carers. I will give one small example of how that can happen. When I talk about what happened in Glasgow, the praise and credit do not go to the Labour Glasgow City Council or to me as an SNP MSP, but to the kinship carers for telling us to get our act together and deliver. I met Mr Purcell when he was Labour group leader. He was, then, unconvinced about kinship care payments, which it is fair to put on the record. Following that meeting and a working group, £40 per week was paid not only to looked-after children but to all kinship-care children—I say that slightly nervously, because some children have fallen through the cracks; we have to identify them and make sure that they get the money. That was an example of parties working together. I recently met David Crawford, the executive director of social care services at Glasgow City Council, and Councillor Matthew Kerr, who has taken over the social care remit from Councillor Archie Graham. We spoke about what will happen to kinship care payments, given the cuts. The first  thing they said to me was, "Bob, we know that more than £40 should be paid. We can't reach the target that should be paid, but the least we expect is some form of increase from the £40." Even in the face of cutbacks, in Glasgow, Opposition politicians and the Labour Council are working constructively together with me as the local SNP MSP. The issue was not thought of in 2007. We now have a focus of attention because kinship carers have forced all of us to get our act together. I pay tribute to those carers. The issue is not only about money. Of course, the money is important, but we are talking about equality, dignity and tackling poverty, too. The issue is also about the wider support mechanisms of local authorities and other agencies. I pay tribute to the Notre Dame Centre in the west end of Glasgow for the fantastic job that it does in taking in the vulnerable children who are looked after by kinship carers. The centre does that at a very reduced rate or no rate at all; it deals with the issues that the children present. It seems that foster carers get a first-class service for their children when compared to kinship carers. That is not equality. There is a disparity between those two sets of carers in respite care and additional support. We are all fighting for equality by raising standards. I have drawn attention to the money, but the issue goes far wider. In looking to avoid a postcode lottery, of course we have to look at the concordat, which Elizabeth Smith mentioned. The concordat has brought a focus to these issues like never before. There has been progress, but it has not happened quickly enough and it is patchy. That is why we have to come together on a cross-party basis. We need to move forward from May 2011—no matter which Government is in power. We need to stand united for kinship carers not only before the election but after it, too.

I thank Anne McLaughlin not only for securing the debate but for the tremendous work that she has done in Parliament on behalf of all Glasgow's communities, of which asylum seekers make up just one part. People who think that Anne McLaughlin focuses on just one issue do not know her constituency casework. She is a credit to this Parliament. I am not going to talk about the termination of the contract with Glasgow City Council and the letter that has been sent out, which have been well documented. Needless to say, I want to put on record that the UKBA's decision is absolutely repugnant, and was handled in a way that goes against all forms of humanity. I want to talk about the relationship between MSPs and the UKBA. I differ from Robert Brown on the issue—it is not about a bureaucratic fight between MSPs and the UKBA; it goes far beyond that. We represent those communities and individuals, and to say that it is a bureaucratic stushie misses the core point. I will give members one example. A year ago, I held a surgery specifically for the Kurdish community in Glasgow. I had made a few Kurdish friends, and I said to them, "If you've got friends, family and contacts in the Kurdish community who wouldn't normally see a councillor, an MP or an MSP, bring them along". About 30 Kurdish individuals went to that event, and we invited police officers, interpreters and people from integration services in the city. For about two to three hours after people had given their initial speeches to the asylum seekers—and to others, because the event was not only for asylum seekers—I was there writing up case notes on what had to be done in response to people's concerns about schooling, their housing situations or their asylum cases. At that point, was I supposed to say to the asylum seeker, "I'm sorry, but could you just sit at the back of the room—I'll give you the MP's name later on and they can take up the case for you"? An asylum seeker might say, "I'd like to talk to you about my asylum, but I'd also like to talk about the absolute pit that the city council or others have put me in for my accommodation." I should say that Glasgow City Council do pretty well on accommodation, but others do not. We cannot pick and choose the cases that come to us, and it is stupid, absurd and ridiculous that the UKBA forces us to do so. It is not good enough. I would gently say that some MPs are better than others at dealing with asylum seekers. I find that the most vulnerable people in society do not go to our surgeries, so we have to reach out to  them. MPs are not always particularly good at reaching out, and there are various reasons for that, but they must do better. If someone went to an MP's surgery and said, as I have heard people say, that they have experienced a very serious and distressing situation in the health service in Scotland with regard to neglect or incompetence—which has even led to fatalities in some cases, as I have heard from representations to my office—I would not feel threatened if the MP was to write to Nicola Sturgeon or the health board. I would not say, "Back off—that's devolved"; that is not how it works. It is not good enough for those vulnerable asylum seekers who come to me and tell me stories of torture, rape, exploitation and abuse, and of fearing for their lives. They are often in tears and are reaching and crying out for help, and I have to say to them, "No. Can you just stop there? That is a reserved matter." On humanity, human rights, dignity, social justice and respect—all the things that make us human, and which are why we get involved in politics in the first place—we have to say, "Sorry—that's reserved to Westminster because of some stushie with the UK Government and the UKBA". The situation is not good enough and it has to change, not for politicians or because of constitutional wrangling, but for asylum seekers. I hope that today's debate, led by Anne McLaughlin, will go some way towards changing that.

Rising fuel prices and benefit cuts are indeed two aspects of fuel poverty. However, does the minister agree that, in order to target fuel poverty, we need additional insulation measures and reduced tariffs for those in such poverty? In that respect, is he aware that the New Policy Institute report on behalf of the Energy Retail Association's home heat helpline has concluded that 400,000 households in Scotland could benefit from energy companies by up to £260, but uptake of that scheme in only 12 per cent? Does the minister agree that every member in the chamber and the energy companies themselves must do more to promote the scheme and, indeed, support the Scottish Government's excellent energy assistance package?

At least he got a referendum.

I welcome the opportunity to speak on the Property Factors (Scotland) Bill at stage 1. I thank Patricia Ferguson for introducing the bill, and I thank my fellow committee members, the clerks, and all those who gave evidence to the committee. The bill shows how members of the Scottish Parliament can work in partnership. The bill's roots lie with Gordon Jackson in the 2003 to 2007 parliamentary session. It was introduced in the current session by a Labour MSP and it has received strong cross-party support. I and a number of my Scottish National Party colleagues have been strong supporters of the bill and I hope that its general principles will be agreed to at decision time. As a fellow Glasgow MSP, I have been keen to support the bill. I and Patricia Ferguson have similar constituency concerns and case loads in relation to property factors, and it is only right that Labour and the SNP MSPs work jointly and constructively to assist their constituents in Glasgow and tackle the problems of poorly performing and, at times, downright cowboy factoring services. I commend the Evening Times and The Herald for bringing the issue into sharp focus. Their  evidence is mentioned in the committee's stage 1 report, as they "found examples of gross overcharging, allegations of intimidation and threats of bankruptcy for refusal to pay disputed bills". Their service is therefore noted this afternoon. Of course, the problem is not just a Glasgow issue. We have heard from MSPs from different parts of the country. The bill sets out to address a Scotland-wide concern. I also extend praise to the Scottish Government, which has been working with the property factors stakeholder group to achieve a national voluntary accreditation scheme. I note that work on that has been paused until the outcome of the bill is known. I hope that it will not have to continue at all: I urge the Parliament to support the statutory regulation in the bill. I am sure that the stakeholder group's work will not go to waste and that the knowledge of voluntary accreditation that was gained from the exercise will be used to inform the standards that are expected, including the code of conduct that will be made by regulation. Much of the spadework has been done. I favour statutory regulation for a number of reasons. For instance, will rogue factors actually bother to sign up to a voluntary scheme? The committee has already heard of problems in getting property landlords to sign up to a landlord registration scheme. That scheme is compulsory, but because of significant issues in prosecutions only one unregistered landlord has ever been successfully prosecuted. If we cannot get cowboy landlords to register for a compulsory registration scheme, what chance would we have of getting rogue factors to join a voluntary accreditation scheme? The case has been made for compulsory accreditation and I believe that it would be beneficial to place registration on a statutory footing. There are issues in the bill, and I hope that the committee, including me, as a member, has been constructive in its scrutiny. For example, there are unclear areas around the £5,000 that an unregistered factor would be fined and the enforcement provisions related to that. We comment on that in the committee report. In the financial memorandum, Patricia Ferguson rightly acknowledges that precise costs cannot currently be quantified, as the scheme will be demand led. That is not a problem, but it is one difficulty in assessing accurately the assumptions in the financial memorandum. There are three groups of people who use factors. We are here to defend the home owners who have been wronged, given a poor service or exploited by factors. The second group is those who are unable to pay because of financial  circumstances and the third group, which we must acknowledge, are the unwilling payers who will use any mechanism presented to them to drag out and resist paying because they just do not want to pay. Whether we go for a home owner housing panel or an ombudsman approach, that group will be a difficulty, and the cost assumptions will become difficult for whichever scheme we go for. It is fair to acknowledge that in today's debate. The bill is about driving change forward, and the best way to drive change is to make it easier for people to switch their factors. If the industry knows that people have the opportunity to switch, it will up its game. We have acknowledged in the committee report that it is not easy to switch factors. We should not pretend that those who need to switch factors have the capacity to do it: a lot of vulnerable home owners are too busy making ends meet to worry about switching factor. We must make switching easier. I will finish by talking about the unintended consequences of deregistration. Paul Martin's point was well made that we plan for deregistration in other fields such as dentistry—that was the example that was given. The fact that there will be difficulties does not mean that we should not use the power. Indeed, it is essential to have it. However, regardless of how deregistration or other policing mechanisms work, I ask that, if the bill is passed, the next Government conducts an early review to see how it is bedding in. That will be necessary, and amendments may be needed at that stage. I will support the bill and I pay tribute to Patricia Ferguson for introducing it.

To ask the Scottish Government how the money for preventive treatment announced for national health service boards in the draft budget will help support Glasgow City Council in looking after vulnerable citizens. (S3O-12218)

Does the minister agree that it will be vital in Glasgow for the NHS and the local authority to work closely together? That has not always been easy, given the problems that have existed with the community health and care partnerships. Will she encourage those bodies to work as closely together as possible and to ensure that the voluntary sector has a role in the delivery of services in the community, to promote preventive health spend?

I apologise for interrupting Pauline McNeill. I was going to intervene at the start of her speech, when she said something that I agree with, but I did not want to interrupt her right at the start. She said that this Parliament should take a view on the matter. I really respect the fact that Labour is contributing to tonight's debate. I notice that Bill Butler and a few other Labour members were in for Jamie Hepburn's opening speech. I gently ask Pauline McNeill whether she agrees that it is a real shame and disappointment that no Liberal Democrat or Conservative members have contributed or stayed to hear the opening speeches.

Labour's amendment yesterday afternoon on the Scottish variable rate and its motion today are hardly Parliament's finest moments—certainly not since 2007, when I entered this place. Yesterday's overegged amendment, which used expressions such as "abuse of power", was an attempt by Labour to play the man and score party-political points ahead of an election. I accept that some sincere speeches—but only one or two—were made in yesterday's debate. I single out Patrick Harvie, who attempted to play the ball and who focused on process. This morning, Johann Lamont has promised consensus and no yah-boo politics. That is not achieved by placing the word "corrosive" at the heart of the motion, which makes it impossible for the party of government to support. That is seeking not consensus but division. Johann Lamont forged more consensus across the chamber by using phrases in her speech such as "dereliction of duty". If that is an example of Labour in Scotland seeking consensus, let us hope that it is never placed in charge of delicate,  high-level, international diplomacy—I can see that that would result in mushroom clouds around the world. In these unprecedented financial times, as the minority SNP Government seeks to steer the 2011-12 budget through Scotland's Parliament, it is simply not good enough for Labour to oppose for opposition's sake. Labour's policy ideas and budget suggestions are non-existent. Labour is running on empty. The three-year budget demand is a fig leaf to hide Labour's inadequacies. No one denies that there are strong merits in having three-year budgets. However, only outlines would be given, because the Parliament only ever sets one budget, one year at a time, as we have heard. It has been said that the voluntary sector wants figures for three years. That sector receives most of its work via local authorities. It wants indicative figures for three years because it hopes that councils will give it more security of funding, and I understand that. However, voluntary sector representatives also raised many other issues with the Local Government and Communities Committee yesterday. They wanted to know whether a £7.15 living wage in the public sector would have an impact on the voluntary sector. They wanted to understand better whether if councils had no compulsory redundancies, that would keep more work in-house in local authorities and whether, as budgets were squeezed, work would be brought back in-house to avoid compulsory redundancies. They wanted to know how they might benefit from further challenge funding that was similar to the £70 million that the NHS will deploy in social care, to promote preventative spend. A dynamic landscape is at play in challenging times. We have savage UK cuts, the onset of a living wage, redundancy issues in councils, shared budgets and a massive drive towards shared services in councils. Yesterday, the voluntary sector representatives also mentioned a culture of resistance in some quarters of the public sector.

One of the two of us has certainly scored an own goal. In its budget, the Government is protecting free personal care and, in the previous budget, it increased funding for free personal care. For all the reasons that I have given and because of the dynamic situation that local  authorities, all other public bodies and the voluntary sector face, the Scottish Government has established the Christie commission, which will attempt to achieve joined-up thinking in sectoral reform. That reform will not be dictated top down from the Scottish Government or via local institutional self-interest but will come from an independent review that is headed by a well-respected public figure. It would be crazy to give a three-year indicative spend for budget lines now when how budget lines are drawn up and formulated and the purposes to which they are directed might change radically within a year. Structures might change. The Scottish Government does not intend to tie the Christie commission's hands. Reform and new ideas are needed. We will move on to three-year budgets after the next election. I will bring the Parliament back to the real world and the commitments that the Government has made to help the Scottish economy. When I went out for dinner last night to a little restaurant called Al Dente in Easter Road, I met a gentleman called Graziano, who is the restaurant's owner. He told me that if it had not been for the small business bonus scheme, he would not have been able to employ a waiter or to keep his business going. That is real help in difficult times from another commitment in the budget—another commitment that the Labour Party has refused to back in previous budgets. In hard times, when radical change and difficult decisions are needed, John Swinney is the man for the job and the SNP Government is the team for the job. I will back John Swinney's amendment this afternoon.

Will the member give way?

Mr Purvis appears to be suggesting that if the motion is carried, it should somehow be binding on—

If Mr Rumbles does not mind—more rumbling from Rumbles. Mr Purvis is saying that that should be binding on the chamber. Johann Lamont said something very similar. Of course, technically, it would not be binding. The last time that the chamber tried to put a financially binding commitment on the Government involved the Edinburgh trams. Does Mr Purvis believe that they have been a success?

I normally enjoy listening to Mr Brown, whether or not I agree with him, but I thought that his speech was, by his standards, quite poor. Duncan McNeil gave a well balanced and considered speech on behalf of the Local Government and Communities Committee. I might come back to it later. This Parliament has taken steps to ensure that lessons were learned from the organisation of the May 2007 Scottish Parliament elections. As we have heard, the Local Government and Communities Committee, on which I sit, conducted an inquiry into those elections and took extensive evidence on the matter, including from Professor Ron Gould, who undertook the Electoral Commission's inquiry into the elections. The Local Government and Communities Committee and Ron Gould recommended that there be a decoupling of the Scottish Parliament and local government elections. That recommendation was made for a number of reasons, not least of which was the need to ensure that the count would run as smoothly as possible and that there would be less confusion for voters when casting their votes. There were other reasons, of course. We must ensure that there is parity of esteem with regard to the various sets of elections that we have in Scotland. There was a feeling that the council elections were overshadowed by the fact that the Scottish Parliament elections were held on the same day. It is probable that a significant section of the electorate voted for a party based on who they wanted to form the next Scottish Government and that they did so not only when they voted in the Scottish Parliament elections, but when they voted in the council elections. In other words, for some, there might have been little consideration of the issues in the council elections because the understandably intense media focus on the Scottish Parliament elections squeezed out any meaningful debate on the various merits of individual council candidates or the track record of council administrations across the country. That is why the Scottish Government, supported by the Parliament, decoupled those elections. The Parliament and its committees united to act in the best interests of running our democratic process as effectively as possible. I emphasise that unity because, although members of the Parliament have very different visions of how to take forward democracy in Scotland, following the 2007 elections we managed to work together, consider the evidence base and act to find a Scottish  solution to the problems that existed at that point. Decoupling was an essential part of that approach. However, at a stroke, the UK Con-Dem Government has ridden roughshod over that Scottish democracy. To have a UK referendum on electoral reform on the same day as Scotland's elections to its national Parliament is a gross insult to Scotland's re-emerging democracy and is, in effect, an attempt to marginalise not only the democratically elected Parliament of Scotland, but the Assemblies of Wales and Northern Ireland, which will also hold their elections on that day. It is clear that the UK media will hook on to and provide wall-to-wall coverage of the UK AV referendum. Indeed, we have only to look at the leaders' debates during the recent UK election, in which questions and answers routinely focused on day-to-day devolved issues that related only to England. Another example is the recent edition of "Question Time" to which Anne McLaughlin referred. The chair, David Dimbleby, ruled out of order a discussion on the construction sector in Scotland because that area is devolved to the Scottish Parliament. However, the following week the same Mr Dimbleby allowed an extensive discussion on tuition fees in England, despite the programme being broadcast throughout the UK. We cannot have confidence that our UK broadcast media will give due respect to the Scottish elections, and the Conservatives and Lib Dems cannot escape from that issue, much as they try. Now we are to hold an AV referendum that applies across the UK on the same day as Scotland's national elections. I do not think that any Conservative or Lib Dem member really believes that the electorate will be fully informed as a result of the clash; I just do not buy the argument. I suspect that the Lib Dems and the Conservatives very much hope that the AV elections will overshadow the Scottish elections, as they know that they cannot put up with the scrutiny that they will face in the latter.

I am pretty sure that I laid those out quite clearly. The Electoral Commission thinks that it can meet the challenges of the election process—in other words, putting a cross on a ballot paper—which the Lib Dems and Conservatives have patronised members in the chamber by trying to point out. The issue, however, is that people need to understand the consequence of the cross that  they put on the ballot paper and what it means for their country.

That point is well made. It is worth pointing out that the Electoral Commission believes that it can get the process right, but is not sure whether it can get the message right. In the previous Scottish elections it thought that it could get everything right, and nothing went right. That is an important point. I will address the UK Government's lack of consultation of this Parliament, its committees and the Scottish people. It is an absolute farce and shows disrespect to our nation—not to our Parliament or its committees, but to the Scottish people. I give a tiny bit of credit to the Scottish Affairs Committee, which did its best at the last minute to come and speak to the Local Government and Communities Committee and get our views, despite the UK Government not caring one jot what those views were. Things must change, and quickly. We have heard that Ron Gould considered that the voter at the previous Scottish elections was treated as an afterthought. For next year's elections, the voter has not been considered at all. I believe that the electoral management board that will be set up in Scotland this year will eventually take power over European, UK, Scottish and local elections, and it will be accountable to this Parliament on an annual basis. My final plea is for some parliamentary committee—perhaps the Local Government and Communities Committee—to have a remit to scrutinise all elections in which the Scottish voter participates, to ensure that we get it right for the voters of Scotland. One thing is for sure: the Lib Dems and Conservatives will get it wrong every time.

I welcome the abolition of car parking charges at national health service hospitals. Will the cabinet secretary reassure me that we will not return to the provisions that the previous Labour and Lib Dem Executive laid, under which nurses would have paid £12 a day to park at hospitals?

To ask the Scottish Executive what it considers will be the impact on local authorities of the increase in the interest rate of the Public Works Loan Board. (S3O-11928)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that answer. I know that alarm bells are ringing across Scotland regarding the uplift in the interest rates of the Public Works Loan Board, which amounts to a 500 per cent increase. In Dundee alone, that will cost £400,000 next year. I have written to Glasgow City Council in the area that I represent to see what the burden will be on it and what the further constraints will be going forward. Will the cabinet secretary make joint representations along with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities to the UK Government to ask it to think again? My reading of the situation is that making public spending more expensive  pushes councils to the more expensive private financiers. We saw how that ended—it was called the private finance initiative.

The cabinet secretary may know that I have met the SPT subway delivery modernisation team and that I have also met the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change, Stewart Stevenson, to push forward subway modernisation. That was in August. At that time, no detailed business plan or detailed technical and financial assumptions were coming to the Scottish Government from SPT to ask for the relevant financial support. Can the cabinet secretary give me an update? I am worried about the fantastic subway delivery modernisation team having its ambition to modernise the subway coloured by the poor corporate governance of SPT at large.

I continue in the same vein, by thanking our committee's clerks and researchers, who have done a sterling job in helping us to navigate our way through the bill. The Government civil servants have been excellent, too, in ensuring that we have had the maximum amount of information to allow us to scrutinise the bill. Both groups have done a fantastic job. In the small amount of time that I have, I will quickly set the scene on affordable housing in Scotland. I remind the chamber that 2,609 more affordable houses were built in Scotland in 2009-10 than in 2006-07. That was the result not of a magic wand approach by the Scottish Government, but of sheer investment—£1.7 billion was provided, which represented a 19 per cent increase. To that can be added the capital acceleration from 2010-11. I mention that because we know that capital investment is starting to dry up because of cuts by the UK Government in the amount of spending for Scotland. That is why reform of the right to buy is important. The Scottish Government is to invest £80 million in council housing. Up to 3,500 new council houses will be commenced in this session, not just because of Scottish Government investment, but because of reform of the right to buy. Only six new council houses were built under the previous Labour-Lib Dim—sorry, Lib Dem; although perhaps I was right the first time—Executive. The springboard for the upsurge in that number was not just the Scottish Government's financial commitment; it was the clear signposting in the SNP manifesto of the ending of the right to buy for new-build houses, which I believe will become increasingly important as we navigate our way through UK Tory spending cuts.  That is important because local authorities can deal with a subsidy of around £20,000 to £25,000 in terms of a housing association grant subsidy. The reason for that is that they bring additional things to the table such as land and other assets that housing associations sometimes do not have. They would not be willing to use those assets were it not for the reform of the right to buy. I think that that is a core element of what we have in front of us, and I am proud to say that we are part of that. I, too, reject the negative, dogmatic ideology of the Conservatives on the right to buy. The social housing charter is quite a serious issue—perhaps Mr Tolson should stop laughing—as it looks at the wider role and activities of the housing associations, local authorities and landlords and praises them for how they benefit the amenity and environmental wellbeing of local areas and for how they participate in their regeneration. Many a housing association has done that in the past, but has not always received the credit for it. I will mention one local housing association, with which I know that Patricia Ferguson also has a relationship. Cadder Housing Association has intervened to help a local community to keep its community centre, which was threatened with closure. One of the issues that Cadder raised with me was that it has to make sure that it concentrates on its core business of providing affordable housing. Under the social housing charter and the wider role, the housing association will be able to be assessed and given credit for its positive community activity. It is important to mention the benefit cuts. This morning, the Local Government and Communities Committee heard that some local authorities could be down by 25 per cent in housing benefit revenue and 10 per cent in council tax benefit revenue because of the Tory cuts over the next three or four years. That is a heavy impact indeed, and I am delighted that this Government and most parties in the chamber are rallying to protect social housing. That is what the bill does, and I am delighted to be able to support it at stage 3.

The member is quite right in what he says about resources and, of course, we always need more, but are the resources that are spent at the local level always being spent wisely? Surely putting carers at the heart of how we structure services, including respite care, would be a step forward in ensuring that we get the right services at the local level? Irrespective of the cash input—and we want more—we must ensure that services are designed with the carer and not the civil servant in mind.

Over the years, we have gradually continued to get a better picture of the job that unpaid carers do in Scotland, and of the scale of that job, and we continue to increase the recognition that we give them. That is something on which there has been cross-party support over the years—even though I joined the Parliament only in 2007, I am conscious that that has been the case since 1999, and I am glad that it continues today. With pressures on the public purse like never before, we must be careful not to allow short-term thinking to intrude on our political decisions in relation to care. We need a long-term strategy that will support those remarkable people now and in the future. Estimates suggest that as many as one in eight of the population care for someone on a voluntary basis and that there are more than 66,000 unpaid carers in Glasgow, the area that I represent. Those figures are likely to rocket in the years ahead, and it is predicted that as many as 1 million people in Scotland will be performing a  caring role by 2037. Such statistics show why it is important that we get this right for the long term. There is little dispute that we have an aging population, and I have already given an idea of the projections associated with that. A further projection is that there will be a 144 per cent increase by 2031 in the number of people who are aged 85 or over. Where possible, we want to keep people at home and in the community, and we will need unpaid carers to help in that regard. That means that we have to take action now, and the strategy that is set out in the "Caring Together" document outlines the thinking and plans in that regard of the Scottish Government and COSLA up to 2015. I think that we are on the right track and are moving forward in relation to that. I also hope that we will gain cross-party support in opposing some of the more harmful aspects of the UK Government's cuts, which could jeopardise carers. I say that not to make a party-political point. If we are to support carers, we have to consider all the aspects that affect them. Earlier this month, even before the spending review was announced, the think tank, Demos, claimed that disabled people and carers could lose up to £9.2 billion by 2015 due to the Conservative and Liberal Democrat UK Government linking benefits to the consumer prices index rather than the retail prices index. It also said that families with disabled children in which one of the adults is also disabled and is cared for by their partner could lose up to £3,000. There are hidden dangers in such proposals, and the Scottish Parliament does not necessarily have the power to protect carers in that regard. I will not say more about the UK situation, as I want to forge cross-party support, but we have to be aware of where all of the balls are on the pool table when we take a shot to help carers. We cannot miss that out. I want to spend the rest of my speech talking about kinship carers, which is a subject that is close to my heart. I am sure that Mary Scanlon will gladly recognise that kinship carers got no structured formal payments before May 2007 and will come on board with the structure that is now in place. That structure has to be improved and made more sophisticated. I am delighted to say to Ms Scanlon that the Labour Party is moving forward in a spirit of consensus in relation to kinship care. At lunch time, I was at an event with Johann Lamont and neither of us was trying to blame the other for having a worse record in relation to kinship care. Instead, we were trying to find solutions that can be used to take forward the situation. One such solution was getting the UK Government on board in relation to kinship care.

I thank Cathy Jamieson for her comment but, although that is the outcome at the local level, the premise is completely inaccurate. Way before the kinship care commitment that the Scottish National Party Government made in May 2007, local authorities could use their discretion to pay any kinship carer a sum up to the foster carers allowance. They did so, and some continue to do so. It is important to get more sophisticated in our approach to the issue of formal and informal kinship care payments. New permanence orders are now in place in relation to kinship care, which have helped. I know that Adam Ingram, the Minister for Children and Early Years, has pushed that forward. The orders are a useful intervention, which shows how we are working together on all aspects of care. The strategy talks about young carers. A lot of the kids who receive kinship care used to be young carers of drug addicts, alcoholics or parents who were in and out of prison. The kinship care commitment is about taking those kids away from situations where they are the carers to a safe environment where they are cared for, so that they can enjoy their younger years. I am glad that we have cross-party support for the strategy.

The motion wants to take us to a point at which a university education is the preserve of the well-off more than it currently is and at which the debt burden on graduates threatens to stall further our younger generation's prosperity. I welcome the Conservatives' debate, as it gives us the opportunity to reject such prospects. With an election year on the way, we all need to be frank about where we stand, so that it is easier for electors to make conclusions about their decisions. I stand against a graduate tax and tuition fees, be they up front or otherwise.

I would like to make progress, Mr Henry. To varying degrees, I am pleased by the Labour and Lib Dem amendments—if not by the tone of Labour members' speeches, unfortunately. I am grateful for the amendments. However, the SNP is the only party in the Parliament that has consistently refused to entertain the introduction of tuition fees, and we have rejected a graduate tax. That is where I stand now. I take a principled stance that is backed with strong arguments. The Labour Party opposed fees back in 1997, but it went on to introduce them. As we have heard, the Tories opposed fees and voted against top-up fees in 2004. We are having the debate today because the Tories have switched sides and seem to have the convert's zeal. The Lib Dems in Scotland opposed fees until their coalition with Labour in 1999. I will not reopen the debate about whether a fee at the point of exit from higher education ceases to be a fee. I hope that we have moved on from such debates and that the Lib Dems in Scotland are coming on board with the SNP in abolishing—as we have done—the £2,000-plus tuition fees.

I suspect that we might join the dots differently, but I genuinely want to agree with the consensus today on how we move forward together rather than to discuss various interpretations of history. I am grateful for the Lib Dem amendment. I look at how our tax pounds are spent and how our oil wealth is squandered and I despair when the chronic waste in the system is mistaken for value and when education is so undervalued that it is mistaken for waste. The Tories have come to the chamber to call for "a graduate contribution toward the cost of a university education". It is a contribution to society to spend four or five years without a full wage and to leave university with significant debt but with a skills base that will benefit our country in the longer term. Let us be clear—the Tories are not asking for a contribution; they want to squeeze harder young people who are already squeezed financially.

A country raises income by raising taxes and not by targeting one sector of society, such as our students, so I reject what Elizabeth Smith says.

I apologise, but I will run out of time if I give way. I could not oppose more the Conservatives' vision for Scotland's future. In that future, education would not be valued. I want an education system in which opportunities abound and in which people are not crippled by debt. This year, more than 17 per cent of non-European Union undergraduate applicants to UK universities chose Scotland as their destination. Progress has been made and we should not play down the Scottish higher education sector's contribution to the UK and beyond. I will paint a picture that I see of Scottish society. I do not believe that students should pay for higher education via a graduate tax, just as I do not believe that ill people should pay for our national health service. I do not believe that parents should have to pay for all child care responsibilities—that would be wrong, but that is the Tory logic. I do not believe that communities in deprived areas should have to pay for policing those areas—that would be wrong. As soon as we start to pick one strand of society and tell it, "You pay for that—you've got your higher education," we are only a short step from saying to mothers, "You pay for your child care"; from saying to parents, "You pay for secondary school education"; or from saying to the ill, "You pay for hospitals." That is the situation in the States, but this country rejects that. I have two words: progressive taxation. I wish that we in this place had the powers to fund higher education properly. We need independence for that. We are short of those powers, but we must still fund higher education. Our SNP Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning will produce a green paper on whether we can square that circle, short of independence. Our students deserve better, but the constitutional settlement denies them that opportunity.

As an MSP for the Glasgow region, I have a long-standing interest in the treatment of drug addiction. The Maryhill area in which I live has long been associated with some of the worst heroin addiction rates in the country. If there was an easy way to solve the drugs problem, we have certainly had enough time to find it. There is no easy solution. There have been many initiatives in the past, but assessing whether they have had any impact is not always straightforward given that we will never know just how much better or worse the national drug problem would have been if those initiatives had not taken place. It is notoriously difficult to quantify the benefit of any individual initiative. I accept with a heavy dose of realism that many countries have similar issues with addiction. However, our problem in Scotland is unacceptable to us and we must persist with action to tackle the blight of drugs. Our collective desire should be to reduce the blight of drugs on our communities to a  significantly lower level than we have at present and to do so at a rate that has never previously been achieved. We cannot sit and watch as the volume of drug-related crime and mortality and the range of social ills that derive from problem drug use continue to increase in the long term at enormous social and economic cost to us all. That the problem affects everyone in Scotland at some level is in no doubt. Our hearts go out to the many families who have been directly affected by drug use—I have worked with many of them in the constituency and the communities that I serve—but let us also remember that the financial burden to Scottish society is estimated at an overwhelming £3.5 billion per annum. That is the cost of dealing with drug addiction. Any strategy to attack the drugs issue must also have at its heart the financial implications for citizens, and that requires a long-term financial commitment from the Government to reduce the ludicrous cost to our nation. We need to think of spending on addiction services as a financial investment as well as a social and moral duty. On that basis, I ask that, in the national interest, policy makers from all our parties consider the financial implications of our nation's drug problem. I contend that, even as we face unprecedented cuts in public spending, we must do all that we can to ensure that, where possible, long-term investment in addiction services is increased in line with need. That is a difficult challenge but one that we must strive to meet where possible. We also need to consider how the money is spent and how we can provide services as efficiently as possible. Many people believe that the pursuit solely of a harm reduction approach merely fosters a drug dependency culture and that the road to recovery model is long overdue. I agree. The Government has taken a bold lead in moving to recovery-based interventions. We have set the tone on a policy level, but far more remains to be done. In financial terms, there has been a 20 per cent increase over three years in the allocation to health boards for front-line drugs services but, more important, the Government has initiated the structures that we hope will deliver more effective treatment based on the underlying philosophy that drug addicts can completely recover from addiction and live rewarding lives without drugs. We must ensure that there is clinician and local provider buy-in to the road to recovery model—that is essential—and that no part of the country persists with a one-club strategy of harm reduction only. Addicts can get clean and addicts do stay clean. The Government is well on the way to achieving the self-imposed target of 90 per cent of addicts who require treatment being referred to an appropriate service within three weeks. Waiting  times are down, but I accept that there is a need to look beyond the statistics and examine the quality of the treatment that addicts receive. I would like us to develop further the process of drug recovery treatment in our prisons. I know that some of the amendments cover that. The scale of the problem in prisons is clear. I have spoken to experts in the addiction field who are keen to look at the procedures for onward referral outwith the prison service, on release, and throughcare and continued support. We must strive to do better in that area. I am sure that the Government will take that on board and look for more progressive models to enable us to do that. I have spoken to residential rehabilitation providers who have often, because of a lack of beds, had to turn away addicts whom their services would have suited. Turning away a cry for help can mean the difference, literally, between life and death. We must monitor how we use our resources to achieve positive outcomes for individuals and rebuild their lives. I want there to be adequate provision for anyone who takes the bold move to come off drugs. We need to think of the cost of treating the addict versus the cost to society of not doing so. Specific treatments for addictions remain controversial and subject to a never-ending debate, but members should unite and send our best wishes to those who seek answers on our behalf. I am sure that we will follow with interest the outcome of the discussions involving the Scottish Drugs Recovery Consortium and its contribution to a recovery-based strategy, which we all support. I want to use my final moments to talk about the realise community project, which was a local drugs project in the Maryhill area of Glasgow. It was close to me and my heart, but it folded recently. It put at its centre employability, pre-employability and productive things for recovering addicts to do in their lives, and gave a huge amount of added value at very limited cost to the taxpayer. It got adult learners to go to community-based education and helped to get them clean and to sustain them in being clean. There were positive throughputs to further and higher education destinations. People rebuilt their lives. I am talking about the voluntary sector making achievements at low cost. Unfortunately, the organisation is no longer with us. I ask all local authorities and public providers to think about using the voluntary sector more appropriately so that high outcomes are achieved for small costs. I will support the amendments this evening.

The member says that I am going to die—later, I hope, not sooner. I thank him for that timely reminder. My intervention is about those who die not at home but overseas. I am not an expert on the bill, but I look forward to considering it in detail. I am keen that more work is done in Scotland on the number of Scots who die overseas. We need more statistical information on the subject. Also, and more important, we need to look into how the Scottish and UK authorities can better support the relatives of Scots who die  overseas. Perhaps there is scope in the bill to consider that in more detail.

The Scottish Government's legislative programme for 2010-11 is a responsible programme in challenging times, offering positive social change and real hope for the future. I draw the chamber's attention to the forthcoming private rented housing bill, which demonstrates clearly that the Scottish Government is rolling up its sleeves, getting on with the core business of government and making changes for the benefit of all society. I look forward to proposals to tackle slum, rogue and unscrupulous landlords—a systematic approach to helping communities such as Govanhill in Glasgow, which has suffered more than most from landlords exploiting both pre-existing and new immigrant communities in the area. We need the powers to deal with those problems; I believe that the bill will provide them. As with the social rented sector, the private rented sector will have nothing to fear from tough regulation. It is time for rogue landlords to shape up or ship out. Indeed, I say to those rogue landlords who are not fit and proper individuals or who have links with organised crime that this Government and Parliament will come after them. On Scotland's constitutional future and the proposed referendum bill, which a number of members have raised this afternoon, I have to say that the SNP has never tried to force its views or opinions on the Scottish people. Instead, we have always tried by the weight of our arguments to  persuade the Scottish people that independence is a key aspect of taking our nation forward in a positive way and for the benefit of all society. That is what the referendum bill is—and still is—about. Clearly, and understandably, the Government would want to put the bill before this Parliament when it would be most likely to succeed but, given the Labour Party's chaotic and shambolic flip-flopping on the independence referendum issue, it has not always been clear when that best moment might be.

First, internal meetings are just that—internal—and what happens in them should stay private. Secondly, I think that it is the member who is lukewarm about giving independence—or, in fact, any more powers—to the Scottish people. That she would deny them their freedom is something that she will have to answer for at the ballot box. In these last few months before the 2011 Scottish elections, the unionist parties' views on the referendum bill have become increasingly entrenched. That has left the Scottish Government with a choice: either to put a referendum bill to our Parliament now in the absolute certainty that the old British establishment parties will kill it off, or to appeal over the heads of those self-serving and self-interested establishment parties directly to the Scottish people.

I am delighted that Hugh Henry has said that because it shows the Labour Party's farcically ideologically moribund nature. I have news for him: there are people who vote for the Labour Party—and indeed for the Conservative party—who believe in Scottish independence. However, only one party is offering independence: the Scottish National Party. The Labour Party might be a single-issue party, but we govern for all the Scottish people. Why is Labour so afraid that it will deny the Scottish people their choice?

No. I do not think that the member would have very much to say. We could, of course, flip the whole argument around and say that we should present the referendum bill to the chamber now and let the UK parties vote it down.

I have some sympathy for such an approach, because it would demonstrate how undemocratic and self-interested those unionist parties are. Indeed, the British heckling that I am hearing this afternoon just sums up the argument. Those parties would have criticised our decision to present the bill to Parliament and they criticised our decision not to do so. For them, there is only self-interest; they have no principles and no ideology. Either way, there will be no independence referendum before the 2011 elections because of the Labour Party, the Liberal Democrats and the Conservative party—in other words, the British parties—which do not support a referendum for the Scottish people or any move to give them a choice.

I will take no lectures from British parties that are standing in the way of giving the Scottish people more powers—with the exception, of course, of the powers that those parties want. The Calman powers could, in the face of other British cuts, cost the Scottish people up to £1 billion per annum. We in the SNP want more powers for Scotland. We want to give Scotland the opportunity to have more powers. We prefer independence, but we want to give the Scottish people the choice. For the next year, we will provide responsible government for the people of Scotland in challenging times. In May 2011, we will go to the Scottish people for a brighter future. The old establishment British parties can hang their heads in shame. We will deliver more powers, and we will deliver independence for the Scottish people.

I begin by thanking my fellow committee members for the robust scrutiny that we carried out in preparing our stage 1 report, and by thanking the committee clerks and researchers for the excellent support that we received from them. Our convener, Duncan McNeil, mentioned that, and also the constructive way in which the Scottish Government and those who gave evidence to the committee engaged with us. During our evidence-taking sessions, it quickly became clear that there is almost overwhelming support for reform of the right to buy. There is support for the right to be ended for new tenants and for existing tenants who choose to enter new- build properties. Some people wish to go further, but the committee believes that the proposed changes represent a balanced approach to reform. The social experiment of the Thatcher Government's right-to-buy reforms in the 1980s undoubtedly benefited some—I do not deny that. However, I believe that they fundamentally undermined social housing at its core. Despite that, the sector is starting to drive forward positively once again. I pay tribute to local authorities and housing associations, which are often the main target of frustrated tenants who have struggled to get suitable accommodation, often because of the right to buy. Councils and housing associations have continued to do all that they can to support social housing in our communities. There is no better example of that than the new generation of council houses in Scotland. There will be about 3,000 new council houses in Scotland under the Scottish Government. Under the previous Scottish Executive, I believe that there were about six. The rebirth of council houses in Scotland is clearly something for which the Scottish Government should be thanked. The proposed reform of the right to buy has clearly been a major incentive in achieving that goal. In the 1980s, the right to buy changed social housing from being a housing option of first choice for many people to being a housing option of last resort. I am proud that such dogma has finally been ended. The right-to-buy reforms pushed a "home ownership at all costs" dogma through Scottish society and helped to fuel an unsustainable housing market, from which we are only now reaping the whirlwind.

Rent levels in the social rented sector are kept under constant review. The member would be better to focus on the housing benefit reforms of the Conservative and Liberal Democrat Government at the UK level, which will be deeply worrying for many vulnerable people in the social rented sector. For every house that is sold under the right to buy, housing debt of about £7,000 remains. That must be serviced by rental income from the remaining tenants, who are often in the most challenging accommodation to repair and sustain.  That is a challenge, and it is unfair to those who did not buy houses under the right to buy. It is a denial of choice for them. I turn to another aspect of the right to buy. Understandably, the Housing (Scotland) Bill takes into consideration those who have been forced to leave their homes due to demolition works. In Glasgow, there are significant numbers of them. Many of those tenants will move to new-build houses, and in those circumstances they will retain the right to buy. I ask the minister to review that, because it is possible that the record levels of investment that the Scottish Government is giving Glasgow for new-build social housing might not sustain the social housing legacy that they should provide. Ultimately, the money could subsidise a new generation of high-quality social rented houses that would be lost under the right to buy. I ask the minister to reflect on the matter and consider it further. The provisions on tackling rogue landlords have also received much attention. More powers are needed to tackle such landlords effectively. The private sector housing bill that will be introduced in the autumn will no doubt make a significant contribution in that respect, but existing powers are not being exercised. It is important to ask why that is the case. For instance, to date there has been no criminal conviction of a rogue landlord who has failed to register and meet the standards that are required in the landlord registration schemes that councils currently operate. The fine at the court's disposal is £5,000. Under the bill, fines will increase to £20,000, but the size of the fine is irrelevant if there are never any prosecutions. Would a £100,000 fine make any difference if there is no enforcement? It is clear that we need to tackle that issue. I suspect that a local authority would have to spend considerable time and effort and make a considerable financial commitment to pursue and achieve a conviction, and a conviction in any criminal matter is not a foregone conclusion. However, any fine that a court imposed would not be passed to the local authority; rather, it would go to the UK Exchequer. The system should be reformed. Money that is raised through criminal fines that courts have imposed on rogue landlords should be used to support local authorities to monitor and regulate the private housing sector. In increasingly challenging financial times, we must find ways of supporting councils to meet their responsibilities. Allowing them to retain court fines would be a strong incentive and would provide such support. There would be zero cost to the UK Exchequer. I have written to our new Secretary of State for Scotland, Michael Moore, to ask him to back my calls for that money to be retained by Scottish local authorities for enforcement in private  housing. That would cost the UK Government nothing. I commend the principles behind the bill and hope that it will be supported in the stage 1 vote.

Will the member give way?

As a resident of and frequent commuter in Glasgow, I begin by saying how much I value the Glasgow subway. The subway is an asset not just to our city's citizens, but to the many visitors who come to Glasgow from other Scottish local authorities for shopping or socialising, for our museums and parks, for architecture or for our range of festivals. The subway is a vital resource in ferrying not just Glaswegians, but fellow Scots across our city. Without it, both Glasgow and Scotland would be worse off, not just because of traffic and transport problems, but from an environmental perspective. There would be a significant impact on the quality of life for many people. There is also a thriving and growing tourism and conference market in Glasgow, which benefits the whole of Scotland and relies on Glasgow's subway. The subway's importance is clear. However, more than 100 years on from its birth and around 30 years on from its previous modernisation, it is in need of some care and attention, and of some significant investment.  I was recently fortunate enough to take a tour of the subway tunnels from SPT, so at around midnight I was walking underneath the city, from Cowcaddens through to Buchanan Street and on towards St Enoch's. I was shown the challenges that the stresses and strains of near constant usage and old age present to Glasgow's subway. Along with my colleague Anne McLaughlin, I met one of the nightshift teams that work unseen under the city's streets to ensure that the subway can operate the next day. They do a fantastic job as they attempt to battle constantly against corrosion, to replace existing parts and to battle the effects of severe water penetration in certain parts of the tunnels. Looking at the challenges that face Glasgow's subway in the years ahead, I have to say that the situation provides a wake-up call for those who have so forcefully called for the Glasgow airport rail link to be reinstated. GARL was desirable—I said that it was a desirable project—but it was a non-essential addition to the west of Scotland's infrastructure. Let me be clear that the difference between the two is that Glasgow's subway is a vital and essential part of existing infrastructure. With GARL we cannot miss what we never had, but in the case of the subway we must value and invest in what we already have in order to secure it for future generations. That is the core of the Glasgow subway issue. When I met senior officials to discuss the challenges and opportunities of subway modernisation, I met committed and passionate people. I have no reason to doubt their ability or their competence but, as it is part of the SPT family, I would not want the subway modernisation project to be tarnished with the persistent and serious concerns that exist over the culture and governance at the very top of SPT. I would clearly need significant reassurances that any public money that is spent during a period of public spending cuts that are unprecedented in modern times was being well used. As a Glasgow MSP I must say that there is a lingering uncertainty and doubt over the culture that existed, and may still exist, within SPT. Let me say, however, that I pledge to work in partnership, across party affiliation and with SPT, to deliver a subway system that is well placed for the 21st century. Perhaps, rather than looking to SPT to leverage in cash, we need to consider alternative ownership options for the Glasgow subway system and thereby to free our subway system from the unwelcome shadow of the old SPT culture. Perhaps we have to think out of the box. Opposition parties sometimes demand cash that may not be there, but we must work together on this project across party political lines and attempt to identify cash, which will—let us not kid  ourselves—be difficult, and leverage it in to safeguard Glasgow's subway for the future.

To ask the Scottish Government what assurances it can give to workers in the national health service in the wake of projected reductions to the Scottish budget. (S3O-10711)

I particularly welcome the principle and guarantee of no compulsory redundancies, which I believe does not exist south of the border. How many more redundancies, voluntary redundancies or cutbacks would there have to be if this Government accepted Scottish Labour's plans to cut a further £332 million from this year's budget? I am very worried about the damage that that could inflict on the NHS and other front-line services.

From his speech, I suspect that Lord Foulkes may have opted out of the respect agenda. We have heard much about the Calman commission, but no UK party gave a ringing endorsement to all its recommendations on fiscal powers. That is the case, no matter how much one party might wish to rewrite history. That said, every party—including the party of Scottish independence, the SNP—believes in greater fiscal powers for the Scottish Parliament. I turn to mutual respect. Every party must be able to express their views on further fiscal powers in an open, considered and respectful manner. There is a responsibility on all parties to do so. Scotland is moving beyond Calman and it is important that we do that in an inclusive way. Calman's fiscal proposals revolve around personal income tax rates. As the proposals currently stand, the UK Government would reduce income tax rates at every level by 10 per cent and decrease the Scottish block grant by a corresponding level. If Scotland wanted to reverse the cuts to our block grant, the Scottish Government would have to disapply the 10 per cent UK cut in order to maintain current income levels. I have serious issues in relation to those proposals. For instance, how would the UK Exchequer estimate the amount of money that would be raised in Scotland in the coming financial year through income tax? Of course, in order to calculate Scotland's block grant for any financial year, any cash reduction would need to be estimated in advance. What procedures would be put in place to adjust the cash that is given to the Scottish Government in subsequent financial years should the UK Government underestimate the tax that it would collect in Scotland? Would we see a corresponding cut in income to Scotland from London in the following financial year? If so, would that be fair to Scotland, given that the lower tax take may be due to a UK Government mishandling of the economy? That is a very real concern, given the current state of the UK economy and the UK's financial predicament. Furthermore, given the expenditure limits that the UK Government places on the Scottish Parliament, which were exposed most infamously in the discovery of the £180 million fossil fuel levy that Scotland has had denied to it thus far, would any additional tax take through growth from UK Treasury forecasts actually be forthcoming to the Scottish Parliament and a Scottish Treasury? Would any increased national insurance contributions that result from growth in the economy be forthcoming to the Scottish Parliament? The great fear is that tinkering with fiscal powers, as Calman proposes, may be used  by English MPs as a Trojan horse to reduce funding to Scotland in forthcoming years, year after year. I am not saying that that will happen, but it is a very real fear. Despite all those issues, Calman's fiscal powers are important in one vital aspect: they have created consensus between the UK parties and the SNP. The consensus is not the Calman report itself—after all, the proposals are not set in stone—but that we all want further empowerment in terms of fiscal powers for the Scottish Parliament. That is the consensus that we have in the chamber today. I want full fiscal powers within an independent Scotland. I passionately believe that that is best for us all. I want the Scottish people to vote on the proposal in an independence referendum. I also believe that it is for the Scottish Parliament to decide whether the Scottish people get a vote on the matter. That said, if the next step in Scotland's financial relationship with the UK falls short of independence but delivers further fiscal powers, let us ensure that those powers are as empowering as possible for this place and for Scotland. Other members have referenced the Steel commission, about which many of my Liberal Democrat colleagues are supportive. The commission said: "The Scottish Parliament should be given responsibility for all taxes except those reserved to the UK" and that it "should have the ability to vary the tax rate for each of the 'devolved' taxes." In other words: purely devolved taxes for devolved services and purely reserved taxes for reserved services. The commission also suggested that devolved taxes could include income and corporation tax. The Steel commission envisaged that taxes for devolved services should be entirely designed and set by the Scottish Parliament—which is in direct contrast with Calman. The Steel commission allows for a progressive devolved taxation, with the ability to choose personal allowance levels for that system. The commission also believed that the Scottish Government should be given borrowing powers. The Steel commission does not provide the solution that I advocate, and I will continue to push for independence, but its findings demonstrate that the fiscal elements of Calman have substantial inadequacies, not just as far as the party of independence is concerned, but for the other parties, which believe in the United Kingdom. We have all exposed those inadequacies—that has been done here this morning. I want a financial framework that has been designed in Scotland and which allows all cash that has been raised in Scotland to go directly to  the Scottish Parliament. That means income tax, national insurance, corporation tax and criminal fines imposed in Scottish courts going not to the UK Exchequer, but to a Scottish Exchequer—and, of course, oil revenues. All those powers and more remain missing—and let us not forget that this Parliament cannot borrow one single penny. Short of independence, the relationship that we should have is one where we sign a cheque to the UK Exchequer for reserved areas—a block grant to Westminster. Let the British parties decide whether they wish to sign a cheque for nuclear weapons, illegal wars or subsidising the London Olympic games. Short of independence, that would be a move in the correct direction, although that is merely my opinion. I prefer independence. We have heard several opinions today, but one thing is clear: all those opinions take us far beyond Calman in empowering the Parliament in terms of financial independence.

On engagement, I ask Annabel Goldie to ask the new UK Government to deal with members of the Scottish Parliament, via the UK Border Agency, on asylum seeker cases. It is deeply disturbing when asylum seekers pour out their hearts to me about their specific issues. However, under the previous Labour Government, I received no correspondence from the UK Border Agency. Will that change under the Conservative Government?

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government believes that ministerial guidelines are needed in relation to the use of Tasers by police officers, given the recent report by Amnesty International. (S3F-2411)

Given the on-going legal debate about the use of Tasers, will the First Minister consider working with key partners, including the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland, the Scottish Police Federation, Amnesty International and others, to draw up a code of practice for police using Tasers, and using any evidence gained from the Strathclyde Police to reform that code? Does he agree that police officers, who daily put their necks on the line, and at-risk citizens, who expect police to intervene in dangerous situations, have human rights and that those should be a powerful driver in any code?

That is ridiculous.

Will the member give way?

On Mr Purvis's ridiculous comments about the worldwide banking crisis having started in Scotland with RBS, can he tell me what powers this place has over banking regulation? If we do not have enough of those powers, which would he give us?

During the current session of Parliament, the Scottish Government has prioritised Government resources to further Scotland and her economic needs in the face of a tight budgetary settlement from Westminster. I am sure that we can all agree on one thing—that budget settlements will become progressively tighter over the next few years. However, there will be varying opinions in the Parliament about the timing and scale of the cuts that are coming. I will leave the blame for Britain's near bankruptcy for another day and try to build consensus where possible this afternoon. We need to get from the debate a working consensus  across party lines to deal with the realities that we face as a nation. Unfortunately, one or two members have not taken a consensual tone in their speeches. They will have to be held accountable for that. It is important to provide a little context for the debate. Local government has had a fair deal from the Scottish Government, which has reversed the trend of reducing local government's share of Scottish expenditure that was set by previous Executives. The working arrangement that the SNP Government and COSLA agreed in 2007 has also served local authorities well. I hope that that relationship is now mature and enduring enough to work constructively on the challenges in managing the downward spiral of Scotland's financial settlements that lies ahead. That is the context in which the Local Government and Communities Committee undertook its finance inquiry. I, too, thank all those who gave evidence in that inquiry, the clerking team and everyone else who helped to produce the report. There is a great deal of realism in the report. As a Parliament, we must be realistic about expenditure in future years. United Kingdom public sector net borrowing and the UK net debt are overwhelming, but we must manage the consequences in the Scottish Parliament. Scotland will have to take its share of the cuts. As we consider the challenges that our local authorities face, I seek assurances from members on behalf of the people of Scotland that, regardless of the party badge they wear, neither they nor their Westminster MP counterparts will accept cuts that are above and beyond our fair share. Dr Andrew Goudie's "Outlook for Scottish Government Expenditure" makes frightening reading. It predicts that Scottish Government departmental expenditure limit expenditure may not recover to last year's levels until 2022. We know that the task that we face is enormous, and Scotland's councils have as large a task as any other public body has in dealing with the cuts. Our report makes important points about how the cuts can be managed. We need to make moving towards common ground a priority and work together to help councils to meet the challenges.

I am delighted that the member chose to intervene rather than say something misleading. He should read the Official Report  tomorrow. I am talking about Scotland taking a fair share of cuts. Now that Mr Purvis's party is in government at Westminster, perhaps he thinks—

That is a very good question. We will wait to see what the Lib Dem-Conservative coalition does down south as it brings savage cuts to Scotland. Mr Purvis will have to take his share of the blame should that happen. Let us consider what local authorities can do. A key issue that we considered and a key aspect of the report was shared services. Michael Cook from COSLA admitted in giving evidence that local authorities could have done more in the past with respect to shared services. He said: "we may not have waved the flag strongly enough to signal our success in driving forward efficiencies".—[ Official Report, Local Government and Communities Committee , 23 September 2009; c 2355.] The committee's convener alluded to that. The committee shared the feeling that the financial crisis may have forced the hand of local authorities, but they should have done much of the work on shared services before they got into the predicament in which they now find themselves. Sharing services provides many opportunities, but it has pitfalls. On the opportunities that it provides, people in Glasgow will not be aware that, if they phone the Glasgow trading standards department, they will reach a call centre in the Western Isles. Services are being shared at the moment, and they could be shared in a range of areas, such as in council tax collection, bin collection and parking enforcement. Such things should have been considered before, but we must focus on them now. On the pitfalls of sharing services, we have already heard that explaining things to constituents in different local authority areas will be quite difficult. For example, the same officers may levy different parking fines in different areas, or people in one local authority area may have to pay for domestic refuse uplifts, whereas people in another local authority area may not have to pay for them, although the same lorry may collect the refuse. Messages must be communicated to constituents if services are going to be shared. The one thing that we should focus on is that any efficiency savings will eventually lead to redundancies, which could be significant. It is the rightful place of trade unions and employers to manage how those redundancies take place but, when they do, we in Parliament must be mature and must achieve consensus. We should avoid party politics. When our local authorities and trade unions try to do the best for their workers, services  and constituents, the people will not accept members playing party politics.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made to pilot a business rates incentivisation scheme across Scotland's local authorities. (S3O-10503)

The cabinet secretary will know of my on-going interest in business rates collection by Glasgow City Council, whose non-domestic rates collection rates have been around 94 per cent for some years. That is lower than the Scottish average by upwards of 2 per cent, which in cash terms is a substantial loss to the city. As a major business centre for a far wider and more populous conurbation, Glasgow faces understandable challenges in achieving higher business rates collection levels due to a number of factors. Does the cabinet secretary agree that an incentivisation scheme that permits local retention of extra revenues would be best piloted in Glasgow? I urge him to consider that suggestion. Which model would he consider most appropriate for Glasgow? I reiterate that I would like Glasgow to be included in any pilot business rates incentivisation scheme.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress has been made on tackling knife crime. (S3O-10412)

I draw the cabinet secretary's attention to another statistic. Glasgow, for which I am a member of Parliament, is part of the Strathclyde Police area. In the past two years, there has been a fall in the number of incidents in which a knife has been used as an offensive weapon in the area. Had the number of offences remained at the level at which it stood in the final year of the previous Labour-Lib Dem Executive, there would have been 1,530 more knife crimes, but it has fallen; in the first two years of this Government, there were 1,530 fewer knife crimes. Will the cabinet secretary stand firm on the good work that is being done in relation to the proceeds of crime, the violence reduction unit and additional police officers? Will he ensure that the message is clear—I hope, on a cross-party basis—that dangerous criminals will go to jail for more than six months and that those who are not a danger to  society will get tough, hard community payback sentences? Let us take the party politics out of such an important issue.

To ask the Scottish Executive what reciprocal health care arrangements are in place between the Isle of Man and the national health service in Scotland. (S3O-10332)

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the case of my constituent, Margaret Caldwell, an 86-year-old lady in Glasgow with family in the Isle of Man. She was worried when she recently found out that the reciprocal arrangement had almost come to an end, and that only on 1 April this year was it extended for a further six months. The lady went ahead with a trip to the Isle of Man, where she took pneumonia. She told me that it was a blessing that the reciprocal arrangement was there. The clock is ticking on that arrangement, however: it will last only for another six months. Will the cabinet secretary liaise with whoever becomes the new UK health minister to pursue a future reciprocal agreement? If that fails, will she and the Scottish NHS get together to work out our own reciprocal arrangement, so that people such as Margaret Caldwell can go to see their families in the Isle of Man with peace of mind?

I hoped to strike a note of consensus in my speech, at least initially. Perhaps that was a vain aspiration, given that a UK general election is looming, and given some of the speeches that we have heard—I exempt Ross Finnie from that observation. I want to consider two key aspects of economic recovery under the Scottish Government. First, I welcome the record level of social rented housing that the Government has delivered, which is an example of how the provision of essential economic stimulus and the securing of important social benefit can be combined in difficult times. In Glasgow, for example, which I represent, there has been a massive 80 per cent increase in new-build social rented housing under the Government, compared with a similar period under the previous Scottish Executive. In terms of bricks and mortar, that represents an additional 1,500 houses for social rent in my city. The approach has helped Glasgow's economy, because more brickies, plumbers, joiners, sparkies and so on have retained their jobs or had jobs created for them. More small businesses in Glasgow and beyond are being supported by the Scottish Government. I am proud of that achievement, which is a success for the Parliament as a whole. There was no great mystery or secret to the achievement of the figures. The Scottish Government took a policy decision to increase the Scottish affordable housing investment programme by 19 per cent  over three years and to spend around £1.7 billion in total. As we heard, a further £31 million will be added to that, which I welcome. As a minority Government, we sought consensus to pass our budget in order to make that investment. Although the Parliament has not spoken with one voice in many recent budgets, as a minority Government the Scottish National Party managed to gain a majority to lever in that £1.7 billion record investment. We can have consensus in trying to tackle the serious economic problems that we face. Another reason for such welcome figures on social rented housing in Glasgow, and indeed figures on affordable housing across Scotland, is that we sought to accelerate much of the capital investment from 2010-11 into earlier years. The Parliament achieved consensus on that, too, and there was general agreement that that would allow the affordable housing sector to support private companies during the recession. The sector was seeing a huge drop in available finance to build private properties and, indeed, a significant drop in demand for such housing due to the income shock that many were suffering. The Parliament also agreed that, having accelerated capital expenditure from 2010-11 into earlier years, it would be dangerous and wrong to slam the brakes on such capital acceleration. All parties called for a further acceleration from the 2011-12 UK budget—we agreed that capital acceleration should happen for just one more year, until our construction sector became stronger—but when the UK Government's budget was presented, there was no provision for such capital acceleration. Scotland's housing sector felt badly let down by both Gordon Brown and Alistair Darling, and it is private businesses, particularly in the construction sector, that will bear the brunt. I genuinely urge Labour MSPs to approach their UK colleagues, should they be in a position to influence policy after the forthcoming general election, and to stand up once more for capital acceleration; it is important. I urge my Conservative and Liberal Democrat colleagues to do likewise and to build a consensus from within the Parliament. I certainly know that my SNP colleagues in this Parliament and the House of Commons will be carrying that message, but I hope that from within this Parliament we can start to rebuild the consensus.

I thank Mr Whitton for his helpful and consensual intervention. We are looking at the stark reality of cuts coming to Scotland—a 1.3 per cent real-terms cut in the year ahead. Should more money become available to Scotland, I would prioritise social housing and construction. That is a difficult decision to make as a Glasgow MSP, but I want to add to the 1,500 extra houses that we have in Glasgow and to provide even more employment. I accept that it is a tough choice to make, but I have made it. I want to touch briefly on the small business bonus scheme. Although it was not initially intended as part of the economic recovery strategy—it was designed to help small businesses to develop and flourish—in the current difficult economic times it has become by default a key section of our economic recovery platform. Throughout Scotland, 200,000 small businesses will benefit; indeed, in Glasgow, 9,000 businesses will save up to £4,000, with almost 25,000 businesses to benefit across the city. Economic recovery is about tough choices in tough times. There are constraints on the Parliament, which we should all acknowledge. I do not think that the UK Parliament ever deliberately does Scotland down; it just follows the biggest market in terms of finance and population density—London and the south-east of England. Measures are not anti-Scottish by design, but they may turn out to be in practice. We saw that with stamp duty, as 80 to 95 per cent of first-time buyers in London and the south-east of England benefited from the change in the threshold while only 25 per cent did so in my city of Glasgow. That measure was not trying to do down Glasgow by design, but it did so by default.

I finish by saying that, if this Parliament had more powers and responsibility over taxation, borrowing, Trident, ID cards and what to spend on defence and wars, we could prioritise economic recovery over such matters. That, of course, comes with independence.

I apologise to the Parliament in advance, as I might have to leave before the end of the debate. No discourtesy is intended. It is vital that we come together as a Parliament this afternoon to show a united front in our determination to tackle serious and organised crime. Our communities expect no less, and people in our most deprived areas face the brunt of the misery that such crime causes. I have spoken in the chamber before about communities and individuals in north Glasgow who have stood up and challenged people who they believe are harming their area. I have regularly met constituents who have asked me to assist them in their cause, and I have done so in cases in which I have been able to assist. In my capacity as an MSP, I have written many letters to the relevant authorities about constituency concerns, and I have highlighted specific legislative gaps in the fight against organised crime in those letters. That is to be expected of an MSP—it is our job.

I congratulate the Vehicle and Operator Services Agency on taking away that licence, although we should be careful, because I believe that the licensee has 24 hours to appeal the decision. I also note that the licence was taken away for MOT offences. Part of my campaign was to allow VOSA to remove licences because of public safety and links to organised crime, but those were not the criteria on which the licence to which the member refers was revoked. Given that  the situation is on-going, it would be inappropriate to talk in any more detail about that case. Community activists have campaigned vocally on the ground for many years for the good of their local areas. That is quite different from people just doing their jobs. Those activists are invaluable to their communities and deserve our gratitude. So, too, do our police officers, who are the front line and who have to face up to serious and organised criminals daily. Much of their work goes unseen and unrecognised. Often, they are criticised when matters in relation to serious and organised crime are not progressed as quickly as communities understandably demand, or when people feel that individual officers make poor judgment calls on specific matters. However, by and large, our police officers do a fantastic job day in, day out and often tackle serious and organised crime head on. I record my thanks to them. In the context of communities fighting back against criminals, and of police officers taking the fight directly to them, the Parliament has an overarching duty and obligation to work together constructively and positively. We are getting far better in our fight against serious and organised crime and progress is being made, but there is no room for complacency. Along with other members, I attended the Glasgow crime summit on Monday. I thank the deputy leader of the SNP opposition group in Glasgow City Council, Billy McAllister, for pulling that event together. I also thank Kenny MacAskill, representatives of the SCDEA and the gangs task force, Professor Graeme Pearson and many MSPs and councillors for attending the event. As a result of attending the summit, I can assure members that our professional crime fighters are focused and proactive and are becoming increasingly intelligent about how to take on the criminals. There is no complacency. There was also no defensiveness about evaluating current performance. Continued self-analysis and best-practice improvement is vital to continued and increased success. I hope that that will be the tone in the Parliament too, so that when there are challenges to improving the performance of our police force, we join together constructively to deal with those challenges. That is what our communities expect from us. It is important that we do not normalise the activities of organised criminals. That is one reason why it is important that we do everything in our power to prevent them or their associates from winning contracts from the public sector. Such contracts not only normalise criminals' activities, but allow them to cash in at taxpayers' expense and create opportunities for money laundering through their ill-gotten gains. I therefore welcome the Scottish Government directive to ensure that  private security operatives must be registered with the Security Industry Authority before they can bid for public contracts. That requirement for registration will ensure that the regulations on the sector squeeze out many of the criminal elements. The measure has led to security contracts for the Commonwealth games being refused. However, a number of my constituents are unhappy that some contracts were awarded before the measure came into force in December 2009. I have had similar complaints from constituents about the signing of a contract between Network Cars and Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board, after police expressed significant concerns and said that the contract should not be awarded. The board has said that, under European Union law, it had no power to refuse to award the contract. However, I understand that the flexibility of public bodies to refuse procurement contracts can be determined by the way in which the initial tender document is drafted. Get the tender document wrong, and the ability to rule out organised criminals from juicy public contracts can be drastically reduced. Therefore, I ask the cabinet secretary to consider exploring ways of extending best practice and advice on the drawing up of tender documents to ensure that maximum flexibility is given to refuse contracts when there are concerns in relation to organised crime. Another serious aspect of tackling organised crime is getting more bobbies on the beat. That has been vital, because for so long organised criminals have been challenged by covert surveillance organisations and local community bobbies have backed off. That does not happen any more—local community bobbies are tackling organised criminals head on in every facet of their empire. I am proud of the job that those officers do. I hope that the Parliament unites around the need to take forward the fight against serious and organised crime.

I am pleased to speak in this debate on factoring services. As someone who has signed up to Patricia Ferguson's proposal to require property factors to register with an appropriate body and to develop an effective dispute resolution scheme for home owners and property factors, I believe that it is important to debate and consider these matters. I am sure that Patricia Ferguson will agree,  however, that it is impossible for members to give a blank cheque to any future factoring bill, in particular because the precise details of the bill remain to be published and robust parliamentary scrutiny must be undertaken before the Parliament makes any final decisions. I have spoken to Patricia Ferguson about the matter and, on a one-to-one basis, I have given my support for the bill proposal. Patricia Ferguson and I have heard similar complaints from constituents in north Glasgow about factoring services. We perhaps even share some of those constituents. Many constituents seek the maximum representation when dealing with their factors and the problems that arise; in itself, that provides a significant indication that there is a problem with poor-quality factoring. Constituents often feel helpless in their dealings with factors. I have direct experience of just how unclear the factoring system can be. I stay in a tenement property in Maryhill. If one of my neighbours highlights to the factor that there is an issue with the lock on the secure entry door at the front of the close, I will find out about it during the following billing period, when I will have the privilege of receiving a bill for it. However, I am likely to be unaware of whether the door was given a cursory glance by a handyman or whether a specialist attended to the fixing of said front door. I will be well aware of the bill for the pleasure of having someone come out to have a look at it, although I will not know any details of what has been done. Similar situations often arise when light bulbs need to be replaced in the common close, or when something in the back court needs to be attended to—or when a number of other apparently minor matters arise in or around properties. There is a feeling that best value is not always a consideration for factors. The more a customer is billed, the greater the management fee that is applied, so many people feel that there might be a disincentive to seek best value. I should be clear that most factors seek best value for customers, are not cowboys and do not exploit. However, perception can be everything, and a move towards regulation could provide reassurance for householders and defend the reputation of good, decent factors. Good factors have nothing to fear from statutory regulation, and everything to gain. Their reputations will be enhanced. Regulation will be an incentive to factors to make their billing systems as transparent as possible and to achieve best value for the customer. Regulation could chase the cowboy factors out of town. Much of my constituency casework involves disputes between owner-occupiers and factors, many of whom are social landlords. In many  cases, that means the Glasgow Housing Association. I do not intend to use my speech just to hammer the Glasgow Housing Association as I might have done in the past. Indeed, the association is improving, and the Minister for Housing and Communities, Alex Neil, and the new chief executive of the GHA, Martin Armstrong, should take some credit for that. Although the GHA is improving, it started from a dreadfully low and poor base. I will give two examples of the GHA's work as a factor. Owners who dispute bills for major works find it virtually impossible to get a full breakdown of how bills were arrived at by the GHA or a specific scheme of works for their own properties, with appropriate costings. One of my constituents got a retrospective scheme of works—in other words, it was drafted following the completion of the works, rather than in advance of any of the works commencing or taking place. When the GHA was asked about how costs were arrived at between itself and City Building (Glasgow), it hid behind commercial confidentiality. A second issue that I am dealing with relates to home owners whose properties are factored by the GHA. Each home owner has paid £6,000 to have their home cladded to improve energy efficiency and address fuel poverty. There now appears to be a serious damp problem in those properties, which has to be investigated. We will see whether the GHA, as the factor, has let down those home owners. I thoroughly agree with the dispute resolution approach. Because of the Conservatives' right-to-buy policy, many people who now own their home could never have afforded to own and maintain a home previously. We must consider credit solutions for home owners who cannot afford to pay for the upkeep of their properties.

I said at the start of my speech that I favour a statutory framework. However, I will have to see how that would work in practice, which is why I cannot give a firm commitment to any bill. Clearly, however, I favour a statutory framework. We need credit solutions as well as dispute resolution, as many home owners avoid maintaining their properties because they simply cannot afford to do so. The minister made a point about local monopolies. Perhaps we need to reconsider the GHA framework, which has a local factoring monopoly for many properties that are owner-occupied. Regulation can improve minimum standards.  We should consider a couple of other issues that might involve unintended consequences. A number of constituents have contacted me about self-factoring. How will people in closes and blocks who have to self-factor deal with regulation? There might be some unintended consequences in that regard.

Apologies to Ms Ferguson. I will finish off by praising The Herald and the Evening Times , which, we all agree, have outpaced all the politicians in addressing the issue. No major political party had proposals in this area in their manifestos in 2007, but we are now coming together to address it as a Parliament. I have no concern about a turf war in relation to addressing the issue. Whether through a member's bill from Ms Ferguson or through one of the two pieces of proposed housing legislation from the Scottish Government, let us deal with the problems.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress has been made since the creation of the local biodiversity action plan for Glasgow and what discussions the Scottish Government has had with Glasgow City Council regarding events planned for the city to mark the 2010 international year of biodiversity. (S3O-9642)

As the minister will be aware, the United Nations international year of biodiversity coincides with the stated target that was agreed by European Union heads of state in 2001 that "biodiversity decline should be halted with the aim of reaching this objective by 2010". Glasgow accounts for a comparatively small proportion of Scotland's rich biodiversity, but the important green spaces within and the quality of the environment of our largest city have an immense impact on the quality of life of its residents. Does the minister agree with me that the planning of amenities, infrastructure and housing should incorporate serious consideration of biodiversity in urban areas? Does she agree that 2010 is an opportunity for Glasgow City Council to improve its track record on biodiversity?

We have just witnessed either a stand-up comedy routine or a spelling bee. I say to Lord Foulkes, consider Glasgow City Council and the Labour Party. That should put you firmly in your place.

I apologise, Presiding Officer. I should have said that that should put Lord Foulkes firmly in his place. I acknowledge the—mostly—constructive tone of the debate, and I hope that the constructive tone of the Liberal Democrat motion, in particular, signals a change in tone in general when we discuss education in the Parliament. In debates in the past, tabloid-style slogans such as "education in crisis" have been bandied about. Such a heated style of debate has done no one any good, including our parents, teachers and students—indeed, it has done them a disservice. I acknowledge that there is anxiety among teachers about the implementation of the curriculum for excellence. Teachers' concerns must be listened to and addressed. That is what the Scottish Government is doing, and it is what  the Liberal Democrats are doing by using their debating time to provide constructive opposition and bring focus to the issue and discuss it further. Should the curriculum for excellence be implemented this autumn? Perhaps. However, the cabinet secretary said that the date is not set in stone, although it is clear that the looming deadline will focus minds. Minds are being focused in schools and local authorities, and good progress is being made throughout Scotland. It is understandable that some schools and local authorities will be more geared up than others will be. If there is evidence that curriculum for excellence should be delayed, will the cabinet secretary acknowledge that implementation might not need to be delayed throughout Scotland and consider a phased introduction? Perhaps not every school in Scotland needs to jump forward at the same time, if the evidence supports a different approach.

Not at all. I am putting forward an idea, and I will be interested to hear what the cabinet secretary says about it. We must remember that the curriculum for excellence is not a big bang event. If all schools are required to deliver on the curriculum for excellence this autumn, performance and delivery will surely vary, but that will be the case whatever the implementation date. I am sure that schools that do not implement the curriculum for excellence as fully as others do will learn from best practice elsewhere and develop their expertise in future years. I can say with confidence that whether or not implementation of the curriculum for excellence is delayed, teachers will continue to do a good job and teach our children to the best of their abilities. The curriculum for excellence is a framework for doing not just a good job but the best possible job. No dark clouds will gather over schools if there is no delay. Nor will everything be sunny and rosy should an additional year be allowed for implementation. I remember that concerns were expressed about the implementation of the five-to-14 curriculum and higher still in Scottish schools. I suspect that reasonable concerns can always be expected as we go through a period of change. There is always uncertainty and trepidation at such times. I have heard that some schools never properly implemented the five-to-14 curriculum over the years. They were supposed to do so, and the documents were sitting on their shelves, but for many people it was a subjective opinion whether implementation had taken place.  Should there be delay? Maybe. Should implementation be phased? Perhaps. Let us consider the evidence. I hope that the Parliament agrees that the cabinet secretary should give us more information in a "few months" rather than "by Easter". We are close to reaching agreement. The curriculum for excellence is too important to get wrong. We will get it right together. I commend the spirit of the debate.

The cabinet secretary knows that I have been working with Julie Love and her family following the tragic death of her son Colin on Margarita Island, with a view to extending fatal accident inquiries to include the deaths of Scottish citizens overseas. At Tuesday's Public Petitions Committee meeting, I raised the issue of the timetable for the Scottish Government's response to Lord Cullen's report. Can I press the cabinet secretary to answer that question as a matter of urgency, because relatives are waiting? Will he look at the wider issue of how the consular system and the Foreign and Commonwealth Office could assist in any extension to the FAI process?

I welcome the passage of the bill thus far and I very much hope that it will be passed at decision time. I reiterate the thanks that have been given to the committee clerks, the bill team and the ministers involved. If there was ever a bill that had the fingerprints of the Parliament all over it, this is it. Where genuine concerns were raised, they were listened to and the bill has been shaped by the Parliament as it has gone through. That is the way that all legislation should go through this Parliament. I will give some context to the bill. In 2004, the United Kingdom figure for repossessions was around 8,000. Despite the fact that the Council of Mortgage Lenders has revised the figure expected in the coming year down—I think to 48,000—in 2008 the figure was 40,000, which is still a huge increase in the number of repossessions over a four-year period. I say to David McLetchie that just as Nero fiddled while Rome burned, if the Conservatives had their way, they would be sitting on their hands while vulnerable home owners had their homes repossessed. It is vital that we act, and the bill will ensure that we do. There should be a Scottish figure for repossessions, but we have some data. We know  that there has been a 77 per cent hike in the number of mortgages that have been in arrears for three months or more, which shows that more people are getting into mortgage difficulty. We also know that between 2008 and 2009, courts in Scotland granted more repossessions—the figure rose from 67 per cent to 75 per cent. There is an evidence base there. We also know that between December 2008 and December 2009, 21 per cent more actions to repossess were initiated in courts. The evidence is clear: we have to act. That is why the Scottish Government has moved to introduce statutory pre-action requirements. I give credit to our neighbours in England who introduced the pre-action protocol. In looking at best practice elsewhere, we sought to improve on the pre-action protocol by putting pre-action requirements on a statutory footing. Perhaps the Government south of the border will look at putting its system on a statutory footing at some point, too.

I thank the minister for that information. I hope that whatever party gets in south of the border after the next election will look at best practice in Scotland and follow suit. The minister raised issues about cost. The Scottish Government sought to put in the bill a provision that would ensure that sheriffs could award costs against lenders should they move to repossess via a court and that repossession fails. Shelter, Citizens Advice Scotland and Money Advice Scotland drew to my attention the fact that under the Conveyancing and Feudal Reform (Scotland) Act 1970—under the terms of standard conditions of security—it would be permissible for a mortgage lender to rack up thousands of pounds in legal fees while attempting to repossess a vulnerable person's home. Although a Scottish sheriff could say that it had failed to meet the statutory requirement to be reasonable in seeking a proper credit solution and could award costs against the mortgage company, under the same act, it is also permissible for the lender to introduce back-door charges, so the legal fee could be added directly to the debt of the vulnerable home owner. I find that unacceptable, which is why I worked with Shelter to lodge an amendment on that at stage 2. However, I did not know at that point that that would impinge upon the regulation of financial services, which is outwith the terms of the Scotland Act 1998. I thank the minister for his  reassurance that he will work with me on that. He has written to Lord Myners to raise the point with him. It makes no difference to me whether the UK Government legislates to end those unfair back-door charges or whether it gives Scotland the power to do so. I just want to help vulnerable home owners and I hope that we can all unite around that. I will certainly write to Lord Myners, too. I am absolutely delighted with one or two other aspects of the bill. I am delighted to see provision for lay representation in Scottish courts. The experts who have helped vulnerable home owners from the first point at which they access debt advice to the end point, when they face repossession of their homes—Shelter, Money Advice Scotland and Citizens Advice Scotland—are the very people who should be in court. I thank the minister for his reassurance about voluntary surrender and ask him to keep a weather eye on how that process works. I am delighted that section 10 has remained intact. There is no compulsion whatever on anyone—the creditor or the borrower—to enter into a protected trust deed. The same situation applies in England. Let us ensure that section 10 stays in the bill. I am delighted with the minister's reassurances. Let us vote for the bill today.

I ask Nicol Stephen for a bit of clarity: how much less money would the Liberal Democrats give Glasgow? I will be sure to let my constituents in Glasgow know.

I approach the debate on the Local Government Finance (Scotland) Order 2010 with a heavy sense of realism. I hope that we as a Parliament can unite at decision time to approve the order. In doing so, we must all face up to the reality that a combination of UK Government cuts to Scotland's budget and the general fallout from a recession from which we are starting to emerge only now is having a serious impact on public spending. To deny that is to hide from reality. Scotland's Parliament has £814 million less to spend than was initially estimated for 2010-11. That is fact.

The member made exactly the same intervention at exactly the same point in a previous debate. Indeed, Jeremy Purvis agreed with that capital acceleration because of the recession. We need a proper political debate on the £814 million less that we have to spend. Many people are in denial about the issue. My next comment was aimed at the Labour benches but, given the pièce de résistance that is Mr Purvis on the Liberal Democrat front bench, I will instead aim it at him: arguments such as his make people look very foolish indeed. Within the context of a shrinking Scottish budget, it is heartening to see a larger share of the spending cake being given to councils than was the case in previous years. This is the third consecutive year under this Government that that has happened. Over the past three years, under the Labour and Liberal Democrat Executive, the figure went down, down, down. It is, however, fair to say that, even given the average real-terms increase to councils of 1.4 per cent, there are difficult times ahead for local authorities. The increase is not brilliant but, given the current financial predicament, it is not bad at all. In particular, modest—at best—budget increases are to be expected in future years. That will lead to challenges for local authorities, including my own in Glasgow. I could put the boot into Labour-controlled Glasgow City Council by going on about the mass closure of primary schools or Steven Purcell not believing in lower class sizes, but I will, instead, look at things from another angle. Councils plan their budgets over the medium term; they must take the decisions that they feel are right for them. That is what Glasgow City Council is doing, even if I disagree with its actions. One decision that it has taken on which I agree is its democratic decision to—once again—freeze the council tax. The people of Glasgow welcome that, as will people across Scotland, hopefully in every local authority area. That is what will be achieved this afternoon if we vote for the order. During such hard-pressed times as these, the council tax freeze is particularly welcome. Over a three-year period, it amounts to £160 million in people's pockets, once baselining of the £40 million per annum is accounted for. That is very welcome indeed. I turn to Derek Brownlee's speech and his point that the funding distribution mechanism under the Scottish Government is identical to that of the Labour-Liberal Democrat Executive. If different MSPs in different parts of the country are not  happy with the settlement in their area, they should come to the chamber and say how they would unpick it. They would have to tell us which part of the country they would take money from in order to give money to their area. This is a fair budget settlement for local authorities. It is rising in real terms and local authorities are getting a larger slice of the spending cake than ever before. I am sure that we will come together to support the order at 5 pm.

As a list MSP for Glasgow, like Robert Brown, I rely on the Rutherglen Reformer to keep me updated on what has happened in the area. Research shows that only 2 per cent of planning notices and public information notices are read. That might not be a reason to take them out of the Rutherglen Reformer , but it could be a reason to review how to make them more attractive.

I am grateful for the opportunity to speak in the debate. I do not support Labour's motion or the Opposition amendment, as they misrepresent—deliberately or otherwise—the continuing consultation on public information notices. However, I genuinely thank Pauline McNeill for giving the Scottish Parliament a platform for debating several issues that relate to the consultation process. The motion describes the debate about public information notices simplistically at best and polarises the debate between two opposing positions. First, it suggests that the current public information notices arrangement is adequate and should be preserved—at least, that was the suggestion until about 10 and a half minutes into Pauline McNeill's speech, when she mentioned one or two things that could perhaps change. No other Labour member has made a telling contribution in that respect. The second form of polarisation is the suggestion that scrapping the current PINs system would have dire consequences. That is a false polarisation that does not help the debate.

The Government is consulting on that option on the basis of representations that local government has made to it. That is what we are debating. The public sector should always seek to account for every penny that it spends and it should spend as wisely as possible. Needless to say, that has never been so true as it is in the current economic climate, in which the UK Government has slashed hundreds of millions of pounds from Scottish budgets. I therefore understand why local authorities seek ways to divert about £6 million in cash a year from paying to advertise public information notices to protecting front-line services. I also understand why the newspaper industry is concerned about the financial impact that that could have on it. As an MSP, I would want to ensure that any shift of public information notices from newspaper advertising to an online portal did not exclude several groups in society. For instance, elderly people are less likely to use the internet than are others. Whereas 80 per cent of working-age people use the internet, only 33 per cent of people aged between 60 and 75 use it. Disparities in internet usage also apply to people who are disabled, who are in ill health and who are from deprived areas. However, those figures are  improving. I should point out that such disparities also exist in the readership of the published press.

It is reasonable to consult on whether local authorities should be given the choice, and that is what we are doing. I will give members more details on that later. I will contrast the internet usage figures with those for newspaper readership. Of the Scottish population, 67 per cent use the internet. In 2008, Scottish Government research showed that 77 per cent of people use newspapers as a source of local news. However, the staggering point is that only 2 per cent of the public who read newspapers read public information notices—[ Interruption .] More than anything else, that figure should be a wake-up call on how any level of government attempts to meet its statutory obligation to inform the public about certain matters of public interest. It should also make every MSP wonder about how best to use Scottish taxpayers' money when we try to meet our obligation to inform them. I hear muttering about the 2 per cent figure, but that is the figure that I have been given—[ Interruption .]

That figure is ridiculously low and we must take steps to address it—[ Laughter .] I hear Opposition members laughing—I thought that they wanted a serious debate. Their heckling will not achieve that and will demean their argument. I will give an example of where things could be going wrong. If a public information notice that said that a pub in Springburn had applied for a licence extension from 11 pm to 1 am was read by only 2 per cent of readers, would that notice be the best use of public money? No, it would not. As a regional MSP for Glasgow, I rely on several local newspapers and I am well served by the Springburn Herald for that purpose in north Glasgow. I would not want such adverts to be placed in that publication to be read by only 2 per cent of its readership. We need to become more imaginative. Perhaps a newspaper could use spot colour but less space. Perhaps it could advertise a link to an internet site with more information or a telephone number that people could call to ask the local authority to send a leaflet with more information.  Not enough people use, study or access public information notices—the situation must change. The consultation is shining a light on that. I thought that I was here today for a constructive debate, but—to be honest—the Labour Party has let the Parliament down.

I was not at that meeting because our group meeting was scheduled for exactly the same time. That was not our choice. I hope that you will use the consultation process to raise some of your concerns; I will use the consultation process and my speech to raise my concerns. I would have been at that meeting had it been scheduled at a time when I could have made it—it is important to put that on the record.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it works in partnership with  local authorities to promote waste reduction and recycling initiatives. (S3O-9229)

As a regional MSP for Glasgow, I represent constituents in Glasgow and South Lanarkshire. I praise South Lanarkshire Council for recycling 37 per cent of waste, which places it seventh out of the 32 local authorities. However, I draw the cabinet secretary's attention to Glasgow, where the recycling rate is 20 per cent, which places it at the bottom of the 32 local authorities. There is a stark contrast for my constituents in neighbouring constituencies. Has Glasgow advised the cabinet secretary how much it foresees its performance improving, and how does that contribute to the Scottish Government's ambitious national targets? Is there a place for poorer-performing local authorities to learn from best practice elsewhere, particularly when, as in the case of Glasgow and South Lanarkshire, the authorities are co-located?

I am grateful for the opportunity to speak in the debate and I am conscious of the responsibility that all members who speak in it have to face up to the stark reality of the brutal budgetary shrink that Scotland faces. As a Glasgow MSP, I will focus on what has become the most controversial part of the budget process—the cancellation of the Glasgow airport rail link. When the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth first announced the cancellation of GARL, I was disappointed. That was one of the toughest calls that I have known since I became an MSP in 2007. I did not want such a significant capital project to be cancelled—none of us did. I remember walking down the stairs outside the chamber to the garden lobby immediately after the statement and having a discussion with Margaret Curran about GARL. During that conversation, she asked me whether I would join a cross-party initiative to get GARL reinstated, and I said that I would be happy to do so. However, my condition was that we would campaign together on two fronts, making representations to both Westminster and Holyrood. My offer to Margaret Curran, which was genuine, was rejected. With a reduction in Scotland's capital budget from 2010-11 onwards, and with as yet unknown cuts from 2011-12 onwards, it was unrealistic to expect that Scotland's capital investment programme could remain intact without the co-operation of the UK Government—co-operation that was not forthcoming. That gives the lie to Wendy Alexander's slippage statements, which deny the fact that the capital budget is shrinking. All indicators point to deeper cuts to the Scottish budget in future years, and there is no sign of Scotland being afforded borrowing powers to allow the Scottish Parliament—if we chose to do so—to borrow to invest in the capital projects that are  now under threat. In that context, I see no way of reinstating GARL without the axe falling somewhere else. That is how things currently stand. That being so, why was GARL being cancelled such a tough call for me as a Glasgow MSP? It was tough because, as an MSP, many factors influence me. Primarily, I am here to represent my constituents, which means that I fight for them and stand up for them. That core responsibility of an MSP means that we all have to decide whether to try to get the best deal for our constituents or a fair deal for our constituents, which can present us with a moral dilemma. I believe that Glasgow gets a fair deal from the Scottish Government. Other members in this Parliament must also decide whether to fight for a fair deal for their area or the best deal. If they fight for the best deal, they will rob vulnerable people elsewhere in the country of money that they also need.

I hope that fellow politicians in this chamber will agree with me that no one should pitch parts of Scotland against each other. In that context, I must compliment the Glasgow Evening Times on its campaign to have GARL reinstated, even if I reject its logic and conclusions. However, I caution some Labour MSPs against irresponsibly pretending that there will be no consequences as a result of the UK Government's huge public spending cuts that are heading our way.

I will give one example of what I am talking about. In the health capital budget, £550 million is available. Labour today could have taken £60 million from it and put it towards GARL, but it has done nothing. I respect those who want to reinstate GARL, but I treat with contempt those who pretend that they wish to reinstate GARL and do nothing to attempt to achieve that. I agree with the general principles of the budget, and I hope that members will vote for it at decision time.

I am wondering whether there is some quicksand in the chamber today, because the longer the debate goes on, the more Labour members seem to be sinking away. Only two are left in the chamber, and I am quite concerned about their wellbeing. I want to declare an interest in today's debate. My mother and father are in receipt of attendance allowance and carers allowance, so this is a real family situation for me. Most people should be sympathetic to the idea of reforming the benefits regime in England and Wales to provide better services for those who are most in need: I know that I am. However, any increase in social provision must be paid for somehow, and whether the scheme is affordable will be the UK Government's main consideration when deciding whether to implement its policy. Numerous areas of Government spending could be curtailed to increase that provision. I will not make party-political points about the things that I would cut, but we are certainly starting to get a full picture of the Labour Government's staggering past and present waste. Parliament needs to send out the message today that when the UK Government goes looking for cash to pay for any new schemes, it should look elsewhere, because this Parliament will fight to protect the dignity of up to 168,000 Scottish elderly disabled citizens whose income is being put at risk by the UK Labour Party. We are talking not about luxury items but about the most basic level of financial support for many  people who are leading considerably more difficult lives than many of us lead. It does not matter how hard the two Labour members who are in the chamber at the moment try to dress up the proposals, they will take money away from Scottish pensioners. It could not be clearer. Labour Party interests and the interests of Scotland's most vulnerable citizens are in direct conflict. It is simply not decent to come to the chamber and pretend that the green paper is anything other than a stated intention to scrap attendance allowance, and to save money by paying less to those who are in need in order to commit to higher expenditure and social care provision in England and Wales. Labour seems to be saying that somehow it will not really affect Scotland. How can that be? Where is the detail to support such claims? It is certainly not in the green paper. What about the knock-on effects? In the city of Glasgow area that I represent, there are more than 8,400 carers allowance claimants. If attendance allowance is a required benefit for claiming carers allowance, will that knock out the other benefit? What about informal care arrangements with family members and friends? Where is the recognition of the enormous efforts of those unpaid carers when attendance allowance payments barely cover additional expenses? The only thing that seems clear in the green paper is that Labour is getting rid of attendance allowance. I say that because I have not heard one Labour MP or MSP rule it out. If the paper is a consultation, let me hear someone on the Labour benches rule out scrapping attendance allowance—now is their opportunity. I see that two more Labour members are with us, but the quicksand seems to have been replaced by tumbleweed and silence. As I said, the only thing that is clear in the green paper is that Labour wants to get rid of attendance allowance, which I believe is wrong. As Labour members have refused to rule it out, they must think that I am wrong and that I am misinforming people. Therefore, they think that Age Concern, Help the Aged, the Royal National Institute of Blind People and Leonard Cheshire Disability are wrong and are misinforming people. That is if we believe the Labour argument, but I do not accept or believe it. According to Labour, the institute for social and economic research must be wrong, too, when it says that the measures could force 40 per cent of attendance allowance recipients below the poverty line. Even the former First Minister Jack McConnell must be wrong. By goodness, he was wrong on many things, but on this one he is certainly right. Let us not beat about the bush: it is not good enough simply to say that we do not yet have the  full detail—we know enough. The UK benefits system is infamously cumbersome and inflexible. If some members were not so dogmatically opposed to the Parliament having control over the tax and benefits system, we might get a real debate on how the proposals would impact on Scotland. As the system stands, I can see no workable way for attendance allowance to be removed while simultaneously protecting the income levels of people who currently receive it. It is not clear from the green paper how any Barnett consequentials from social care spending in England will come to Scotland. We are not even sure whether the Scottish Parliament would be able to reinstate any lost income. A similar situation has arisen with the Scottish Parliament's policy on kinship care. The UK tax and benefits system has not been flexible enough to allow us to top up the income of vulnerable people who are kinship carers using our Scottish block grant. If we did that, the UK tax and benefits system would take it away. The system is inflexible and cumbersome and we have no way of knowing whether it will be any better under the robbing of attendance allowance that the Labour Party proposes. I doubt very much that it will be.

I completely agree with Jamie Stone. That is a perfect example of the unintended knock-on consequences of taking money away from the poorest and most vulnerable people in Scotland. That is why I hope that this afternoon the Conservatives, Lib Dems and SNP will oppose Labour's plans to take money away from the most vulnerable people in our society.

Oh jeez—where to start with that? Elaine Smith specifically talked about people who currently receive attendance allowance, thereby  saying that no one else will be able to get it if the allowance is scrapped. If Elaine Smith had listened, she would know that I clearly outlined that, given the UK tax and benefits system, it is not possible to give the guarantee that she mentions. I certainly will take no assurances from a UK Government that guaranteed me that there were weapons of mass destruction in Iraq. I have one further key point, which is that all the devolved Administrations and the UK Government, irrespective of which party is in power, have to work together closely before even a green paper is produced, because a domestic decision by the UK Government for England will have a knock-on effect in Scotland, Ireland and Wales. Likewise, a domestic decision in Scotland will have knock-on effects for the UK tax and benefits system. It is scandalous, stupid and outrageous that there was no consultation with Scotland or the Scottish Government. We should support the Government's motion and chuck out these abhorrent Labour plans.

I am grateful for the opportunity to speak in this debate. As a member of the Subordinate Legislation Committee during stage 1 and the publication of the stage 1 report, I must pay tribute to my fellow committee members, the committee clerks, the legal team and the Scottish Government bill team for their hard work and co-operation. I have to say that I found the task to be rather dry, unglamorous and challenging, so I must apologise to members on the committee who have been secretly enthralled by the process and those on the legal team who cannot get enough of this bill. To be honest, it is not really for me. However, dry though the whole matter might have been, the bill is still very important. In a small yet significant way it represents a spreading of the Scottish Parliament's wings away from the three transitional orders that empowered it to make and interpret acts of the Scottish Parliament. As those transitional orders were based on the UK Interpretation Act 1978, it is only right that, after 10 years of devolution, we review the situation and introduce new legislation. As members have already pointed out, in its stage 1 report the committee could not reach a clear consensus on a number of aspects. One of the key elements of part 2, which seeks to implement the recommendations of the 2007 inquiry into the regulatory framework in Scotland, is the increase from 21 to 28 days in the period after which a negative instrument should come into force. I welcome the Scottish Government's acceptance of that recommendation; however, at committee, some members decided that we should go further than 28 days. Indeed, as we have heard, 40 days was suggested. Like other members, I was somewhat surprised by the proposal, given that the recommendation to  increase the period to 28 days had been made in 2007. I believe that a 40-day period would completely knock out of kilter the delicate balancing act between the Scottish Government's need to act with purpose and effectiveness and the need for strong parliamentary scrutiny. As Margaret Curran said, it would make it difficult to keep "the show on the road"—[ Official Report , Subordinate Legislation Committee , 21 November 2006; c 2131.] in ensuring effective use of subordinate legislation. Given that there appears to be no real evidence of the benefits of a move to 40 days, I suggest to Parliament that a 28-day period strikes the right balance. Neither was there consensus in the committee about the period within which a negative instrument can be annulled. When, in response to a wish that was expressed by certain members to extend the period from 40 to 50 days, ministers outlined the kind of parliamentary timetabling problems that such a move might throw up, the same members said that the Government was deliberately picking worst-case scenarios. However, it was that very line of argument from some Opposition members that made me move towards the Government position. Put simply, I would expect any Government of whatever party to take account of worst-case scenarios and to take steps to avoid such situations. For that reason, I am minded to back the Government's current position, although I want to hear what members have to say as we go through the rest of the parliamentary process. I have also been led to believe that under the previous Executive as well as under this Government, the spread of subordinate legislation has been rather uneven, with a glut of activity after recesses resulting in a pile of SSIs being sent to the Subordinate Legislation Committee. I do not accept that the previous Executive was, or that this Government is, incapable of improving the timetabling of subordinate legislation to avoid such surges of activity, particularly after the summer recess; indeed, the Subordinate Legislation Committee in the second session highlighted the same problem. A move to 50 days would only make matters worse. Although I have drawn attention to differences within the committee, I have to say that members largely united around the bill's general principles. I will give it a fair wind this afternoon, and hope that Parliament will come together to support it.

This afternoon's debate provides a fitting end to the current parliamentary term: there will be many things on which our parties disagree, but the passage of the Home Owner and Debtor Protection (Scotland) Bill through its stage 1 committee scrutiny will, in my opinion, be a shining example of the parties coming together to get the job done. The bill will be a powerful tool to protect family homes from repossession and to ensure that effective debt  solutions exist for the many vulnerable individuals and families who are caught in an inescapable debt trap. That debt trap is often due to current defective legislation. Therefore, as we enter the holiday period, we should remember that the bill provides an example of what this Parliament can do when we put our minds to it. I hope that stages 2 and 3 of the bill can be completed very early in the new year. All of us in the Parliament have a responsibility to seek consensus where possible and to agree on a reasoned compromise where it is appropriate to do so. Indeed, I believe that ministers were in listening mode throughout stage 1, so I look forward to seeing what will emerge during stage 2. I want to cast an eye south of the border. Some unionist colleagues might anticipate that every comparison drawn with England is an attempt to play party politics, but I can assure them otherwise. It is believed that England has had some success with the pre-action protocol, which is a list of best-practice protocols that lenders should go through before seeking repossession. Indeed, Labour members have spoken highly of such protocols in previous months. As Alex Neil mentioned, under the protocol—which is clearly a step forward—around one third of cases are still not dealt with appropriately. The move to put the pre-action protocol on a statutory basis in Scotland, combined with the provisions that will require all repossession cases to appear in court and—just as important—enable statutory pre-action requirements to be tested in court, will give this Parliament an incredibly strong and powerful framework for dealing with repossessions in Scotland. I believe that the bill will put Scotland ahead of its closest neighbours in tackling repossessions, but the progressive legislation in England is what has led us to this point. Another provision in part 1 that I want to highlight is the right to representation in court by a lay representative. I believe that, in years to come, this Parliament will view that practice as commonplace and will wonder why it took us all so long to allow people from organisations such as debt action Scotland and Citizens Advice Scotland to provide such representation in court. After all, such organisations often support families with debt and repossession issues, providing vital support, building up trust and giving advice along the way. In many circumstances, they are best placed to defend repossession actions in court. Much has been said about part 2 of the bill. It is vital that we ensure that part 2 is as good as it can be and that all that is good about it is not lost as the bill progresses. We should not let the consultation issue get in the way of that. I see nothing in part 2 that cannot be retained, either in its current form or following further clarification  or—if need be—amendment. I believe that our committee agrees, which is why, despite the concerns about consultation, we all agree to the general principles of both parts of the bill. Mr McLetchie was extremely critical of part 2. He evoked Bob the Builder in asking whether we could fix it. Although he hoped that we could, in much of his speech he appeared to suggest that the only tool that the Conservatives would use would be the spanner that they would throw in the works. I strongly hope that that is not the case. I would not claim that Labour has similar intentions—I believe that its members will be constructive, even though I may not agree with Cathy Jamieson's or David Whitton's choice of language to describe the bill. It is the Government's responsibility to produce draft legislation and it is the Parliament's job to improve and amend it as appropriate, and I genuinely believe that Labour will work in partnership to achieve that aim. I turn to the certificate for sequestration, which is vital. There are people out there who are caught in debt quicksand and are sinking fast. If someone has too high an income to make an application to the low-income, low-asset debtor scheme but does not earn enough to participate in a debt arrangement scheme or a protected trust deed, they are at the behest of their creditors. CAS has huge concerns about that and wants there to be no delay in the taking of action. It believes that any delay will result in another year of misery for many people in Scotland. The certificate for sequestration would solve the problem. So far, the biggest concern about it that I have heard is that the system might be overly bureaucratic, but I suspect that that is always the complaint whenever a new system comes in. It is for the Government to get that aspect right. In the time that I have got left, I want to deal with the biggest red herring, which relates to protected trust deeds. It will not become compulsory to remove the family home from a protected trust deed; the bill will just make it legal to do so, which, at the moment, it is not. The bill simply provides another tool in the box for dealing with repossessions and securing family homes. I see no reason why creditors cannot make a debt arrangement to exclude a family home, regardless of the level of equity that is contained in it. I am open minded about whether we need guidelines, but I make it clear that as long as we are talking about a negotiated settlement that is not forced on the sector, there is no issue—it is a red herring. I believe that the Parliament will come together on the bill's general principles, and I look forward to stage 2, when I hope that a constructive partnership will be developed that will save people  from repossessions and provide them with debt solutions.

Will the member give way?

Throughout the UK, the effects of 12 years of economic incompetence, reckless borrowing, fantasy growth that was based on that lending and mindless largesse with public funds to no great benefit—the devastation that the Labour years have caused—are starting to bite. Those who are culpable for that disaster are being forced from office but will be rewarded with good pensions and handsome pay-offs. They will be comfortable; our children and our children's children will have to pick up the tab. This pre-budget report sums up perfectly the death of the new Labour project—no admission of fault anywhere and no idea of how to get the economy moving. After a series of wildly false projections from the Treasury, it now looks as if the UK economy will have contracted by a staggering 4.7 per cent in 2009.

Gordon Brown is responsible for a lot. The 4.7 per cent contraction in the British economy is his fault. It is time for him to shoulder some of that responsibility. Mr Kerr said in his speech that building houses does not create jobs, so we will not take any lessons from him.

Mr Kerr should check the Official Report . In Scotland, the action that is needed to pull the nation out of Labour's recession is purposely  denied by the chancellor. Labour and Darling are strangling the Scottish recovery at birth while Scottish revenues prop up Labour's real priorities. The failure of the UK Government to agree to capital acceleration for Scotland in the coming year has thrown a major stumbling block into our path to recovery. Instead, in 2010-11, the Scottish budget will be slashed by an eye-watering £814 million.

I do wish to be accurate. Jeremy Purvis acknowledges that the figures are correct. The decisions were taken by the whole Scottish Parliament; we all agreed on the need for capital acceleration. If Mr Purvis now disagrees with that, perhaps he should say so. In stark contrast to Labour's decade of recklessness, the past two years of SNP Government policy and responsible spending decisions have helped to steer the Scottish economy through these difficult times. We are not there, but we are getting there. Since May 2007—month in, month out—unemployment has been lower in Scotland than in the rest of the UK. The success of the Scottish Government in curtailing the worst effects of the recession has been undermined by drastic cuts in the Scottish budget. The chancellor's forecasts are now something of a running joke—if only this were a laughing matter. Labour has not got a clue on the economy. Without the return of Scottish revenues to Scotland, the nation is being bled dry. Capital acceleration is needed now for housing, infrastructure projects and job creation—all the essential components of economic recovery. History tells us that Labour in Scotland will sit back and let Labour and Tory Governments in London act without regard to the Scottish interest. Labour members are today arguing the same old line. Without the powers that the Scottish Parliament needs, no Scottish Government—regardless of the party that is in administration—can protect the nation from Westminster cuts. The £350 million capital shortfall for 2010-11 will result in the loss of affordable housing, the loss of an estimated 5,000 jobs and the loss of essential projects. When the Glasgow airport rail link was cancelled, Labour was first to point out the potential for associated job losses for the city. That infrastructure project was lost as a result of Labour cuts in London. The Scottish Government had to bring the Scottish finances back under control.  In Glasgow, the Labour council has managed to run the mainland Scottish council with the highest level of funding into financial turmoil. It has made cuts across the board—it is closing schools and slashing budgets for community projects and support services for the most vulnerable. Not only has it put organisations that support the vulnerable under threat, we have now heard that almost 4,000 jobs will be lost. I have this to say to the Labour Party in the Scottish Parliament and Glasgow City Council. When the Scottish Government axed GARL, Margaret Curran approached me to ask what we should do about it, I told her that I was with her. I said, "Let's start a campaign to reinstate GARL. Let's go and see Alistair Darling and Gordon Brown and demand that these cuts don't happen." Margaret Curran walked away. I now say to Steven Purcell in relation to the 4,000 potential job losses in Glasgow and the slashing of voluntary sector budgets, "I will stand should to shoulder with you to protect vulnerable people and jobs in Glasgow, but we must take the campaign to Downing Street—to the people who hold the financial purse strings and are making the cuts." The offer is there. Andy Kerr did not call for capital acceleration today; neither did Wendy Alexander. However, before the pre-budget report, everyone was calling for it. Willie Bain called for it during the Glasgow North East by-election. The only issue was how the accelerated spending would be decelerated at a later date—when we would pay it back. Now Alistair Darling and Gordon Brown have said no. There has been not a chirp or a bleat from Labour, although there have been a lot of girns from Wendy Alexander. That is hypocrisy of the highest order. This Parliament does not have all the powers to tackle recession and an economy that is in turmoil, but we have some and need more. Capital acceleration would save 5,000 Scottish jobs that the Labour Party is putting at risk.

I am disappointed that a combination of savage UK cuts and, in some cases, local authority non-co-operation on class sizes has led to a phased delivery on free school meals. However, can I get an assurance that the SNP Government is fully committed to universal and nutritious free school meals at lunchtime for P1, P2 and P3 school children and that the principle remains intact—only the pace of delivery has changed?

The flowers are on their way to Helen Eadie's office as we speak. I'll see you for dinner and a bottle o' wine tonight, eh?

Back to reality. I found Charlie Gordon's speech, the tone of which was measured and appropriate, very informative, and Mr Stevenson's reply constructive and thoughtful. I feel that it is reasonable, in the context of the debate, to contrast the concessionary scheme in Scotland with what is available south of the border. In that respect, I differ quite strongly with Karen Gillon, who believes that it is wrong to draw that comparison. I disagree with you on that, Karen. Surely it is narrow minded and inward looking not to look at social provision in other countries. Of course we should look at that; we should also adopt progressive and helpful ideas, when appropriate. Of course we should be outward looking—I am an internationalist.

I could do with two hours of PE every week. You know, Karen, it is important that we consider every—

Absolutely. It is important that we consider what all countries are doing without restriction. I do not have a hang-up about England, although Karen Gillon seems to. She should be more outward looking. The minister drew a favourable comparison with our neighbours in England not to provide a feather in the Scottish Government's cap, but to show that a job has been well done by the Scottish Parliament. After all, when the national concessionary travel scheme was introduced by the former Scottish Executive in 2004, it was warmly welcomed by the SNP, which was then in opposition. Indeed, such a scheme has been included in SNP manifestos since 1999. I return to Mr Gordon's constructive tone. I genuinely hope that his approach signals a change in Labour's approach. When the scheme was reviewed in 2008, floods of Labour propaganda appeared. There was scaremongering that the SNP was going to throw wur grannies aff the bus, but the scheme was, in fact, amended to extend provision. Labour's approach was unbecoming of an Opposition, and I hope that it has learned its lesson. It knew that the scheme was not under threat, but it sought to raise unfounded and spurious concerns. However, Labour has stepped up to the plate today—I pay tribute to Mr Gordon for that—and is being a responsible Opposition, particularly if it accepts the Government's amendment.

I will speak from my knowledge. I know that Glasgow Labour went to Fife to condemn care charges there, despite the fact that the charges under Labour Glasgow City Council were four times higher. I agree that extending the scheme to include all our citizens on the lower rate of disability living allowance would be a progressive step that would certainly assist in reducing barriers and promoting social inclusion. A number of policy initiatives that would extend provision to all our citizens would be beneficial and progressive. For example, in order to tackle child poverty, improve people's health and reduce stigma in society, I would like the provision of free school meals to be extended beyond the primary 1 to primary 3 pilot so that every year in our primary schools was covered.  However, that would have to be paid for; it would have to be funded. Similarly, extending the concessionary bus scheme to our citizens who are on the lower rate of disability living allowance must be paid for. Mr Gordon made suggestions about how to drive a better deal with our bus companies and others, which, I am sure, the minister listened to. However, if Labour members are serious about the motion—they may be; I certainly believe that Charlie Gordon is—I assume that the Labour front-bench team has already had detailed discussions with the Scottish Government to agree a way forward during the budget process. The Government has, of course, published a draft budget, and I assume that Labour members suggested an amendment during the parliamentary committees' budget scrutiny to include the proposal that has been made. Of course they would have done that if they were genuine about the matter. If they did not do so, that raises serious concerns about how genuine some Labour members are about the motion. I listened to Helen Eadie's comments—I hope that our dinner is still on—about Parliament's job being to decide what it wants and the Scottish Government's job being to find money to pay for that. That is, in effect, what she said. I like Helen Eadie, but I say to her as gently as possible that such an approach would mean a car crash of a balanced budget strategy for Parliament. It is fair to point out that increased DLA levels would help to remove mobility barriers. Perhaps a solution could be UK Government tax breaks on fuel costs for bus companies that decided to sign up to an extended provision scheme so that any additional costs would not be passed on to the Scottish Government and the Scottish taxpayer. There are always solutions, and we must look outward for them.

If Labour wishes to take the matter seriously, it has the opportunity to do so, but simply demanding cash is not the way forward, given that we have a Scottish budget that is shrinking due to UK Government cuts. Let us see whether we can find a way forward.

At no point in my speech did I say that I wanted an unpopular Tory Government or the current unpopular Labour Government. I want independence for Scotland. My point was that I did not want to wait until any unpopular UK Government is elected in May next year to deliver for the people of Scotland. It is Pauline McNeill who would kick these recommendations into the long grass.

I became active in politics and joined the SNP in 1990. The context was a UK Government unpopular in Scotland and the legacy of Tory policies, such as the poll tax. I  believed then, as I believe now, that independence is the best constitutional arrangement for Scotland and for all our peoples. I believed then, as I believe now, that independence is not an end in itself, but a democratic springboard to a better life for all our peoples. Much has happened since 1990, and Scotland has come far on her democratic journey. As a school student, I used to demand, "Independence now." Time has moved on and there are grey hairs and a lot more pounds, but I still believe in Scotland gaining independence as soon as possible. The independence argument has matured. The desire for Scottish independence is as strong as ever, but it is for the independence movement to win the argument. We should not wait for it just to fall into our laps when there is an unpopular UK Government and we should not just shout our arguments louder than our unionist rivals. We must win the argument. Our nation has come far on its democratic journey in a relatively short space of time. We have our own Parliament and can now debate the end point of that democratic journey, and the consensus in the chamber is that that journey should continue. As we have heard this afternoon, there is consensus in the Parliament on our getting powers over air guns, drink-driving limits and speed limits. There may be moves to change the drink-driving limit south of the border, but I say to Lord Foulkes and others that the power to decide the limit for ourselves is a good power to have because—guess what—we in Scotland can make up our own minds on such matters. That is what democracy is all about. We can deliver such powers speedily and before the next UK election. There is consensus, despite attempts to pretend that there is not. As we have also heard in the debate, however, there is no consensus on financial powers. It has been well outlined that the Murphy tax-cutting powers in the UK white paper may come from a desire to make the Scottish Parliament more responsible for some of the money that Scotland raises, but will bring none of the benefits of any increase in prosperity that there may be at some point in the future. They will give us no right to decide what model of taxation best suits the Scottish nation and no power to decide which income tax bands we would like or what the impact might be on the benefits system. So, there is no consensus on that issue. Ms Brankin had the audacity to ask what rate of corporation tax the SNP would set despite the fact that the Labour Party will not give us the power to determine corporation tax. That is the utmost hypocrisy from the Labour Party.

Ms Brankin seems to pick and mix which countries to compare. The chancellor has just said that, in the next five years, North Sea oil revenues will be increased by £9.5 billion. Labour members can pick and choose the countries to suit themselves, but we are not Ireland or Norway—we are Scotland and we want just the normal powers of an independent nation. That is all that we want, but Labour would forbid it. There is no consensus on financial powers and I am not trying to pretend that there is. The SNP wants independence, and we are willing to put that under democratic scrutiny, perhaps alongside proposals for alternative powers. In 2010, the SNP will legislate for a referendum, and Parliament will decide whether to vote it through or bring it down. That will be the Parliament's democratic decision. There are three different positions among the unionist parties, although, to be fair, if we include all the positions that the Labour Party has adopted we would be in double figures. At least one of the parties that does not believe in what I say on independence agrees that there is consensus on some powers. The Liberal Democrats have said, "Let's get on with the job of delivering the powers that we agree with." That is a principled argument, even if it does not take us to what I believe should be the end point of our journey, which is independence. The consensus between the Labour Party and the Conservatives is to govern Scotland and its constitutional future by remote control. The UK Government's white paper, and the Conservatives' claim that they will decide after the UK election, really mean that they want a mandate from the UK population to decide on constitutional arrangements for Scotland. I am sorry, but that is for the Scottish people to decide.

Will the member give way?

Malcolm Chisholm would obviously wish for more money for the City of Edinburgh Council to deliver services. From which local authority would he take the money?

That was a very thoughtful speech—I wish that I had more time to focus on some of the points that Peter Peacock made. The motion refers to the new Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, Mike Russell. I congratulate the minister on his appointment and I wish him well. It is important to pay tribute to the achievements of his predecessor, Fiona Hyslop, as other members have already done. During Fiona's time in office, the principle of free education was re-established by abolishing the graduate endowment tuition fee. She delivered the introduction of grants in further education and the extension of higher education to young asylum seekers. We have witnessed the delivery of free and nutritious school meals to children in primaries 1, 2 and 3—and I am worried by the comments from Liberal Democrats about attempts to wreck that. There has also been progress in providing cash for kinship carers, which the previous Executive fundamentally failed to provide. I will not attempt to gloss over the challenges on teacher numbers and class sizes—I will come to those issues. I am sure, however, that politicians of all parties are mature enough to acknowledge Fiona Hyslop's achievements, of which there are many. On a personal level, I thank her for the opportunity to be one of her parliamentary liaison officers. Despite those achievements, the motion refers to "the growing crisis in Scottish education". I am disappointed that the Liberal Democrats used those words, which I find ill considered and inappropriate. I hope that they will reflect on the use of such words, through which the Liberal Democrats undermine confidence in our education system and ignore the excellent work and commitment of pupils and teachers in schools across Scotland.

I apologise, but I do not have time. I do not believe that that was the Liberal Democrats' intention, but that is what the motion does. Class sizes are at an all-time low, and that has been achieved under an SNP Government. I will point out the flawed logic of the Liberal Democrat argument as gently as possible with this question: if there is a growing crisis in Scottish education under this Government, how serious was the crisis before May 2007, when Labour and the Liberal Democrats were in power and when class sizes were higher? Wow—that must have been some crisis indeed. The answer is that there was no crisis in education before May 2007. Of course there was not a crisis, but—

I apologise, but I want to fit in all my content. There is certainly no crisis now. In trying to score a party-political point the Liberal Democrats have overplayed their hand, and they are wrongly and needlessly damaging the reputation of our education system. As I said, I do not think that that was the intention behind their motion, but that is its result. The motion mentions a need "to rebuild the bond of trust between central and local government". I am not sure what that kind of language is trying to achieve. Perhaps the Liberal Democrats think that Mike Russell and COSLA's Pat Watters should take a blood brothers' pledge to rebuild that bond of trust. I can see it now: Mike Russell could be Huckleberry Finn to Pat Watters's Tom Sawyer in some Boy's Own adventure. I make light of the situation for a very good reason. By talking about rebuilding a bond of trust, the Liberal Democrats overegg their argument. To suggest that local authorities, which have all agreed to freeze the council tax for two consecutive years, do not have a working relationship—sorry, a "bond of trust"—with the Scottish Government is clearly nonsense. It is unfair for councils to be lumped together in such a way. Is the bond of trust broken in East Lothian or Perth, where more teachers are being employed? How about the 19 local authorities where primary school class sizes fell over the past year? Is the bond of trust shattered in East Ayrshire, where there has been a 33.7 per cent increase in the number of P1 to P3 classes of 18 and under over the past year? Of course not. There are 32 local authorities, each of which has its own relationship with the Scottish Government.  Opposition parties should be promoting those relationships, not trying to undermine them. The Scottish Government hoped that teacher numbers could be maintained in the face of falling school rolls. It has been challenging to work in partnership with local authorities to achieve that. The figures are clear, as are the challenges, and no one is trying to run away from that. Several local authorities could have and should have done better. That is a genuine frustration. However, tabloid headline-grabbing phrases like "education in crisis" and "rebuilding bonds of trust" are just that: they might deliver newspaper headlines, but they do not deliver any form of constructive opposition. I say again: I do not believe that the Liberal Democrats want to use education as a political football. There is a genuine opportunity to engage with the Scottish Government, but the Liberal Democrats' motion has missed it. They could have provided constructive opposition, but they have chosen not to. I hope that they will reflect on that, as there is a way forward together if they choose, dare I say it, to grasp the thistle. We have a new education minister, and there are challenges ahead. It would be more appropriate if Opposition parties were positive and constructive. We have to bear responsibilities, as a Scottish Government, and those responsibilities are clear. We must also better match the additional rights that have been extended to councils with their responsibilities better to fulfil their obligations. I wish our new cabinet secretary all the best in that challenging task.

It is clear that cuts are on their way to local government in future years—UK cuts with a Labour axeman. We have heard that local authorities are considering a move to shared services and other reforms to deal with those cuts. Does the cabinet secretary agree that local authorities must consider any changes carefully and that the local authority in the city that I represent, Glasgow, and other local authorities should commit to having no compulsory redundancies?

Glasgow? Excellent.

To ask the First Minister what support the Scottish Government is providing to the 2014 Commonwealth Games. (S3F-2032)

I want to ensure that, in terms of its budget, Glasgow's Commonwealth games is treated equally with the London Olympics by the United Kingdom Government. Will the First Minister back my call for Glasgow City Council to join me and the Scottish Government in insisting that the £300 million that is owed to Scotland through London Olympics regeneration funding is paid to Scotland? Will he also ensure that a significant share of those funds—if they are recovered—will be used for regeneration projects in Glasgow to build a lasting legacy of the 2014 games? I fear that, if that does not happen, the UK Government will not only rip off Glasgow, but will let down Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Executive what contribution the collection of non-domestic rates makes to raising funds for the Scottish Government. (S3O-8094)

That is a significant figure. With regard to local authorities' collection of non-domestic rates to reach that figure in raising funds for the public purse, I draw the cabinet secretary's attention to the top 10 non-paying businesses in Glasgow. The total amounts to almost £1.8 million going missing from the public purse, including £450,000 alone from the company Hutchison 3G UK. Will the cabinet secretary ensure that Glasgow City Council and all Scotland's local authorities take seriously their responsibility to collect non-domestic rates? I suggest that there may be some complacency on the matter in Glasgow, because when Scottish National Party councillors asked about that figure, they were told: "due to the NDR national pooling arrangement the Council does not keep the rates it collects and therefore the collection of arrears has no direct impact on how much money the Council has available to spend." Surely Glasgow must do better.

I thank the Local Government and Communities Committee clerks, the SPICe team, my fellow committee members and the committee convener, Duncan McNeil, for the work that they have done on the report that is before us. The inquiry into equal pay in local government was one of the most frustrating exercises that the Local Government and Communities Committee has undertaken. Every witness told us that they were keen to find a way forward on equal pay. Everyone said that they wanted to ensure that people who had suffered discrimination in pay over many years would be compensated and that equal pay for all workers, particularly low-paid women workers, would be guaranteed. COSLA said that it wanted to resolve the equal pay claims, as did the trade unions and individual local authorities. However, there are agreements that date back to 1987, and an agreement between COSLA and the trade unions in 1999 to resolve the issue by 2002 was subsequently extended to 2004. There was no resolution then, and there is no resolution now. In a report in 2006, the Finance Committee said that the matter should be dealt with within 12 months, but it was not. We are still waiting. Everyone told us that they wanted to deal with the equal pay claims, but 35,000 tribunal claims are still outstanding. Low-paid female workers need action, not just kind words. It is time for local authorities to get real with regard to their approach to equal pay claims. They must put equal treatment of their female workers on an even footing with their own financial interests. The reality check for local authorities was summed up by Alex McLuckie from the GMB union, who said in evidence to our committee: "The range of offers, rather than settlements, was from about 48 per cent to about 95 per cent of what could reasonably be expected to be won at tribunal. That is quite a difference."—[ Official Report , Local Government and Communities Committee , 11 March 2000; c 1785.] Anecdotally, I have heard of one case in which a tribunal awarded a worker £30,000, but the offer from the local authority had been only £3,000. Why would a low-paid woman worker accept £3,000 from a local authority when a tribunal would award £30,000? Local authorities need a  reality check. If local authorities are going to offer 48 per cent of what female workers are owed, as Alex McLuckie said, why would anyone take that option? Nobody would settle for that figure. The committee heard from Philip Barr, from the City of Edinburgh Council, who said that the city would settle cases that it could not win. He called that a "no-brainer", and I agree. It is also a no-brainer to acknowledge that, unless councils get real with their offers to female workers, recourse to a tribunal will be the only option for many. At the Local Government and Communities Committee, I asked unions and COSLA whether they would consider working more imaginatively to achieve the settlement of equal pay claims. I also asked whether they would consider the option of spreading phased or staggered repayments over a number of years. Both sides said that they would consider that, and such a recommendation is contained in the committee's report. In 2008, Audit Scotland said that council reserves were £530 million. Some £33 million of that was said to be set aside for equal pay claim liabilities. Staged payments, together with action by the Scottish Government to work with local authorities and the UK Treasury to raise funds via capitalisation, mean that it is finally possible for local authorities to deliver for low-paid workers. The excuses are running out. Many members have mentioned how wary people who are involved in equal pay disputes are about showing their hand during any discussions and negotiations. We have heard that that is due to the highly litigious nature of the issue. However, that approach is self-defeating. The greater the delay, the greater the scope for lawyers to have their merry way. It is a matter of regret that COSLA and local authorities have chosen not to deal with the issue of equal pay at national level. That was a serious mistake, which has led to an unclear, patchwork quilt approach to equal pay being taken across Scotland. With the possible consequences of the Bainbridge ruling still to be considered, it is vital that a similar patchwork quilt approach is not taken by Scotland's local authorities and unions in that regard. That is why I strongly endorse the recommendation that, in addition to the publication of advice and guidance, COSLA should consider whether a framework agreement, with the suggested payment matrix, could be put together to deal with Bainbridge. A patchwork quilt approach will fail low-paid female workers. All that such an approach will do is to keep lawyers warm and wealthy—it will do nothing to help the people whom the report is aimed at helping.  I welcome the report, and I hope that it is the last one that the Parliament has to produce in an attempt to deal with the issue of equal pay.

I draw the cabinet secretary's attention to a proposed demonstration in Glasgow in November that is unwanted and clearly not cultural. The English defence league plans to come to Glasgow and spread its hate and poison outside mosques. We should say no to  that. I have already written to Strathclyde Police and Glasgow City Council. Will the cabinet secretary back me by making representations to both those organisations to ensure that that poison is not spread in our country?

I agree with the concerns that have been raised on teacher employment for 2009-10. Teachers who are now looking for work, having completed their probationary year in 2008-09, and who are part of the training intake that was decided on early in 2007 for one-year postgraduates—or, indeed, in early 2004, for those doing a four-year course—are unemployed partly as a result of the badly managed recruitment decisions of the Labour-Liberal Democrat coalition in 2004 and 2007.

In a minute. In every year since 2005, an ever-increasing number of trained teachers have failed to secure permanent employment, in part as a result of the previous Administration's decisions. I will take an intervention from Ms Brankin on those decisions.

That intervention allows me to draw attention to the 200 teachers whom Glasgow Labour has failed to employ. In two short years, with the SNP Government's prioritisation of education spending, our primary schools now enjoy record low average class sizes. Labour members may not think that that goes far enough, but that is a bit rich coming from a party that does not even believe in lowering class sizes. That is hypocrisy, hypocrisy, hypocrisy, not education, education, education. In our concordat commitments, we made our policy for lower class sizes clear. Let us not forget that national Government sets the agenda, but local government employs the teachers. Where  the policy of the elected Government in the concordat agreement, to which all local authorities signed up, is respected and adhered to, class sizes are coming down. Local authorities, not Government, employ teachers. That is clear. Does any member want education departments across Scotland to be centralised? I do not think so. In Glasgow, the Labour-run council has chosen not to implement smaller class sizes. It prefers to make cheap political points against the SNP than to support teachers, children and families. Labour in Glasgow is letting down our children badly. The closing of 20 primary schools and nurseries against the backdrop of a sham consultation amounted to no more than the wanton destruction of local communities. Class sizes are rising, while teacher numbers are down, as is spending on education, which is now the lowest in the country. Steven Purcell's priorities are all over the place. Last week, Purcell spoke of "a dagger in the heart of Glasgow." When Glasgow Labour closed the primary schools and nurseries, that was a dagger in the heart of every community. That was the real dagger in the heart of Glasgow and it was wielded by the Glasgow Labour Party.

I will take no more carping from Ms Brankin. Labour members carp away, filling the chamber with an unwanted air of cynicism. Does that sound like Rhona Brankin? I think so. Labour entirely misses the point: the SNP has a new ambition for Scottish education. Labour prefers attack, attack, attack; it has nothing positive or constructive to say. The SNP Government will legislate to reduce primary 1 class sizes to a legal maximum of 25. When the Labour-Liberal Democrat Executive failed in its class size targets, did it legislate to reduce the legal maximum? It did not. For Labour, it is not education, education, education, but hypocrisy, hypocrisy, hypocrisy. The SNP will take no lessons from Labour; we will act. We are reducing class sizes and standing up for teachers. Labour should come to the chamber with something constructive to say. That is what this country needs; it is what our teachers, pupils and communities need. People want constructive policies, not Labour negativity. I ask members to reject the Labour motion.

Will the member take an intervention?

In the member's conversations with Jenny Boyle and Donald McDonald, did he inform them that there are 10,000 teachers in Scotland who are over 55 and could retire at any point and that they should hang on in there, or did he just tell them his side of the story and make cheap party-political points instead of putting their careers first?

Diageo's proposals for closures and job losses in Glasgow and Kilmarnock have thrown up many challenges for all those who have done all that they can to save a future for workers in our communities. The issue has also thrown up a huge challenge for people elsewhere. That is certainly the case in Fife, where there is a real prospect of an increase in Diageo's workforce as a result of the closure of the Port Dundas and Kilmarnock sites. That has placed workers, unions, communities and politicians in Fife in an invidious position. No one wanted to be seen as promoting jobs in one community at the expense of misery in another. I am pleased that that has not happened. Of course, it is only natural for people in Fife to welcome the job creation and expansion in their  area, but the workers, unions, communities and politicians there have seen the bigger picture. We have not been pitched against one another in our struggle for jobs; rather, we have remained united across party-political lines and across regions. We must all remember that, although we are discussing proposals that affect communities in Glasgow and Kilmarnock today, it could be other members' communities tomorrow. I need not look very far to illustrate that. For instance, job losses are pending in Livingston. I wish Angela Constance MSP and the workers who face unemployment as a result of the Bausch and Lomb closure my best in attempting to protect jobs. We must remain united and ensure that we support jobs in our communities wherever and whenever they are threatened, whether that is in Glasgow, Kilmarnock, Livingston or Fife. Much has been said about the efforts to save the Diageo jobs. Although the occasional comment might have been out of step with the united efforts, by and large, people in the task force and beyond have remained united and solidarity has been shown. I pay tribute to all those involved. I note that there is no Labour amendment, and I very much welcome the joint approach from Scotland's two main parties to dealing with job losses. It is absolutely vital that the Scottish National Party, our party of Government in Scotland, and Labour, our main Opposition party, stay united in our efforts to support Diageo workers and to mitigate the effects of the looming job losses. Dealing with those job losses is not about politicians; rather, it is about the workers, the unions and the communities around Port Dundas and Kilmarnock, who need our continued help and assistance. I am encouraged that the motion speaks about supporting the continued work of the task force, as that is vital. I strongly welcome the fact that the trade unions are actively attempting to extend the life of the Port Dundas site beyond the closure date that Diageo proposes. I urge Diageo to review its proposed closure date and to give real consideration to the possibility that Cameronbridge will not be fully up and running by that time. I ask Diageo once more to review the risk of centralising much of its white and dark spirit distillation in one location, with a view to buying any shortfalls on the open market. A market upturn in sales or an unforeseen problem with the centralised distillation facility could leave Diageo seriously exposed in meeting spirit demand. Even at this late stage, an extended lifespan for Port Dundas might be not only socially responsible in relation to the Glasgow workforce, but prudent for Diageo in business terms. I welcome the Scottish Government's continued support for the unions in their efforts to press Diageo on that.  I pay massive tribute to the workers and unions, who, for example, showed a willingness to demonstrate wage constraint way before the prospect of closure was on the horizon. Workers and unions were already responding to challenging times, because they were realistic about the need for change, but also committed to Diageo. John Swinney has outlined how the task force closed the value gap between Diageo's plans for closure and the task force's alternatives. I have said before in the Parliament that Diageo must get the balance right between maximising its profits and meeting its social responsibilities. If that balance is not struck, we have unfettered capitalism, which benefits no community in Scotland or anywhere in the world. I believe that Diageo has got the balance wrong with the closure, but it must now ensure that it meets its social responsibilities by assisting with regeneration in the affected areas. I pledge to do all that I can to assist in Port Dundas. The site has a prime location, just north of Glasgow city centre and set above the M8 motorway. Whatever the future for the site, whether commercial, residential or mixed use, we must ensure that jobs are created for the local community and that the community is consulted on the plans. I reiterate my strong belief that the unions still have an incredibly good case for extending the life of the Port Dundas distillery. Diageo has nothing to lose and everything to gain by doing that. As other members have said, the longer the site remains open and workers are employed there, the greater the opportunity for the task force and the Scottish Government to reskill workers and diversify employment in the area. I pay tribute once more to all who are involved in the campaign. I have been proud to be part of it and I will continue to help the communities and workers in my constituency who have lost out.

To ask the Scottish Executive to what extent it considers the Tennent's brewery at Ladywell in Dennistoun contributes to the drinks industry. (S3O-7709)

Tomorrow, along with Anne McLaughlin MSP, I will meet the new owners of Tennent's. At that meeting, I will show a willingness to work with the C&C Group to market both Glasgow and Scotland as core parts of the Tennent's brand in much the same way that C&C used the strength of brand Ireland to market Magners cider successfully. Does the cabinet secretary agree that, in a week in which we have witnessed job losses from Port Dundas, the potential action of the new owners of Tennent's in taking Tennent's lager to the next level by developing the Tennent's brand in such a way could be of huge benefit not only to the company, but to its workforce and to the economies of both Glasgow and Scotland?

One of the key educational opportunities of the 2014 Commonwealth games is that those who have never volunteered before will be given the opportunity to do so and, as a result, to improve their skills base and confidence. Does the minister  agree that our new army of volunteers should be drawn from throughout Scottish society and that it should represent the diverse and rich cultural and racial mix within our nation? Does she agree on the benefits that that will have for anti-racism strategies to boot?

I am sure that the minister agrees that the increase in police numbers has had a positive impact on policing in Glasgow, and that it has been given added value in Glasgow through Chief Constable Stephen House's reform of community police shift patterns, to ensure that the maximum number of community police officers are on the streets when they are most needed. In some places, that has more than doubled their presence. Will the Scottish Government continue to work with our police forces to ensure not just that there is a greater number of police but, more important, that there is more effective policing?

I congratulate Willie Coffey on securing the debate. I have been proud to stand four square behind the workers at Port Dundas and Kilmarnock. The cross-party unity in the campaign to save jobs has been vital—it has been a real strength of the campaign. I have met the workers and unions at Port Dundas on a number of occasions, and I have organised a round-table meeting with a number of stakeholders—including Glasgow City Council, the unions and Scottish Enterprise—specifically to consider the case for Port Dundas. I thank Partick Thistle for hosting that meeting and I commend Partick Thistle and Kilmarnock Football Club on their support for their local communities. I also commend other politicians who have strained every sinew to save jobs, including Willie Coffey, Des Browne and Patricia Ferguson. Central to my concerns as a Glasgow MSP is how the workers at Port Dundas have been treated. They recently showed loyalty to Diageo by  accepting a pay deal that showed great restraint. They have continued to consider ways of improving working practices to make them more efficient for the company—they are a committed work force. The reason for the pay restraint and for the flexibility in relation to working practices was that the workforce was led to believe that that would secure jobs. Workers at Port Dundas have invested by the sweat of their brow in Diageo. All they ask is that the same loyalty and respect be shown to the workforce by the company. As we have heard, the other day Diageo announced operating profits of £2.6 billion—a 4 per cent increase—with £1.2 billion going to its shareholders. Let us be clear: Port Dundas makes Diageo money and Kilmarnock makes Diageo money. The company is not cash strapped. The issue is whether Diageo maximises its profits at the expense of its loyal and hard-working workforce and their communities and, in doing so, damages its brand image. I am sure that the proposals that will be put to Diageo by the Scottish Government task force will consider ways to make the retention of operations at Port Dundas and Kilmarnock more attractive to Diageo. I very much hope that Diageo will listen and realise that a balance between unfettered profits and meaningful corporate and social responsibility—including investment in communities—must be struck. In the long term, investing in communities will strengthen the brand and increase profitability. It is also the right thing to do. I support Willie Coffey and Linda Fabiani's calls for an inquiry into the whisky industry. I have spoken to Diageo and it is clearly choosing to buy white spirit from rivals or to produce it at distilleries in which it has part ownership. There appears to be an awful cosiness between companies that are otherwise market rivals. Perhaps that needs to be examined, along with other parts of the industry. The Scottish Government-led task force has concerns over the extent of the exposure Diageo is leaving itself open to in the marketplace. Patricia Ferguson and David Whitton mentioned the danger of Diageo putting all its eggs in one basket. I agree with that analysis. I believe that the way ahead is to continue with the Port Dundas distillery for the next few years. We need to work with Diageo to reduce overheads and analyse how to help it with its cost base. In two years, the market could look very different. Diageo markets Johnnie Walker as Scotland in a glass. It views the dram that people take worldwide as a premium Scottish product. It must now pay a premium to Scotland's communities and invest in Kilmarnock and Glasgow. It is with great good will that I wish the cabinet secretary  well tomorrow in what will hopefully be constructive discussions with the company.

I am pleased to speak in this afternoon's debate as we consider the general principles of the bill. However, as I am a Glasgow MSP, members would expect me to focus on the elements that will directly affect my constituents. Glasgow has just gone through a sweeping and brutal series of school closures—eleven primary schools and nine nursery schools were axed. I know at first hand how, when a local authority gets it badly wrong in relation to school closures, the pain is felt by the whole community, particularly the children and parents who are affected. Such open wounds will take a long time to heal in my city, and I suspect that many parents and their families will never forgive Glasgow City Council.  I believe that when a local authority is planning a fundamental alteration to the school estate, such as was planned in Glasgow, it is not good enough for proposals to appear as a bolt from the blue. Once a council has put forward a strategy for closing and merging a raft of schools, I suspect that that council's views become entrenched and that the ruling council group becomes defensive with regard to any criticism of such proposals. That might be the case irrespective of the council and the party that is in control. In Glasgow, many parents read about the closure proposals in the newspapers before they got a letter from the council. That is not acceptable. The anger about that, and the feeling that secret schemes were being cooked up in back rooms for months, while everyone else was none the wiser, meant that the proposals did not go down well. That is no way to treat parents or children. I welcome the strong steps in the bill to improve the consultation process. However, I suggest that when a local authority is considering rationalisation of its school estate in such a significant way, guidelines should provide for a pre-consultation exercise to be undertaken. I am open to suggestions on the nature of such an exercise and how it would be conducted, but it should be undertaken before any details emerge and views become entrenched.

Given that the SNP's manifesto commitment—which I suspect members are only too keen to see us fulfil—specifically mentioned rural schools, it is only right that we also examine that particular issue. From the Glasgow experience, it is clear that communities feel that they are taken for a ride and that councils are merely going through the motions. Communities can respect decisions with which they disagree, but only if they feel that they have themselves been respected. I ask the minister to consider whether, as part of the bill, the Government would be open to making provisions for pre-consultation guidelines. Another aspect of the bill concerns the involvement of HMIE, which I strongly endorse. I note that HMIE will not be expected to attend consultation meetings, but it is important that it attend at least some. I am open minded about whether that means that it should attend meetings at a fixed amount of schools within any school closure programme, or whether it should have more of a roving role to evaluate the effectiveness of such meetings. It is clear from the Glasgow  experience that such meetings were poorly run and organised, and did not allow parents a genuine opportunity to express their views or to feel that they had been listened to. I will give an example. If a parent raises fears about possible territorialism issues that might arise if their child's school should close, they would expect to be listened to, as opposed to being told on the night that there are well-established criteria to eliminate such problems. That should also be the case for matters such as safe walking routes to school or child care facilities—parents were told not to worry about such matters, and their questions were answered, on the very same evening as the public consultation meeting. Parents were not looking for slick presentations at consultation meetings from council officials with pre-rehearsed answers to justify all aspects of closure; they simply wanted to feel that they were being listened to. In Glasgow, 96 per cent of 8,000 respondents to the consultation among parents and communities objected to closure plans because they felt that they had been completely ignored. There is clearly a need for some form of quality control within that aspect of any consultation process. It has to be monitored somehow, which may be a role for HMIE. If there is no independent assessment of the quality of consultations, many parents will feel that local authorities are not listening to them or conducting the process openly and transparently. I urge that consideration be given to how we monitor the quality of such consultation meetings, and to whether HMIE could be the body to do that job, although I am open to suggestions on other bodies. There is much to be welcomed in the bill; I specifically welcome the extension of the list of consultees and I am delighted that teaching staff may now be allowed to have their say during a consultation. In Glasgow, I have heard some stories about quiet words being had with staff to remind them that the council are their employers and that it would be best if they said nothing. The teaching union Educational Institute of Scotland was rather muted about the Glasgow proposals, and I know that individual teachers would have liked the protection and the right to speak their minds in public. I welcome the educational benefit statement that will be part of the process for councils, although some guidance may be needed on it. It should be retitled as something along the lines of educational analysis statement, as to call it an educational benefits statement could be a self-fulfilling prophecy and lead to an automatic assumption that the altered provision will be of benefit, which is not necessarily the case.  Councils need to move to a culture in which they will alter or throw out their initial proposals because their consultation exercise has worked and they are responsible. A willingness to do so is a sign of strength in councils.

Of course. I thank the cabinet secretary for her helpful clarification. I conclude by saying that I am delighted with the core change to allow call-in by the Scottish Government, as opposed to referral. If the bill becomes law, when a council does not comply with the requirements that are imposed on it, and does not take account of material considerations that are relevant to the decision, ministerial call-in will be an option. That is the real strength of the bill. Previously, such matters were dealt with by referral. In the future every parent, teacher, pupil and politician who disagrees with a school closure will be able to go to the Scottish Government and ask it to call in and review the decision.

Companies such as Diageo must strike a balance between, on the one hand, reducing their cost base and maximising their profits and, on the other, treating workforces and communities with the same respect that the Port Dundas workforce have already shown by exercising wage restraint in the  belief that such a move would safeguard their jobs. Does the cabinet secretary agree that, in order to secure a future for Port Dundas, Diageo must strike that balance and that, if the plant receives even a short-term reprieve, ways of reducing cost bases such as the £1 million a year that it pays in charges to Scottish Water should be considered constructively?

When reviewing consultation processes on school closures, will the cabinet secretary look at the example of Labour-controlled Glasgow City Council, which had a flawed consultation process? Although 96 per cent of parents wanted their schools to stay open, this week their schools are being closed. Can we ensure that such abhorrent decisions are never taken again?

The Labour motion is based as much on fantasy as on reality. The question is where to begin. Why not at the start? Well, not quite at the start but four lines in, Michael McMahon's motion states that the Calman commission's findings are "based firmly on evidence and engagement with the people of Scotland". Oh dear. Talk about weak foundations. I did say that the motion was based on fantasy. Of course, Calman's findings are based on evidence, if one accepts that it is okay to decide on the questions that are to be asked as part of the process of collecting such evidence and to agree that it is okay to restrict the scope of any answers that are given. Strike them from the record if they refer to independence—what a joke! That makes a mockery of the idea of real and full engagement with the Scottish people. To rule out independence and to look only at devolution is, at best, unionist navel gazing. Not considering independence was the fault line that ran through Calman, which was a closed shop in terms of its agenda. Those who wished independence and those who—heaven forbid—wanted to consider it as an option did not need to apply. The British parties employed the thought police right from day one when it came to aspects of empowering the Scottish people, our nation and the Parliament. Three lines on, the motion states that we welcome "the establishment of the steering group to take forward the report's recommendations". The people of Scotland do not need a steering group to give an emphatic yes to whether Scotland's Parliament should take decisions on air-guns, drink-driving limits or speed limits. There is overwhelming support in the Parliament and in Scottish society at large for such steps. Given that there is clear agreement, let us get on with the job. Why wait? It is time to act and deliver on those aspects of Calman now. However, that is not what the motion calls for. The motion calls for a steering group to be set up, but a steering group is unnecessary and will only create delays and, potentially, disputes. We must unite around what we agree on and act to deliver without delay. The Labour motion takes Calman from being a closed shop and turns it into a talking shop. The Scottish people deserve far better. They deserve a Scottish Parliament that  represents the Scottish people, not one where the Opposition parties are agents of the British state, rather than advocates for the Scottish people, which is disgraceful.

I am proud of the Parliament, but I am also proud of the Scottish people. Sovereignty does not lie in this chamber; it lies with the people. Mr Brown's party would forbid the people from deciding their own democratic constitutional future. What have Labour and the Liberal Democrats to fear from asking the Scottish people what they think about independence? Perhaps it is not a case of having nothing to fear but fear itself, but, rather, of having nothing to fear but the ballot box. After all, for Labour, losing Scottish elections for the first time in 2007 was followed by losing European elections in Scotland, too. Labour is trying to limit and control the constitutional debate because it is trying desperately to retain a grip on power, rather than considering what is best for the people of Scotland. It is hardly surprising that Labour does not know what is best for the Scottish people, given that it was driven from power in 2007 because it turned against the Scottish people. The Parliament is at its best when it strives for consensus. I am sure that members will agree that I am second only to Mr Kenneth Gibson in trying always to achieve consensus in the Parliament. However, it is clear that we do not have consensus on independence. Some people in the Parliament want to alter the financial arrangements between Scotland and the UK by playing with income tax levels. Others might want to look at VAT, corporation tax, or control over the taxation regime for oil and gas, which would secure revenues for the Scottish people. There are a variety of views. Some of us just want good old independence for the Scottish people. We want the ability to use our resources, to raise our own revenues and to decide whether to send our men and women to war and whether to have or reject weapons of mass destruction such as Trident. We just want independence—the natural, honest, dignified position of any self-respecting country. I tell the British parties not to use Calman as a fig leaf to protect the embarrassment of the British state. Whether or not members believe in independence, they should let the Scottish people decide.

Yes, if Jeremy Purvis is wearing his fig leaf.

That intervention shows that the Lib Dems have not got a clue on the constitution. If the United Kingdom wished to get rid of its head of state tomorrow, the UK would be a republic, irrespective of what the Scottish people wanted.

Excuse me. Jeremy Purvis has had his turn. If the UK decided to join the euro tomorrow, we would join the euro, irrespective of what the Scottish people wanted. Independence would let the Scottish people decide. Where the report states the obvious in cherry picking a range of powers, for example on speed limits and air-guns, on which we all agree, let us deliver on those proposals. We have consensus, so there is no need to faff about with steering groups in order to move forward on those areas. Where consensus does not exist, let us test Calman's fiscal tinkering against independence in a referendum. After all, we are all democrats. Why would the British parties fear democracy?

I know that Jacqueline Fleming had serious underlying health problems, but pregnant NHS staff may feel that they are at higher risk than other front-line workers. I therefore ask the First Minister to consider authorising risk assessments on front-line NHS staff who are pregnant, to ensure that they are as safe as they can be at their work. In doing so, will he bear in mind the fact that, as we are unsure of the side effects of Tamiflu on mothers and unborn children, there may be an increased risk of complications in pregnancy, of premature birth or of miscarriage?

On the other steps that the Government is taking to help homeowners, can it be estimated how many families overall may be able to stay in their homes because of the Scottish Government's extensive actions?

Decoupling the local government and Scottish Parliament elections is vital. The equality of status and esteem that this Scottish Government has been developing with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities via the concordat and single outcome agreements means that local government and Scottish Parliament elections must have equal status. Having both elections on the same day has led to local government issues being swamped by national ones. We must ensure like never before that just as Governments should stand or fall on their records, so should our councils. It is ironic that two aspects of today's parliamentary business that I have been involved with make the case for me. First, we took evidence at the Local Government and Communities Committee on the £60 million town centre regeneration fund. Alex Neil, the Minister for Housing and Communities, said he hoped that there would be a healthy geographical spread of successful bids to the fund. However, he also made it clear that the quality of the bids was crucial. If a local authority were to make a poor and unimaginative or disappointing bid and it lost out, voters might wish to express an opinion about it at the ballot box. Secondly, we had a statement on the Scottish Futures Trust and the school building programme only this afternoon. If a local authority does not make best use of its capital budget or makes a botched job of a Scottish Futures Trust bid, once again the electorate might wish to express a view at the ballot box. I picked those two examples not just because of their topicality, but because they are both Scotland-wide issues and, on another level, intimately local ones. Decoupling will allow voters to decide clearly on the merits of both national Government and local government. Although the topics debated might sometimes be the same, the performance of Governments, Opposition parties in the Parliament and local authorities will vary depending on the topic under discussion. Decoupling will enhance the clarity and the scrutiny of their performance. Indeed, it might allow some local authority electorates to wake up and smell the incompetence At the Local Government and Communities Committee, much was made of the significant  numbers of spoiled papers at the local government elections, despite the fact that there were considerably more spoiled papers in the Scottish Parliament elections. We believe that there was much below-the-radar spoiling of ballot papers in the local government elections, which was caused by misunderstanding. Many voters marked 1 and 2 on the paper and then, because of poor numeracy and literacy skills, marked 2 again. That did not count as a spoiled paper as long as the first preference vote was cast successfully. There is obviously an iceberg-type issue with spoiled papers at local government elections. I congratulate the Parliament on moving towards decoupling, but I ask the Government to ensure that there are decent public information campaigns to reduce the incidence of spoiled ballot papers.

Can the cabinet secretary confirm, so that there is absolutely no doubt, that the money that has been announced today is new money and is in addition to future local government settlements? I would like to encourage the Labour council in Glasgow to invest money in the school estate by making a bid to the SFT instead of withdrawing education from communities, as it has been doing—scandalously—recently?

The cabinet secretary will appreciate that there is growing concern about front-line public service workers; indeed, NHS workers have disproportionately borne infection. Can she provide more detail on how such workers will be supported and, just as important, what steps have been taken to communicate that message effectively to such vital and valued staff?

I congratulate Aileen Campbell on bringing this important debate to the chamber. The plight of town centres throughout Scotland should concern us all. I am concerned about the decay of many of our town centres in Glasgow, but the town centre regeneration fund offers an opportunity to assist in turning many of those areas around. We should not pretend that £60 million will solve the problems that town centres face, but, as the  minister said, we should make the best of that cash by using it effectively to leverage in additional moneys and make the biggest impact for town centres and the local communities that they support. I will return to that point later. When the town centre regeneration fund was first announced, it was widely assumed that city-located town centres need not apply. There was a clear belief that towns were towns and cities were cities, but, in planning terms, that is not true. In taking up the campaign to ensure that our cities—including Glasgow, the city that I represent—did not miss out, I met Alex Neil, the Minister for Housing and Communities. I am delighted to say that the Scottish Government has ensured that cities can apply and has attempted to make the qualification criteria as flexible and inclusive as possible. I have not left the matter there; I also met the head of Glasgow's development and regeneration services, Mr Steve Inch, and Cathy Laing, of the Glasgow North Regeneration Agency, to discuss possible bids. One of the bids is for Maryhill, so I declare an interest in the matter. Although I am a list MSP for the Glasgow region, I am a resident of Maryhill, which I consider to be home, after staying there for more than 10 years. Maryhill is a proud community, but it is not without its problems. Like many areas, it suffers from high levels of poverty and social exclusion. The more prosperous members of our community are often drawn into the city centre to high-end shops and better amenities, or to the out-of-town shopping facilities with which other town centres have experienced problems. Those who remain are often from the lower income groups, and they are left with a relatively small amount of local facilities and poor amenities. Communities should be able to celebrate their diversity, and social integration is a core element of any society. Maryhill needs more facilities that will benefit all who stay there—irrespective of their income level—and bring all parts of the wider Maryhill community together. I hope that the historical canal and botany areas, which are flanked by the barren valley area, will be at the heart of one of Glasgow's transformational regeneration areas. I hope that there will be a sizeable mix of housing developments, and a real opportunity to breathe life into an area that—as it has just lost two local schools—is crying out for amenities. At the heart of the area sits Maryhill burgh halls—a once-proud building that now lies in ruins. However, it is rising from the ashes, and the Maryhill bid for the town centre regeneration fund is critical to the regeneration of the building. The plan for the new burgh halls is central to a £1.8 million bid from Glasgow.  I will list for the minister some of the facilities that will be in the new burgh halls: a wide hall meeting area, a cafe with healthy eating options, a nursery offering up to 40 child care places, a garden courtyard civic meeting area, a gallery that will tell people about local history to build civic pride in the area, and even, believe it or not, a commercial recording studio. The project will provide child care for low-income families and create more than 100 jobs. Glasgow is asking for £1.8 million to allow more than £9 million to be invested. That really leverages in extra cash and, as the minister would say, is a big bang for the Government's buck.

It gives me great pleasure to speak in this afternoon's debate. The substantial amount of cash that has been levered in by the cashback for communities initiative is testament to Scotland's increasing success in tackling serious organised crime. From such success, communities should quite rightly reap benefit. That is the very essence of what cashback for communities is about. Dirty money, built up on the pain and heartache of communities, is now being used to assist communities. Let me share with members my direct experience of that. After I was elected in 2007, one of my first visits was to operation reclaim, which is run jointly by Strathclyde Police and Sidekix with support from a variety of community partners. That day, I met Police Constable Harry Faulds, who was out playing a game of football with youngsters in the Milton area. The Milton area is no stranger to serious organised crime; I made that point in a members' business debate that I secured in order to praise the community activists who have taken a stance against such crime. With members' indulgence, I will mention just a few of those activists. Alex O'Kane, for instance, has had his home and family targeted over the years because of his stand against drug dealers, who have for a long time peddled their misery in the local area and beyond. Indeed, only a few months ago, Alex O'Kane's house was subject to a reprisal petrol bomb attack. It would be wrong not to mention Councillor Billy McAllister, the local SNP councillor, who has also been subject to many serious threats against his person. Such people who take a stand in communities and become victims themselves need the Parliament's support. Let me describe an incident that perhaps brings home the extent of the threat that exists in our communities. When Councillor McAllister and I held a public meeting in Lambhill—just along from the Milton community—just a few years ago, several hundred people attended. The MOT station next door to the meeting venue had been witness to the cold-blooded murder of a young  man whose family was allegedly involved in organised crime. The shooting happened just a few hours before the meeting took place. After our speaking out against such criminality and violence at the public meeting that night, a call was made to our local SNP mobile phone number, saying that criminals had been in attendance at the meeting. The anonymous caller said that, if people continued to speak out, people would be hurt. The threat was, "Stay quiet or else." I mention that incident in today's debate because it is important that we never forget the pain and misery that such organised criminals cause to our communities. We must acknowledge the truly brave and heroic actions that communities take daily to stand up against the perpetrators of organised crime. It is just that the money that is recovered from such criminals is used to support our communities, and that is precisely what the cashback for communities scheme is doing in Milton and throughout north Glasgow. I return to operation reclaim. The police and sports coaches are working with young people in various locations in north Glasgow. PC Harry Faulds plays football or rugby with young people who are at risk of falling into crime, as opposed to chasing them round the housing scheme. Such diversionary activities have broken down territorial boundaries and led to a dramatic fall in the local crime figures. The cabinet secretary and the minister are aware of that. A few months ago, I visited Petershill Juniors during one of Mr MacAskill's ministerial visits. The Scottish Government had provided £15,000 to operation reclaim for intensive work with 120 known gang members in the local area over a six-month period to turn them away from organised crime. Perhaps the cashback for communities scheme will allow such schemes to be expanded. Longer-term funding for large-scale diversionary activities such as operation reclaim, which could be enhanced and expanded, could be secured. That would be a positive thing. The existence of more large-scale projects with longer-term funding would represent a positive initiative for communities from the cashback for communities scheme. Every penny that we spend on the cashback for communities scheme should improve the futures of our communities and reduce the number of youngsters who turn to crime and antisocial behaviour. In other words, we are talking about building a legacy. In our discussions in the chamber on the Commonwealth games in 2014, we have spoken a lot about building a legacy. I firmly believe that we should find a way of twinning the cashback for communities scheme's ability to fund a legacy by lifting communities out of the  grasp of organised criminals and raising the aspirations of the next generation with the hope and vibrancy that we wish to develop through having the Commonwealth games in Glasgow. The cabinet secretary should consider how the social legacy that we wish to build from the cashback for communities scheme and the Commonwealth games in Glasgow in 2014 can be developed through people working in partnership in a structured and co-ordinated fashion. I hope that that can be achieved, although I appreciate that the Commonwealth games legacy starts with a deficit of £150 million. I welcome the debate and its consensual nature. Before the debate, I looked at the figures for Glasgow. Sixteen cashback for communities projects were funded in the east end of Glasgow in the first two rounds of funding; the funding for those projects came to £266,000. In the past couple of years, my city of Glasgow has received £680,000. We should say thank you for that money, although we are entitled to it. As a Glasgow MSP, I want to get more money for Glasgow, which is natural, but we should clearly say that Glasgow receives cashback for communities money and benefits from it.

Will the member give way?

On affordable homes in Glasgow, the minister will know that I have been working closely with Maryhill Housing Association to ensure that, as a key stakeholder, it is central to plans for transformational regeneration area status there. Will the minister ensure that community-based housing associations are central to transformational regeneration areas and the development of affordable housing?

Well, it was on affordable housing.

The cabinet secretary is aware that Glasgow City Council sends a higher proportion of its waste to landfill—almost four fifths—than any other local authority does. What contacts have there been between the Scottish Government and Glasgow City Council to try to tackle that rather disappointing figure?

I am shocked and stunned to hear Patricia Ferguson, a Glasgow constituency member, being an absolute apologist  for Glasgow Labour, which is closing schools in my city. You should be ashamed of yourself. I will remind the parents that you were that apologist.

Sorry, Presiding Officer but, like the parents, I get passionate about these issues.

No, thank you. We have heard quite enough from you. To borrow a word from the Liberal Democrat motion, it is with much lament that I must criticise that illogical and ill-considered motion. The Liberal Democrats know very well that councils, not the Scottish Government, employ teachers throughout Scotland. They also know that the concordat between COSLA and the Scottish Government sets a direction of travel on class sizes. That direction of travel is clear—class sizes are falling and pupil to teacher ratios are the best in the United Kingdom. The motion is not constructive opposition; it is political opportunism. The figures show that the bulk of the drop in teacher numbers—55 per cent—is attributable to only four councils. I will return to that shortly.

I am aware that 300 additional places have been funded. In all likelihood, if the Liberal Democrats and Labour had signed a third partnership agreement, Scotland would now have even fewer teachers. We must remember that the former coalition partners promised 600 fewer teachers than there currently are in Scottish schools. Given that councils, not Governments, employ teachers, if Opposition parties had been in government now, that figure might have been far worse. The record funding of councils by the Government has given councils the opportunity to maintain teacher numbers. I will assist Opposition members with constructive opposition.

As a back bencher in the Government party, I am happy to provide Rhona Brankin with that assistance, so I ask her please to listen. Opposition members should ask the Government how it intends to work with local  authorities that are not performing to drive forward the agenda on teacher numbers and class sizes. The approach of blaming the Scottish Government for any council that is not making better progress on education surely gives local authorities a get-out-of-jail-free card. For example, in Glasgow, a Labour council is acting with impunity and arrogance in closing schools and not replacing retiring teachers. The Liberal Democrats had an opportunity to use the topic of teacher numbers to place the spotlight on a wayward local authority and to attempt to help devastated parents throughout Glasgow but, oh no, the Lib Dems did not choose that option. Instead, they put narrow party-political opportunism ahead of parents. Let me help out the Liberal Democrats. Will the minister enter into discussions with those local authorities that we would like to make more progress than they are currently making? When he does so, let us hope that the message that he passes on from the Liberal Democrats and the Labour Party is not to encourage councils to do as poorly as possible so that they can blame the SNP Government. Parents will not buy it and voters will not buy it. We will stand up for education.

Will the member take an intervention?

Glasgow 2014 is a tremendous opportunity both for the city that I represent and for the whole of Scotland. I have heard it said that the games are a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity. Given that they will happen only once, that is true by definition. They are certainly a wonderful opportunity. However, the aspirations that we have for Scotland's largest city—Glasgow—and for our nation go far beyond winning and successfully running the 2014 Glasgow games. Today we are here to talk about the legacy. One clear legacy not just for Glasgow but for Scotland will be that we will have put on a wonderful sporting event, on budget and with lasting social and economic benefits. I say "Yes" to all those things. However, by achieving them we will open the door to another lasting legacy for Scotland: when our nation shows itself to be capable of achieving such success, we will raise our profile and enhance our reputation on the international stage, which could lead to other major international events being hosted in Scotland. I have in the past spoken at length about the need for a strong social legacy for Glasgow. As I have said, although a clutch of—I hope—gold medals, fond memories on the part of visitors to our city and a host of new and upgraded facilities will be welcome, those alone would be a poor show, given the opportunities that lie before us, so I am delighted that the Scottish Government's draft legacy plan goes far beyond that. The idea of introducing, in conjunction with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and councils, a range of community sports hubs across Scotland is positive. I support that, but I stress that providing people who already exercise and who are already active in sport with better facilities is  not the best way forward. I hope that community sports hubs will be sited where participation in activities is lowest. The aim will be to bring together people from different ethnicities, income groups, ages and—this of particular importance in Glasgow—different territorial areas. Positive health outcomes and the promotion of social inclusion must go hand in hand. It is fundamental that we inspire the youngsters who are most likely to find themselves alienated by society. That inspiration might be to be more physically active, to volunteer, to learn more about other cultures or to enhance their skills by gaining from the apprenticeships in Glasgow that will flow from the games. Whatever people are inspired to do, the key thing must be that they are inspired. That will not just happen, however—we all have a responsibility to plan and work for it. In that regard, our education establishments and the voluntary sector are key players. I will give members a flavour of some of the projects in Glasgow that I believe could be key partners in inspiring Glaswegians and in building on the legacy. There is in Maryhill an organisation called realise community care project, which provides a supportive community education setting to help former addicts to build pre-employability skills and to support them in other ways. Phoenix Futures has in the north of the city a residential drug rehabilitation unit, which strives daily to turn lives around. Operation reclaim is a partnership between communities, Strathclyde Police and Sidekix. It uses Scottish Government money, via cashback for communities, and helps to break down territorial barriers by getting vulnerable youngsters involved in sport. We must find a way for the Commonwealth games legacy to help the people who benefit from such services to thrive. That is essential. I want those projects to develop and expand, and to be directly linked with Glasgow 2014. If the 2014 games pass people by, we will have let all Scotland down. I am positive, however, and I commend the efforts that have been made to ensure that Scotland gets its fair share of lottery funding to finance legacy initiatives. I praise the Big Lottery Fund, whose communities 2014 fund is already awarding small community grants of up to £1,000 to promote not just sport but, importantly, a variety of other physical activities for groups of people who are less likely to be involved in physical activity. That is entirely the right approach. It cannot be achieved without funding, but the Big Lottery Fund's approach is to maximise the benefit from whatever funding is available. I commend it for the attitude that it has shown. I am delighted by much of what is contained in the draft legacy document. In particular, I note that  it discusses "Enhancing Partnerships" and "Encouraging Community Engagement". I draw to Parliament's attention the fine work that Partick Thistle Football Club does—Margo MacDonald mentioned other football clubs. I joined Frank McAveety at Partick Thistle to promote the club letting under 16s into the ground for free, but the work that Partick Thistle does goes far beyond that. The club works with a variety of community groups, including the Glasgow Old People's Welfare Association and the mental health charity, the Scottish Association for Mental Health, to name just two. Partick Thistle does a lot of work with vulnerable groups of people who are not necessarily physically active, and does it on a shoestring budget. I ask the minister to join me and to come along to Partick Thistle FC to see the good work that it does. I believe that that sort of work could be replicated at football grounds across Scotland, and could be branded as being part of the Commonwealth games 2014 legacy. I urge the minister to consider that. There is much to be welcomed in the draft document, and there are many opportunities. In the time that I have left, I will mention just one. The games present a Scotland-wide opportunity, as Michael Matheson said, but they are also Glasgow's games. I have in the past suggested that a festival of Glasgow should take place before the games. Edinburgh has its festival, but Glasgow is also a festival city. We should have a festival in 2013, to celebrate everything that is good about the Commonwealth and Glasgow. Perhaps a legacy of the games could be a four-yearly festival for Scotland, based in Glasgow. I endorse the interim legacy plan paper and very much hope to support the final document when it is published.

On the matter of making progress on class sizes, will the cabinet secretary make urgent representations to Glasgow City Council, as the closure of many primary schools in the city will lead to higher class sizes in schools outwith the local community? Will she specifically challenge the Labour education spokesperson, Jonathan Findlay, who bizarrely defends higher class sizes as providing "larger and more flexible learning groups", and suggest to him that he should listen to his Labour counterpart on the City of Edinburgh Council, Councillor Andrew Burns, who believes that it is common sense to take account of Government class size targets in relation to any proposed school closures?

To ask the Scottish Executive, in light of any implications for fuel poverty, whether it will respond to the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets consultation on proposals in relation to the regulation of energy companies. (S3O-6488)

I thank the minister for that answer, particularly with regard to prepayment meters. When the minister responds to the Ofgem consultation, will he make the most powerful representations about the lack of action on tariff differentials, whereby customers on prepayment meters pay far more than those who pay by direct debit—the difference is £118 a year, on average. I ask him to bear it in mind that 22 per cent of people on an income of less than £10,000 a year use prepayment meters.

Does Mr Whitton accept that the Labour leader in Glasgow, Steven Purcell, has said that the school closure scheme is not financially driven? In that case, what does the issue have to do with the budget debate?

I rise to support the Local Government Finance Act 1992 (Scotland) Amendment Order 2009. I do so with the belief that, in passing the order, the Scottish Government, the Scottish Parliament and Scotland's local authorities will have worked in partnership to help hard-pressed council tax payers throughout the country, particularly during these uncertain and difficult economic times. We should put that help in context. Council tax went up by 60 per cent under Labour, and it will increase by a further 3.5 per cent on average in England this year. In Scotland, we are moving together in a different direction. To get all 32 councils to agree to freeze their council tax for two years running is an achievement that we should not underestimate.

Andy Kerr keeps talking about giving local authorities equality of status and esteem; we are giving local authorities responsibility, and it is unfortunate that Andy Kerr does not share a desire to give them that responsibility. Local authorities are working across political parties with the Scottish Government to ensure that financial respite is given to council tax payers. That will hopefully extend until 2012, with year-on-year council tax freezes that will save the average taxpayer more than £240 over the four years. That is surely welcomed by us all. Further context should be given by a wider view of local authority funding. Over a number of years, local government's share of overall Scottish Executive funding fell, dropping year on year. However, since the election of the new Scottish Government in May 2007, that has been rectified and, for the first time ever, the share of the spending cake has started to increase.

Mr Purvis should realise that councils have that choice already. They do not have to freeze council tax; they have the option of an additional uplift, directly from the Scottish Government, of more than 3 per cent. Alternatively, they can increase council tax beyond that. Clearly, that is councils' choice, and they have opted to work with the Scottish Government. This year alone, local authorities will have a 5.1 per cent increase in revenue from the Scottish Government. The assumed council tax contributions for 2009-10 come to £1.83 billion. Over the years, such assumed contributions have been increasing, and I have already mentioned just how sharp council tax rises have been as a direct consequence. However, by stepping in and taking the place of council tax payers, we ease the burden. It is not just a question of £70 million this year, but the embedded £70 million from last year. That is an additional £210 million over two years that council tax payers would otherwise have to pay. That should definitely be welcomed. That funding from the Scottish Government ensures that services are protected. My local authority, Glasgow City Council, froze council tax  before 2007. The difference is that, since 2007, the Scottish Government has been providing it with additional financial support to allow it to continue to freeze the council tax. For Glasgow, which I represent, that means an additional £7.78 million if the order is passed today. That is why I will be voting to accept the order at decision time later this afternoon.

I should perhaps apologise to Mr Kelly, as I e-mailed him before the debate to apologise for not being able to be here. However, I have stood up the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning to be here to show solidarity with Mr Kelly and the unions and to add my support. I commend James Kelly for bringing the debate to the chamber. It is important that he has done so. It shows why members' business debates exist and how they can bring everyone's attention—including that of the Scottish Government—to an issue. I thank him for that. For me, the first issue that sticks out as clear as day is that such closures involve not just job losses—there is a community tragedy when those job losses occur. When I met the unions about the  downsizing of the Glasgow passport office, they highlighted the fact that not only are the individual employees affected, but the brothers, sisters, mothers, sons, daughters and cousins are affected, too. Without doubt, entire family networks will be wiped out as being economically inactive if the factory closes. That huge impact on communities needs to be borne in mind and that is why I am taking part in today's debate to show solidarity with James Kelly, the unions and the workers. Unfortunately, as Bill Aitken pointed out, I doubt that this will be the last time we discuss such issues in the coming months or—dare I say it—in the coming years, given the current economic climate. Therefore, it is worth noting that the Local Government and Communities Committee's inquiry into child poverty is starting to give more consideration to not just how we get people off benefits and into work, but how we deal with maximising the income of those who have lost work and are now on benefits, which is clearly happening in the current economic times. In that respect, and without wishing away a single job at Vion, I believe that in the event that jobs go the Scottish Government and UK Government have a joint responsibility to ensure income maximisation for all the families who are affected. That positive action could be taken in both jurisdictions. One point that struck me about Iain Gray's question at First Minister's question time today was that, although I disagreed for party-political reasons with many of its sentiments, his question singled out one individual as being the human face of people in troubled economic times. It is important both that we hear those individual stories of the recession and that we take collective action. If we take out the party politics from today's First Minister's question time, I think that we heard general agreement between the First Minister and the official Opposition on the type of collective action that is needed to deal with the job losses in Cambuslang. I encourage James Kelly to keep pressing on the issue. He should know that he has my support and that I will work with him constructively. Things can be achieved by working constructively. For example, by doing so I was able to achieve an additional 1,000 apprenticeships for Glasgow City Council as part of a £6 million investment in Glasgow. I very much hope that those 1,000 additional apprenticeships will go not just to people who stay within the Glasgow city area but to people who live in the greater Glasgow area, including James Kelly's constituency. As a list member of the Scottish Parliament for Glasgow, I have a shared responsibility to ensure that the people of Cambuslang and Rutherglen prosper and do not suffer job losses, so I am happy to work with James Kelly on that. As Anne  McLaughlin is, I am pushing to ensure that such areas attract funding from the town centre regeneration fund. I hope to secure funding from that for Glasgow, but I give a commitment to work with James Kelly to see what we can do for Cambuslang. I will finish by talking about the action that the Scottish Government can take when such job losses happen. The PACE scheme needs to be used in Cambuslang to the greatest possible effect, so I take on board Hugh O'Donnell's point about the ability of subcontractor companies to access it. Let me also, in the light of the cross-party unity and solidarity that exists on the issue, make a genuine and serious point that I belong to a party that is a national party in Scotland—

I reject any notion that any part of Scotland receives preferential treatment, so I hope that Labour members will not turn the issue into a party-political football. Presiding Officer, let me finish off with one sentence. These are not just M and S jobs—these are the jobs of the people of Cambuslang, whose community is at risk.

The minister makes the point that we must ensure that fuel poverty schemes target those who are most fuel poor. Can he provide me with more information on the efforts that will be made to ensure that household fuel prices are affordable and that energy efficiency measures are implemented for young families that are vulnerable to fuel poverty?

Will the member give way?

I welcome this debate on student income, secured by the Liberal Democrats. I may not agree that this is the appropriate time to hold such a debate—certainly not with a consultation on student support, "Supporting a Smarter Scotland", on-going—and I may not necessarily agree with the solutions proposed by the Liberal Democrats, but it is an important topic. Given that under the previous Executive there was at best a stand-still position on tackling student debt—I am trying to be polite—and that student debt doubled, it is welcome that the Liberal Democrats and the SNP Government are perhaps moving in the same direction in relation to student support and student debt. The Scottish Government has abolished the graduate endowment, lifting £2,300-worth of debt off each student and benefiting about 50,000 students and graduates, and has reintroduced student grants to part-time students with a £38 million investment that will benefit 20,000 students. There is also a 14.6 per cent increase in funds available to tackle student hardship. Those catalysts surely set the agenda for the debate. The SNP Government has moved to tackle student hardship and debt, and the Liberal Democrats have joined us. Although I welcome that, I am sure that members will understand that I cannot support the Lib Dem motion. The Scottish Government has moved to deliver the SNP's pledges where possible. With the on-going consultation, we are keen to go further. For many students, their debt is far smaller than it was.  While not all of it has been dumped—not as much as we would like—we have gone far beyond what any other party promised the electorate at the previous election. I have an open mind on the £7,000 minimum income guarantee but, like everything else in life, funding must be identified and allocated and a delivery mechanism must be put in place. I am delighted that a further £30 million has been identified and that the Scottish Government is consulting on how to allocate those funds, but basic arithmetic shows that a £7,000 minimum income guarantee cannot be delivered using £30 million. It also pre-empts the on-going consultation. That is not right, which is why I cannot support the Lib Dem motion. That said, at least the Lib Dems are clear about what a minimum income guarantee is. I will tell members what it is not. It is not the Labour amendment. A minimum income guarantee for students is just what it says: a minimum income guarantee. It might be a cocktail of parental contribution, student grant and student loan, but, once implemented, it should be available to all students. Helping the poorest students is, of course, a positive act and is why the graduate endowment has been dumped, why parental contribution has been taken into account and why student hardship grants have been increased. However, a minimum income guarantee by definition gives all students a minimum income. If we give some students a minimum income and not others, we will not help the poorest students who will be left. The bar must be put at the same level for a minimum income guarantee. Labour's proposal is simply an oxymoron. In fact, after nearly two years in the chamber, I am beginning to feel that the Labour Party is an oxymoron. The Liberal Democrats might not agree with the Scottish Government's position this morning, but I genuinely hope that, come decision time, they will not be made a patsy by the Labour Opposition.

No.

It is a pity that Jackie Baillie cannot be with us today, when all her hard work and that of her team will, we hope, come to fruition. I send my best wishes to Jackie and her family. My part in the passage of the Disabled Persons' Parking Places (Scotland) Bill has been both formal and personal. I will return to the personal aspect a little later. My formal role was as a member of the Local Government and Communities Committee, which was the lead committee for the bill—we have already heard from other members of the committee today—and as a speaker in the stage 1 debate. We hope that the bill will be passed into law following today's stage 3 debate. Both in the Local Government and Communities Committee—which is known for robust exchanges at times—and in the debates in the chamber, we saw Parliament at its best, in our coming together across party divisions and providing effective and positive scrutiny. That is something that the new Parliament was established to do when it was reconvened in 1999, and I believe that today's passage of the bill into law is a part of achieving that. Looking back at the Official Report of stage 1, I am struck again by the amount of consensus on the issue.  At stage 1, I discussed the proposed fines for abusing bays and spoke of the light-touch rather than soft-touch enforcement by Asda stores and, hence, the 93 per cent approval rating from its customers. I wholeheartedly agree with Patricia Ferguson's comments on the Asda store in Maryhill. I, too, have visited that store—a remarkable job has been done there. At stage 1, I also spoke of the need for routine enforcement in high streets throughout Scotland to ensure that there is equal access for people with special mobility needs. The aim of the enforcement measures in the bill is not just to levy fines but to achieve equality. Fines are needed as a tool, but let us not forget that the principle is not about charging motorists but about changing attitudes to achieve equality. The charge is merely a tool to be used to that end. I said that I wanted to touch on a personal aspect in relation to the bill. My father is a blue badge holder and in the past couple of years his mobility has gone from bad to worse, quite frankly. Although he used to get out quite often using the blue badge, he now gets out maybe once or twice a month. His experience is that, if he cannot find a space when he goes to a store to go about his personal business, he has to park further away. He can use his walking stick to get into the store and spend five or 10 minutes there before returning to his car and his house, but people do not see the invisible side of such mobility issues. When someone sees a blue-badge holder going about their business, they might question whether that person needs a blue badge, but they do not see the person in pain the next day, and perhaps in bed, because they have pushed themselves to do more than they are physically capable of doing. If the bill is passed today, my father and others like him will benefit. Let us hope that the bill will change attitudes and banish ignorance. I consistently hear about cases—we have heard examples today—in which someone has used a disabled persons parking bay when they have just popped into the shop for a pint of milk or a newspaper, or are visiting a neighbour for a short while. At the same time, it could be my father or someone like him who is popping in for a pint of milk, to pay a bill, or to visit a relative. Blue badge holders do not want to be prisoners in their houses, but having a Motability car and the blue-badge scheme could make them prisoners in their cars if they cannot get out. We must take that on board. I hope that, as well as the publicity campaign to ensure that people are aware of the new law, there will be a public information campaign to tackle ignorance of the mobility needs of blue badge holders and the unseen side of their disability.  Other members have spoken about the costs. I will not go into that in great detail as I mentioned it at stage 1, but I hope that the absurdity of some local authorities' costings will focus their minds and encourage them to give us some real figures. There are serious concerns that some local authorities have inflated the costs to avoid a statutory obligation to enforce bays. If that is the case, they should be ashamed of themselves. The Equality and Human Rights Commission said: "there should be no additional administrative burdens on local authorities as a result of the Bill, because this should be part of their ongoing work under the Disability Equality Duty." It is clear that that has not always been understood. It is time for local authorities to step up to the plate. I finish by quoting the comments that I made at the beginning of my speech in the stage 1 debate, because they sum up how I feel about the bill. "For me, the bill is about ensuring that everyone in Scottish society is treated with the same respect and dignity, no matter who they are. If a person found it more difficult to access or leave their home, to use local facilities, to visit local shops or to go and see their friends simply because of the colour of their skin, their sex or their religion, the Parliament would rightly be outraged. We should not stand for it."— [ Official Report , 26 November 2008; c 12764.]  If the bill is passed today, we will ensure that people with special mobility needs are treated in the same way as others.

I begin by paying tribute to Stewart Maxwell for all his hard work and commitment as housing minister, for which I thank him. In addition, I congratulate Alex Neil on the new post to which he will, we anticipate, be appointed this afternoon. I genuinely welcome the Labour motion. Repossessions are a growing and significant problem, and I am glad that the motion acknowledges that. I also welcome the tone of the language that the motion uses in relation to the housing association grant, even if it has not been reflected in Labour members' speeches—although Rhoda Grant's speech was excellent. If time allows, I will return to HAG later. I hope that we can build a consensus on repossessions. Members will know that I have talked regularly about my massive concerns about private companies offering sell and rent back products. In doing so, I have echoed the serious concerns of the Office of Fair Trading, which has called on the UK Government to regulate the practice via the Financial Services Authority. The Office of Fair Trading has evidence that companies that offer such products significantly undervalue the houses of struggling home owners at the very time when they must count every penny and are becoming increasingly resigned to having to sell their homes in order to tackle mounting debt. The last thing they need is property cowboys robbing them blind by giving them far too little cash for the property that they are being forced to sell. Of course, the one benefit that families that are forced to sell their homes are supposed to derive is that they can stay in the family property. However, we have seen that that is not always the case, because rent level and security of tenure guarantees are often undermined and people are lied to or misled. The OFT found that that has happened. We hope that the UK Government will very soon regulate the shocking black market in repossessions, which results in pain, heartache and injustice for victims. I received a "wait and see" reply when I wrote to the UK Government on the matter. It is genuinely still considering regulation, which I expect will be introduced shortly. The Scottish Government is also pressing for regulation.  I am a member of the Local Government and Communities Committee. At its meeting this week, the SFHA and Shelter agreed with me that regulation is needed and that such repossessions put pressure on councils and housing associations throughout Scotland in respect of their meeting housing need and homelessness targets for 2012. The Labour committee members also agreed that movement is needed. I think that genuine cross-party support exists in the chamber to work with the UK Government on that.

I thank Mary Mulligan for her constructive intervention. I listened with interest to what was said during the meeting, and my immediate reaction was that the scheme should be abolished. On that level, I agree with Patricia Ferguson, but I am not sure how someone's ability to sell their house to a third party can be abolished without infringing their individual rights. However, I am interested in the UK Government's proposals. All options are on the table. Let us hope that we get the matter resolved very soon. I have met the SFHA and housing associations throughout Scotland to discuss HAG levels—as other members have—and it is clear to me that there were two core elements to the call for HAG level adjustments. Our discussions on that were useful, as I think the Government's discussions with those bodies were. My understanding is that the Government has been clear about ensuring that the assumptions that have been used to calculate HAG levels are accurate. The formula was not an issue; the aim was to ensure that the figures in it were accurate. In working out subsidies, under the old HAG assumptions the figures for rent levels, uncollected rent, inflation levels, housing association reserves and so on were not accurate, which led to the revisions for 2008-09. I am delighted that we have a Scottish Government that has moved quickly and confidently to revise HAG levels for 2009-10 in the light of changed circumstances. If the numbers change, the subsidy will change. That gets to the crux of the matter. It is up to members to move forward with cross-party consensus to support local authorities and the housing association movement. I am not sure how much time I have left. The Presiding Officer has indicated that I can keep on talking, so I will do so. It is not often that she indicates that I can do that. I want to mention one or two other things that I am proud of. I am proud of the end of the right to buy new-build properties. That is a core issue.  There has been a lot of heat around the issue of six new council houses being built under the previous Administration. We can argue about the numbers as much as we like, but how can local authorities be incentivised to build new council houses if those houses will simply be bought under the right to buy? That approach must end, and we must incentivise local authorities to get back in the market to build affordable social housing. I am delighted that 1,000 or so such houses will come online as a result of a £25 million investment. I hope that they will do so soon. I thank the Presiding Officer for her patience, and am glad to have taken part in the debate.

Does Hugh Henry agree that the reserves estimates in previous HAG assumptions were wrong and that it was the input of new numbers that led to the revised HAG assumptions last year?

I let the Presiding Officer know before the start of the debate that I would not be here for the opening speeches. I apologise to the chamber; no discourtesy was meant to any member. Play is a significant aspect of the early years framework. I am afraid that I missed what Hugh O'Donnell said about it, but I heard what Robin Harper, Robert Brown and others had to say. Active and structured play not only makes for positive health outcomes for our children, but has a far wider social and educational benefit. Removing barriers to healthy play is important. One such barrier was highlighted just yesterday by Keith Hayton in his evidence to the Local Government and Communities Committee, on which I sit. Mr Hayton has carried out research as part of our child poverty inquiry. On page 37 of his draft report, he mentions  "The difficulties of bringing up children in multi-storey blocks and low rise flats. This was seen as a particular issue with play as it was felt that young children could not be let out on their own. Even if they could be seen from a flat, should anything occur, then it would not be possible to get there quickly." He went on to quote some parents whom he had met, and I would like to share some of those comments with members. One parent said: "Families should be in a house with a garden. To put families away at the top of flats with no garden, it's just criminal. My kids are just 1 and 2. They cannot go out to play on their own. They need a garden". Another said: "They put me in a top floor flat with just a wee balcony and nowhere for the kids to play". I raise those points to draw attention to the fact that the early years framework does not exist in isolation from the idea of social regeneration in our communities. Good-quality social rented housing should be a first choice, rather than a last resort, for families in Scotland. The high-rise flats of the past, which we are now demolishing, were mistakes. We must ensure that we not only build houses but foster communities. It is in that context that our early years framework can thrive; I hope that it will thrive by engaging families in our communities. In addition, we need to challenge, in a constructive fashion, some pre-held conceptions among parents and communities. In doing so, we must raise the capacity and the expectations of families in our most deprived areas. Poverty, poor educational attainment and limited life chances should not be accepted. Our Government and our local authorities must remove the barriers to families leading happy and productive lives, and we must ensure that our most vulnerable families do not view their lot with an air of inevitability. Poverty, ill health, poor educational attainment and antisocial behaviour are not inevitable. They are symptoms of a failure of social policy in Scotland and the UK over many years. In our new Scotland, we must rectify such failings and must do so together, as a Parliament. Whenever possible, we must try our best not to be partisan just for the sake of it. I must hold my hands up and admit that that is a failing from which I sometimes suffer.

I am warmed by the fact that there are two constructive amendments to the motion; I only wish that the Labour Party's amendment was similarly constructive. Many parents will have had negative experiences of school. Some of them will rationalise that as being the school's fault. When problems arise with their own kids, they will sometimes blame the school. Sometimes parents  are in denial or view problems at school as being inevitable. The report by Mr Hayton for the Local Government and Communities Committee contained some comments from parents in situations in which problems had arisen with their children. One parent said: "If they sneeze they get excluded". Another said: "Teachers can exclude you for anything now". Another comment was: "Stop banning children for trivial reasons such as having pink hair. It doesn't affect their work and if they're happy inside it will improve their performance". The stigmatisation of some children is an issue in schools, but when there are genuine problems at school, parents are all too often not willing to accept their role in dealing with them. Such problems can often reinforce the negative experiences that parents had when they were at school. The early years framework must capacity build and reach out to parents so that they trust schools and education.

I am sorry, but I do not have time because I want to move on to free school meals; I am sure that Mary Mulligan will listen with interest to my comments on the subject. I am glad that Unison backs the idea of public services that are universal and not means tested, as does Children in Scotland, which has stated that services should provide the best outcomes for the whole child "irrespective of parental employment status". I am a long-time campaigner for universal free school meals. The issue is about the whole child. In our society, there are no rich children and no poor children; there are just children, all of whom need help and assistance. Universal free school meals provide that. Labour members may wish to know that the number of kids who did not take up free school meals, although entitled to them, and who are now taking up that entitlement has increased by 8.5 per cent. That is the effect of a Scottish Government policy—of which I am incredibly proud—on the lives of the poorest and most vulnerable children in our society. The early years framework should be about consensus politics and almost all of us in the Parliament are on board with that. I commend the early years framework to the chamber.

rose—

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress has been made on its commitment to work with local authorities to promote lower class sizes in primary schools. (S3O-5827)

I draw the cabinet secretary's attention to Glasgow City Council's proposal to close 25 primary and nursery schools in the city  and, in particular, its proposal for St Agnes's primary school in Cadder. The school has seven classes, none of which is a composite, and an average class size of 21. The council proposes to merge St Agnes's with, and move its pupils to, St Blane's primary school in Summerston, where the new school will have an average class size of 25. What representations does the cabinet secretary make to local authorities—and Glasgow City Council in particular—to ensure that they are on board with and do not fly in the face of the Government policy to lower class sizes between P1 and P3?

The cabinet secretary might find it worth while to meet the leadership of Glasgow City Council as soon as possible. I draw his attention to the financial implications of the council's plan to close 25 primary and nursery schools, with an estimated cost saving of £3.7 million. Will he impress on Glasgow City Council how many more schools it would have to close if Glasgow Labour MSPs were to vote again against the Scottish budget, which would involve the council in a £205 million budget cut?

I welcome the measures announced in the statement, which will undoubtedly tackle home repossessions. What efforts has the Scottish Government made to ensure that people are secure in their homes and are not compromised by the UK Government's failure to act on the Office of Fair Trading's recommendations that the sale and rent back market be regulated? Minister, I am worried that, in effect, there might be a black market in repossessions.

It is important that we get our new national qualifications framework right, so I welcome the Scottish Government's extensive consultation on the matter. The new framework is a testament to the way in which the previous Scottish Executive passed on to the new Scottish Government progress in relation to curriculum development and the qualifications framework. The previous Scottish Executive commissioned the OECD report, which many people regard as a springboard for the Scottish Government's proposed reforms that we are debating today. There is, therefore, continuity within the debate. In general, I support the proposed reforms and commend the Scottish Government for its approach. I will raise a few matters that particularly interest me. First, I will comment on the proposed reform of standard grade qualifications. For many, the two-year standard grade courses are too long. Courses that could be short, snappy and exciting can become a two-year drag, so many teachers will welcome the idea of a one-year course that is split into a number of internally assessed units followed by external certification. Motivating students can be a challenge at the best of times, and it can be difficult for teachers to sustain a two-year focus. I therefore welcome the recognition that the current mainstay of S4 assessment at levels 3 to 5 should change and the fact that the reform will lead to focused one-year courses. The merger with intermediate qualifications will achieve a most desirable outcome for education by decluttering the landscape—that is a most overused term, but it will be achieved in this case. Many people frown upon the foundation examination at standard grade. Some say that it is external certification just for the sake of it and that,  by using course work and internal assessment from the two years, teachers can ably assess whether a student has achieved the required standard. Teachers can ably assess students at standard grade as being of a sufficient standard to merit accreditation at level 3 or, in this case, foundation. In many ways, that makes access 3 a better option for many students and easier for teachers. However, although I believe that access 3 has far more benefits, the foundation exam has certain other benefits that I hope will not be lost. The fact, for example, that it is external can be a strength. Access 3 does not have such an external exam. For some—though not all—students at level 3, that kind of exam is an important rite of passage in their educational journey and for many teachers the external exam affirms what they already know about the ability of their students. Because many schools operate multilevel teaching, there is a very real prospect of having classrooms in which students at level 3 are studying themes similar to those being studied by students taking the new level 4 and 5 qualifications. However, the fact that there is no external exam at the end of the year could lead to problems in motivating students at level 3 and in how they view the validity and status of their own certification. The prospect of exams is the only way in which many teachers can motivate some students, and taking that away might lead to apathy and, in some cases, challenging behaviour. I am not saying that students should have to sit an external examination to achieve level 3; however, offering the option of an external examination would give added value to the access 3 qualification and prepare students who wished to move into S5. It would certainly be a new target for students who did not sit—or, indeed, did not pass—the external examination. Students who passed the external exam could progress to the new level 4 qualification, if that were deemed appropriate. Meaningful progression is important for all learners in education. Although many students will quite rightly want to pursue so-called less academic courses after S4, others will want to persevere with the learning that they enjoy. Offering the option of an external examination for level 3 would provide that kind of progression and I believe that learners at that level deserve such an opportunity. I welcome the proposals to introduce science and language baccalaureates at S6 and note that the cluster award approach mirrors that which is taken in the higher still qualifications framework. I am pleased that the baccalaureates will give students an added incentive to push themselves in these areas and that, in particular, they will help to  motivate S6 students into viewing the year not as a slack year before university but as a chance to push themselves the extra mile. However, the introduction of the baccalaureate might have an unintended consequence. As David McLetchie has pointed out, for a number of years now the social sciences have been squeezed in secondary schools. Many students skip social sciences in S5, preferring to take them in S6, while other students who did not take history or modern studies in S4 try to crash their higher in S6. Without a social science baccalaureate in S6, the hand of subjects such as history and modern studies might be weakened further when students come to choose their subjects, and I welcome the cabinet secretary's assurance that she will seriously consider extending the baccalaureate system. However, any such move must be examined and monitored closely. I welcome the provision of an extra year to bring in our new qualifications framework. Financial resources are an important issue, of course, and I believe that they will be provided. Politicians will always argue over money, figures and so on, but the biggest resource—

I am trying to make a very important point; the member should sit down and let me do so. As the biggest resource in any school is the teacher, it is vital that local authorities provide good-quality continuous professional development and in-service training, additional in-service days and so on. I am very glad that the cabinet secretary has given assurances in that respect. Teachers want courses as much as they want resources. Good teachers need core materials that they can develop into themes for their lessons, and the cabinet secretary should consider that in the build-up to the launch of the new curriculum framework. As for the proposal to extend the study time for highers to 18 months, the fact is that many youngsters who fail their highers in S5 get the shake-up that they need to pull up their socks and pass the exam in S6. One unintended consequence of running highers for 18 months from S5 into S6 is that such second chances might not arise. Most members have taken a positive approach to the debate, and I broadly support the Government's approach.

I, too, endorse CABx and the giving of £4 million to them for the provision of better-off calculations for kinship carers.

Do you appreciate the difficulties that CABx are having in making those better-off calculations because it is unclear what the Department for Work and Pensions will take off kinship carers' benefits?

rose—

With kinship care, we are debating an issue that is close to my heart. A couple of years ago, the kinship care group in north Glasgow hosted a Scotland-wide election hustings on kinship care. From that moment, I was determined to help kinship carers and their families when I could. Their commitment, hard work, dignity and passion made a real and lasting impact on me. I knew that my party—the Scottish National Party—had given commitments on kinship care, and I was keen to be elected to deliver on them. That is the context for the debate. Labour did not even send a speaker to those hustings two years ago. What is more, the Labour Party manifesto for the May 2007 elections did not mention kinship care payments at all—I hope that Rhona Brankin did not mislead the chamber earlier.

No, thank you. I have only four minutes and a lot of good news to tell. We have before us a Labour Party motion on kinship care. For that I am truly grateful, and I genuinely congratulate the Labour Party. I welcome all politicians who are converts to the cause of supporting kinship carers; the issue does not have to involve party politics. However, I will take no lessons from the Labour Party, which in eight years of running the Scottish Executive did nothing for kinship carers. It is an SNP Government in Scotland—not the Labour Party—that is giving additional funds to councils to provide kinship care payments. Kinship carers are rightly impatient for their money. I said in this chamber a few months ago that, until kinship carers see additional hard cash, they will not believe any commitment from any political party. However, they should not be taken in by other political parties, none of which promised to give kinship carers allowances equivalent to those for foster carers. They promised absolutely nothing, and it is clear that, if the Labour Party had been returned to power, not one additional penny would have been forthcoming.

I apologise—I do not have time. I acknowledge the frustration that must be felt by kinship carers who care for children who were previously designated as looked after. Because of stability issues, they have sought residency orders, and they fear that they may lose out. I understand those fears, and I give a special mention to Jessie Harvey from the north Glasgow  kinship care group, who is in the public gallery today and who has campaigned relentlessly for all kinship carers. My colleague Christina McKelvie will say more about residency orders later. Some councils are starting to deliver payments to kinship carers, building up to the equivalent amount that is paid to foster carers. My local authority—Glasgow City Council—is about to pay £40 per week for looked-after children in the new year. I wanted the council to work more quickly, and I wanted the sum to be larger. I met the leader of the council—a Labour council—and agreed that a working group should be set up to prepare for payments. That £40 is the first step in the SNP and Labour in Glasgow working together positively. Labour MSPs should stop whingeing and get with the kinship care agenda. I have heard comments about the Department for Work and Pensions potentially clawing back money from kinship carers. I have lodged a parliamentary motion to say that that should not happen under any circumstances. Many SNP members have signed it, but not one member from the Opposition benches has done so. I have written to James Purnell at the DWP to ask for clarity to be given to kinship carers and for local authorities and Scottish taxpayers not to subsidise the UK Government when all that we want to do is help the most vulnerable groups in our society. I phoned yesterday and again today to ask for that clarity, but none has been given yet. Significant amounts of money are being delivered. Kinship carers rightly want the money to be delivered as quickly as possible, and they want to see hard cash. I welcome Opposition parties now getting with the SNP agenda and converting to the cause of supporting kinship carers.

Will the Labour front-bench spokesperson please tell me what promises and commitments Labour made to kinship carers before May 2007?

Does the First Minister agree that Glasgow City Council's decision to reduce teacher numbers is purely political, given that its education budget is increasing? Does he share my concern that the Labour Party in Glasgow is playing politics with the education of Glasgow children?

Will Jackie Baillie take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

We have heard this afternoon about UK Labour's shocking mismanagement of the economy. We have also heard Labour politicians defend Gordon Brown and paint him as the all-conquering hero.

Absolutely not. That sort of talk will not wash. The current predicament of the UK, and with it Scotland, has Gordon Brown's—and perhaps Andy Kerr's—dirty mitts all over it. In fact, Gordon Brown's hands are not just dirty, they are absolutely maukit, as are Mr Kerr's in relation to PFI/PPP.

Mr Kerr was not quoting anyone—it was me who was talking, and I allowed him to intervene. Scotland's predicament results not just from UK Labour's mismanagement but from the structural weakness of Scotland within the UK, which can be rectified only by Scottish independence. Take the Barnett formula. As an SNP politician, I am clearly not a fan. The formula allows the UK Treasury to take all of Scotland's money and award it a sort of pocket money. No self-respecting nation would allow that. However, we have to work with where we are now, and here in Scotland, right now, the Barnett formula is how Scotland's financial share of the UK coffers is worked out, but that does not make it fair. It is an anomaly. Another anomaly in the current round of cuts and the pre-budget statement is the £129 million that will be taken from the Scottish budget  because of cuts in English and Welsh health spending. That is wrong. Imagine someone with two children who wants to give each of them a birthday gift of £50. One of them can find only £30-worth to spend their money on, but the other spends £50 on CDs or whatever they choose. Imagine the parent then saying to the second child that, although they have spent the £50, they have to give £20 back. Mr Kerr may laugh, but when Scotland plans a socially just budget for three years, but then has a £1 billion black hole because of Labour incompetence, I do not laugh, and neither do vulnerable people in Scotland, Mr Kerr.

Mr Kerr can dress up Labour cuts any way he likes, but vulnerable groups across Scotland will know that they are Labour cuts and that it is Labour's hatchet that falls. There is no denying that Scotland faces serious housing difficulties, but we have taken positive steps, despite the fact that not one extra penny was announced in the UK pre-budget report for housing, which was an absolute scandal: just when the UK construction industry needed more support than ever, not one extra penny was announced for housing. In the shakedown from the pre-budget report, we saw a slashing of English efforts to tackle fuel poverty, at a time when we saw a 20 per cent increase in Scottish efforts to tackle fuel poverty. The pre-budget report showed absolutely no serious efforts to redress the balance. Alistair Darling and Gordon Brown could have said, "Enough is enough. We need a windfall tax on the excessive profits of the energy companies." However, we heard nothing. They could have said, "We are changing the funding rules for carbon emissions reduction targets to make sure that Scotland gets its fair share—£100 million a year to address fuel poverty and energy efficiency." Again, we heard nothing. Those were missed opportunities, and a £1 billion bill will be coming to Scotland because of Labour's incompetence. Who is suggesting how we should address that £1 billion bill? Rhona Brankin had an idea on Barnett consequentials. When £34 million of Barnett consequentials appeared in Scotland's budgets for us to spend, Rhona Brankin was keen that it should be spent on the families of disabled children. What is sauce for the goose is sauce for the gander. If £1 billion of cuts are coming, I would like the Labour Party to suggest which services it would cut. Would Wendy Alexander, as a former communities minister, encourage Mary Mulligan to scrap the remainder of the Scottish affordable  housing budget? The SNP increased that budget by 19 per cent. Would Labour make it vanish? Would Richard Baker or Paul Martin wipe out at a stroke the £480 million Scottish prisons budget? The cuts have to be paid for somehow. They are Labour cuts, so let us hear some Labour suggestions. In Glasgow, my constituents are receiving £154.5 million over a three-year period via the SNP Government's fairer Scotland fund. That money goes to community groups and voluntary sector organisations, which do a huge amount—

Jackie Baillie says that it has been cut. Would she cut it even further? Would she abolish it at a stroke to pay for her party's incompetence? She probably would. I will finish by saying that, yes, economies hit recessions. However, I would like to think that the next time the UK economy hits a recession and the next time a UK party of any colour mismanages the economy, this country, this nation, will be independent, so that we can escape the worst ravages of UK mismanagement.

Will the member take an intervention?

To ask the First Minister, after the launch of "Achieving Our Potential", the Scottish Government's framework on tackling poverty and income inequality, what plans there are to work with the United Kingdom Government on the anti-poverty agenda. (S3F-1240)

I know that income maximisation is a key part of the Scottish Government's framework for tackling poverty, and its new energy assistance package to tackle fuel poverty includes at stage 2 a good-quality benefits and tax credits check to ensure such maximisation. However, I am worried that, in cash terms, the UK Government is not as committed as the Scottish Government is to tackling fuel poverty. Will the First Minister commit to working with the UK Government on this matter and to ensuring that Scotland gets every single penny of the renewables obligations and carbon emission reduction targets cash that it is due?

For me, the bill is about ensuring that everyone in Scottish society is treated with the same respect and dignity, no matter who they are. If a person found it more difficult to access or leave their home, to use local facilities, to visit local shops or to go and see their friends simply because of the colour of their skin, their sex or their religion, the Parliament would rightly be outraged. We should not stand for it. It should be no different for people with mobility issues, and the bill addresses equality of access for those in our society who are disabled. For that reason, I will support the Disabled Persons' Parking Places (Scotland) Bill later this afternoon. I commend Jackie Baillie for the bill. My comments are based on my experience as a member of the Local Government and Communities Committee, which took evidence on Jackie Baillie's bill. On the cost of the obligations that will be placed on local authorities should the bill be passed, the financial memorandum says that £1.7 million is required to implement designation orders on existing disabled bays throughout Scotland. However, as we have heard, Glasgow City Council estimates that around £2 million will be required in set-up costs alone, with £2.1 million required to repaint its 4,500 advisory bays. I am not sure where Glasgow City Council is getting its paint from, but the figure suggests that it does not exactly drive the best deal for my constituents and hard-pressed council tax payers. Perhaps the paint is purchased from the home decoration department of Harrods—along with some gold-handled paint-brushes—or perhaps the costs have simply been inflated. John Wilson made some pointed remarks about that, with which I associate myself. If the bill is to progress, it is vital that we get some more robust figures from local authorities, so that the obligations that are placed on them can be properly costed and planned for. As is noted in the committee's report, Euan Page of the Equality and Human Rights Commission stated: "there should be no additional administrative burdens on local authorities as a result of the Bill, because this should be part of their ongoing work under the Disability Equality Duty." If authorities have not been doing that work, why not? If legislation is needed, it is because it is time for legislation. On enforcement, I too will mention Asda—we have heard a few people mention Asda today; I promise that none of us is sponsored by it. It gave  us evidence on how it enforces disabled parking bays in its car parks. Asda works with Town and City Parking and adopts a light-touch approach to enforcement, as we heard from my committee convener, Duncan McNeil. It is important to note that, for Asda, light touch does not mean soft touch. With a small team of wardens moving between stores, basing themselves where they believe the biggest problems are, Asda has achieved a dramatic effect in freeing up disabled spaces, as we have heard. For Asda, a light touch means changing the attitudes of customers, rather than unduly charging them. By asking drivers to move on, Asda has changed attitudes without alienating its customers. Where necessary, it also issues fines. After Asda gave evidence to the committee, I took the opportunity to meet Asda and Town and City Parking at one of Asda's Glasgow stores. I saw a system that was operating very well. In the first 10 months of 2008, Asda fined a total of 185 motorists among its five Glasgow stores. That model may be a template for the owners of other private car parks in responding to the new obligations that the bill will place on local authorities to contact the owners of private car parks with a view to enforcing disabled bays. On on-street parking and enforcement, it is important to ensure that people know that the bill will not mean that there is a police officer or warden lurking around every corner. However, it should be easier to enforce the legislation in town centres and on high streets, if that is appropriate, given the likelihood that police officers and wardens will be present anyway. When the legislation is abused, I expect it to be routinely enforced and fines levied. The situation is more difficult in remote and rural areas. It is also unrealistic to expect there to be a warden or a police officer lurking around every corner if a bay is abused on housing estates and schemes throughout Scotland. Therefore, it is important that the general thrust of the legislation is about not only access and equality for disabled individuals but changing people's attitudes and behaviour. We need more idea of the guidance that will be given to those who will enforce the disabled parking scheme. For example, in local communities, might a sensible way ahead be for a community warden to chap at the door of someone who parks in a disabled bay, to warn them that they could be fined in future, rather than levying a fine there and then? We must ensure that light-touch enforcement is used when that is appropriate and that firm enforcement is used when that is appropriate. We must get the balance right.  I would like to hear more about what guidance will be issued but, all in all, I am happy to agree to the general principles of the bill.

I welcome the cabinet secretary's statement, and I regard it as a move on from previous, well-intentioned attempts to tackle fuel poverty, and a move towards attempts that are strategic and well-organised, unlike the previous attempts. I welcome the significant 20 per cent increase in funding from the Scottish Government, and I ask the cabinet secretary how negotiations are going with energy companies to achieve Scotland's fair share of £100 million per annum for CERT money?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

I will ask about the level of retirals this year—and in doing so I will not blame the Government or the historic concordat for the ageing process or for the fact that people are allowed to retire.  What will be the level of retirals this year, and what challenges—and opportunities—will that present to the teaching profession?

We have already heard that Pat Watters of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities said that the free school meals policy is fully funded. Does the cabinet secretary support the views of other members of COSLA who yesterday told the Local Government and Communities Committee that there is no need to renegotiate the concordat as a result of the policy, that any additional financial pressures on local government were external to the concordat, as they involved matters such as inflation in food and fuel prices, and that the free school meals policy is, indeed, fully funded?

To ask the Scottish Executive what recent discussions it has had with Glasgow City Council about the implementation of a local income tax based on ability to pay. (S3O-4539)

Several hundred households in north Glasgow have been re-banded, and I am led to believe that the council is struggling to cope with processing efficiently the repayment of money to the hard-working families who have overpaid. That is another financial and administrative liability on Glasgow City Council as a result of the council tax. When the cabinet secretary next meets the council, will he raise the issue with it and try to  persuade it of the powerful case for abolishing the council tax and introducing a fair local income tax?

The Scottish Federation of Housing Associations has welcomed the Scottish Government's attempts to put cash liquidity into the construction industry in Scotland. Has the Government discussed with the building industry the possibility of the United Kingdom Government doing likewise UK-wide? That is supported by the National Housing Federation in England and the SFHA is sympathetic to it.

Would it not have been advisable and courteous for the Secretary of State for Scotland to await the outcome of today's debate first?

In looking at the Gould report and considering its recommendations and their impact on the local government elections, it became apparent to members of the Local Government and Communities Committee from the start that it was nigh on impossible to ignore the clear connection between the Scottish Parliament and local government elections. The complex mix of legislation that governs the administration of both sets of elections, split between two jurisdictions, and the far-reaching conclusions of the Gould report, led to a "considerable cross-over", as the committee acknowledged in paragraph 20 of its report. With more than 146,000 spoiled papers in the Scottish Parliament elections and more than 38,000 spoiled papers in the local government elections, it is clear that much was wrong with the way in which the elections were administered. In the aftermath of the 2007 elections, the blame game between politicians started almost immediately. The question was: whose fault was the poor administration? It was most welcome to have Professor Ron Gould conduct a wholly independent investigation into the matter, the result of which was the Gould report. Publication of the report was a defining moment for the Scottish Parliament. I refer in particular to the debate and vote on the matter in the chamber in January 2008 and the committee report that we are debating today. Both the debate and our report endorsed Gould's key recommendations. Our Parliament has used the Gould report as an opportunity to move beyond the blame game and as a toolbox to work out how to ensure that we get the administration of future elections right. In the May 2007 elections, the buck stopped nowhere. Inadequate and outdated legislation, poor organisation and lack of co-ordination allowed the blame game to become one of pass the parcel between all those involved, including the previous Scottish Executive and the Scotland Office. Pass the parcel is a kids' game. I am proud that the Scottish Parliament, Scottish Government  and our committee have been adult enough to back Gould and say clearly, "In future, the buck stops here." In essence, Ron Gould said exactly that when he talked of responsibility being divided between the Scotland Office and the Scottish Government. He said: "it cannot be guaranteed that these electoral processes will be conducted effectively, due to the fragmentation of the legislation and decision-making in this context."

He said that, but he also said that responsibility should go to the Scottish Parliament because that would be the logical choice. I had hoped that today's debate would help to drive change in the Scotland Office, but the Scotland Office has yet to agree with Gould, or the Scottish Parliament, on the matter. We in this place are signed up to further devolution of executive and legislative powers to the Scottish Government and Parliament for the administration of its elections. We all want the buck to stop here, yet the Scotland Office has been resistant; indeed, it has refused. With a new broom in charge of the Scotland Office in Jim Murphy as Secretary of State for Scotland, I had hoped for more than merely a change of face; I had hoped for a change of direction. I had hoped that Jim Murphy would start his new job with a blank canvas on how the Scotland Office and UK Government respond to unified calls from our Parliament for further executive and legislative powers to be devolved to Scotland

The committee convener makes a good point, but if legislative responsibility were to be brought to this chamber that would happen quite naturally. Yesterday, I sent the Secretary of State for Scotland a letter in which I asked the UK Government to give further consideration to ensuring that the Scottish Parliament has all the legislative powers that are necessary to learn the  lessons of 2007. I also made Jim Murphy aware of today's debate. I hoped that he would reflect on the current Scotland Office position of refusal to the key Gould recommendation that "exploratory discussions take place" between the Scotland Office and the Scottish Government, with a view to assigning responsibility for both elections to the Scottish Government. However, at 6.30 pm last night, I received the Secretary of State for Scotland's short reply: there will be no change of position. For Jim Murphy not even to wait for this morning's debate is hardly the Scotland Office reflecting on the matter; rather, it is reacting, and doing so in a knee-jerk fashion. His response is an insult to the chamber. It appears to be business as usual at the Scotland Office, no matter what the Scottish Parliament decides. The Scottish Parliament believes that the Gould report provides a toolbox to modernise Scotland's elections. The response of Jim Murphy and the UK Government was to throw an almighty spanner into its works. Such a knee-jerk reaction from a UK minister does not bode well, but I am sure that the Parliament and the Scottish Government will continue to show how illogical the Scotland Office's position is. As they hear the rest of the speeches in today's debate, I hope that members will bear in mind the fact that we cannot implement fully the improvements that are necessary unless the Scotland Office plays ball. Currently, it refuses to do so.

Because it would be shut.

Will the Scottish Government take into account the recent grim statistics on child poverty when it publishes its response to the consultation on a local income tax? Will it take into account the rising fuel and food prices that many low-paid working families are experiencing when it considers any benefit that might arise from scrapping the council tax and introducing a local income tax that is based on the ability to pay?

Today's debate is a positive step forward by the Conservative party in Scotland. The motion that is before us makes reasonable requests and gives the chamber another opportunity to debate the implementation of the local income tax, which members have already voted for in principle. I welcome the Conservatives' introduction of the debate. The Conservatives' step forward is, of course, a baby step. Until they support a form of local taxation that is based on the ability to pay and stop trying to make do and mend with the unfixable, unfair and unwanted council tax, they will not be able to walk tall with the people of Scotland. They will be deserting our pensioners in particular and the modest-income, hard-working families of Scotland. The Conservative proposals for the reform of local taxation are the equivalent of placing a scabby Band-Aid on the gaping wound that is the council tax. People will not refuse the Band-Aid if it is offered to them, but they know that it ain't going to solve the problem. However, today's motion from the Conservatives is progress. It looks at the mechanics of delivering the local income tax, which is welcome. The SNP amendment is also important, and MSPs should support it, irrespective of their views on local taxation. I will make my position clear on council tax benefit: it is Scotland's money, it belongs to us and anyone who calls for it to be given back to the UK Exchequer rather than used  to support local services throughout Scotland should be ashamed of themselves. Anyone who does not support Scotland's Parliament keeping the money to which it is entitled is a stranger to defending Scotland's interests and should be ashamed of themselves. During the Labour leadership contest, both Andy Kerr and Iain Gray said that Westminster should keep council tax benefit. That is to their shame, and I hope that they will reflect on it. Perhaps they will listen to Cathy Jamieson, who said that had she won Labour's leadership election, she would have raised the matter with Gordon Brown and Alistair Darling, with a view to retaining the £400 million. I very much hope that Cathy Jamieson will be given a free vote this afternoon, so that she can vote with the SNP and the Liberals to defend Scottish money rather than with her party and the Conservatives.

I am sorry, but I have only four minutes. It is my preference that the council tax be scrapped and replaced with a local income tax based on the ability to pay. However, even if the Labour Party or the Conservatives came up with an alternative that I might agree with, I would still support the £400 million of council tax benefit being retained in Scotland. It is fundamental.

I say to Mr Brownlee that my speaking time has not changed. Derek Brownlee said that the Conservatives will discuss retaining council tax benefit in Scotland, and I welcome that progress—perhaps that was to be the subject of his intervention. Labour is now in danger of being the only party in Scotland's Parliament that is actively looking to rob Scotland of its own money and give it to Westminster. Shame on the Labour Party. I ask it to reflect on that and to start to stand up for the people of Scotland. Labour-controlled Glasgow City Council ran an online local income tax calculator and worked out that 72 per cent of Glaswegians would be better off. I will spread that word in Glasgow, and other SNP members will spread the word throughout Scotland. It is time that we scrapped the council tax and delivered a fair, just, local income tax.

Will the member take an intervention?

I will start as James Kelly finished, by commending Margo MacDonald for using her limited debating time to debate this crucial subject. I also want to pay tribute to the terrier-like campaigning abilities that she brings to the cause of securing added funding for Edinburgh. Although I might not always agree with her on issues such as trams and capital city funding, I think that she is excellent at doing what she does. Therefore, as a Glasgow MSP, I make no apology for saying—as Bill Kidd has said—that I would like the lion's share of any lottery funding that is recouped to return to the city. It would be nice to have the money: we can argue about where to allocate it once we have it. There is a growing consensus that money for good causes has been plundered in the dash for cash to underwrite the spiralling cost of the London 2012 Olympics. It was a shame to hear Jackie Baillie being an apologist for the £116 million that has been directly plundered from Scottish funds.

They will benefit from participation in the London Olympics, but they could benefit a heck of a lot more from £116 million.  I wish London a highly successful games, and any legacy benefit that can be achieved for Scotland will be welcome. However, if one were to ask community groups and voluntary sector organisations in Glasgow—the area that I represent—whether they would choose to hope and pray, and hold their breath, for some form of legacy from London, or be given the opportunity to access up to £150 million that should be in the hands of lottery fund distributors in Scotland, they would say that they would rather have the cash. I met an organisation in Royston in Glasgow called the Northern Rock Festival Group, which Frank McAveety knows quite well—I have seen a picture of him there, strumming a guitar. It is a community music group that works with young people. I have discussed ideas with the group for how a Commonwealth games legacy might benefit young people in Royston and Springburn—I will return to that later. However, the Northern Rock Festival Group tells me that given a choice between holding its breath for a London legacy and having the opportunity to reaccess up to £150 million, it would rather have the cash. That is the crux of the matter. Communities and community groups throughout Scotland, and Scottish society—all of us—will suffer because of that funding shortfall. The money could be used to build grass-roots sporting facilities and to build on community activities to achieve a legacy, whether from London in 2012 or, more significantly, from Glasgow in 2014. Within that funding shortfall, there will be a loss of £13.1 million for sportscotland, but the loss to sport goes far deeper than that. I am sure that Margo MacDonald will agree that sport is not a standalone activity: the aim is for sport to be a positive part of all our lives. Sport can bring people together, integrate and inspire people, and turn lives around. Last night, I had the pleasure of hosting a meeting of the cross-party group on racial equality in Scotland. We were joined by Ros Micklem, chair of the Equality and Human Rights Commission in Scotland. She said that, as part of the 2014 legacy, she wants to work to bring communities together in Glasgow and throughout Scotland. That is positive work that is not always related directly to sport.

I thank Margo MacDonald for that intervention. I will give two further examples of how we can use the Commonwealth games and sport for a  legacy in Glasgow. A project that I have mentioned before in the chamber is operation reclaim, which is based in Springburn in the north of Glasgow. It revolves around rugby, football and cricket coaches and Strathclyde Police working with disadvantaged youngsters in the community to break down territorial boundaries and reduce crime. The project hopes to move into the Maryhill area, but it is cash strapped, so lottery funding could help to facilitate that move. The project is using the 2014 games, and sport in general, as a force for good in society. The second example is the Northern Rock Festival Group, which I mentioned before. It is interested in producing a CD, for which young people would make up and record songs that represent each Commonwealth country that will participate in the Commonwealth games. Young people who might not go to an athletics track or a swimming pool can still connect with the Commonwealth games in their area. Such projects can give disadvantaged youngsters something positive from the Commonwealth games in Glasgow. I endorse the fantastic idea of running on the dream number ticket, to recoup some money for Glasgow's Commonwealth games. I wanted to intervene on Jamie McGrigor, who I see has left the chamber. The Tories might have been about to say that if they were to get into power, they would return the £150 million to Scotland—I would like an acknowledgement of that in their summing-up.

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with the Glasgow Bar Association about the new summary justice reforms. (S3O-4238)

The Glasgow Bar Association's opinions on summary justice reform, which have unfortunately strayed into the press, have been quite a sensitive issue. Are those opinions similar to those of other bar associations throughout Scotland?

I welcome the £4.7 million to help to eliminate rostered single crewing. That brings funding into focus—

Has any thought been given to using the polluter-pays principle to fund demands on the Scottish Ambulance Service during peak times, for instance on Friday and Saturday nights in town and city centres or when major football games are taking place?

Lord George talks about ministers taking responsibility. Who takes responsibility for the 20 per cent increase in the prison population from 2001 to 2007?

I have thoroughly enjoyed this morning's debate, which has been constructive for the most part. I particularly thank Elizabeth Smith and Robert Brown for their fascinating speeches, which added something to the debate.  I will focus on kinship care, which is mentioned in the Labour amendment. I have spoken on the topic before, and I have fully endorsed the Scottish Government and Scottish local authorities' joint commitment to introduce payments to kinship carers of looked-after children on a par with the payments to foster carers. I acknowledge that "looked after" has a legal definition and that other kinship carers will not qualify. I am glad that the Government and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities acknowledge that and are considering a variety of other ways to provide the support that such carers need. There has been a giant stride forward for the 2,000 or so kinship carers of looked-after children, 500 to 600 of whom are in Glasgow, the area that I represent. I must say, however, that many of them will not fully believe that there has been such a stride forward until they see hard cash in their bank accounts. I will return to that point later. It is certainly true of the kinship carers in Glasgow, including the kinship care group in north Glasgow, which I have met several times, and the national kinship care network that was established recently. However, we are building up trust with kinship carers. Given the years of inaction and delay from politicians, it is little wonder that expectations are high and that impatience exists. I hope that those expectations will be met before too long. It is only right that support is provided because, in the role of corporate parent, local authorities would otherwise have to place many children with foster parents or in residential care. It is widely acknowledged that, where kinship care is possible, it is far more beneficial for the child, the wider family and society as a whole. I realise that, when we reach the point at which a kinship care arrangement is necessary, something might already have gone wrong. GIRFEC is about identifying problems and providing support way before kinship care arrangements are necessary. I take that fully on board, but, as I have been involved with kinship care, I wish to develop that point.

The Scottish Government is actively reviewing ways in which to increase school meal provision and entitlement. I look forward to the successful pilots being implemented fully throughout Scotland as soon as possible. In discussing the implementation of kinship care payments, I will comment on the Glasgow experience. Initially, I found the situation  disappointing. The local authority was not ready to deliver. It was unprepared and there was a dispute about funding the kinship care payments commitment. As many members know, the Scottish Government gave £4 million to provide a range of services for kinship carers, including money for training and a national information and advice service for kinship and foster carers through Citizens Advice Scotland. I am sure that we all welcome that. However, the figure was seized upon not just by the administration of Glasgow City Council but by some Labour politicians in the Parliament, who wrongly claimed that the commitment to kinship care payments was not being delivered. That is not the case. The £4 million figure was wrongly used as a headline figure for paying for delivery of the commitment. To clarify, in a joint statement, the Scottish Government and COSLA said: "The Scottish Government and COSLA have agreed that sufficient resources have been included within the total financial settlement for local authorities to meet the commitment." The money exists and it should be used for the intended purpose. Rather than use kinship care as a political football, I asked for a meeting with Steven Purcell to discuss the matter. At the meeting, I and Councillor Phil Greene—the SNP council group spokesperson on kinship care—had constructive talks with Steven Purcell about delivery. The result was that a sub-group was convened to prepare for delivery. I hope that kinship carers will benefit soon. Glasgow City Council could have moved much more quickly to deliver for kinship carers in the city. Payments could and should have started by now. However, rather than stand on the sidelines and grumble about it, which would not have achieved anything, I tried to be constructive and proactive in my approach. I ask all members who have an interest in kinship care to do likewise. They should contact their local authorities and have constructive discussions with them about achieving delivery. There are wider issues in relation to supporting kinship carers. Scottish ministers are trying to discuss with United Kingdom ministers the fact that the complexity of the UK benefits system has an impact on kinship carers. The issues of child benefit and income maximisation for kinship carers need to be worked through. I hope that UK ministers will appreciate the approach that Scotland is taking on kinship care and work constructively with us. Again, that is something that all politicians in the Parliament can try to support. The kinship carers whom I have met provide a vital service for the children they care for, their  families, the wider community and society in general. They deserve gratitude, respect and dignity, and we are moving in the right direction in that regard. Earlier, I described developments in kinship care as a giant stride forward. I expect some local authorities to deliver very soon. As I have said, I believe that local authorities have received funding to do so. I do not know whether members have seen the film "Jerry Maguire"; if not, my next reference will be lost on them. However, I think that many kinship carers now find themselves in the position of the character Rod Tidwell, as played by Cuba Gooding Jr, who said, "Show me the money." Kinship carers are saying the same thing to local authorities.

Does the minister agree that the best use of MSPs' time, if they care about direct payments to kinship carers, is to do what I have done in Glasgow? I felt that Labour-led Glasgow City Council was dragging its heels on kinship care payments, and that it was unprepared and giving misleading information.

Does the minister believe that members, rather than grandstanding in the chamber, should meet the leaders of the relevant councils? I did that in Glasgow, and there is now a task force for implementation because a Scottish National Party member—

I hope that the cabinet secretary agrees that the proposed housing transfer ballots on 17 November represent significant progress, in that they will present the first opportunity for GHA tenants to move to proper community-based social landlords. That is something that the Labour Party failed to achieve when it was in power. I welcome the cabinet secretary's assurance that more GHA tenants will move to community ownership if they choose to do so. Does she agree that the GHA, as a transitional organisation, must implement effective proposals to ensure that it downsizes its organisation, whether that happens voluntarily or otherwise?

I will need a pair of sunglasses by the time that I have finished my speech, because the sun is shining straight into my eyes and blinding me. I thank Sandra White for bringing the debate to the Parliament and I thank the union that is involved for helpfully providing detailed information. The matter is reserved, but the debate should not give rise to a turf war about which matters should and should not be reserved. When jobs in Scotland are under threat, every member of the Parliament has a duty, a right and a responsibility to stand up for those jobs. We are clear about that. During Pauline McNeill's speech, I tried to put on the public record the fact that there can be no assurances about front-of-office jobs at the Glasgow passport office—it is wrong to say that there can be. I will return to that issue. It is absolutely right that we must deal with the facts—it is not scaremongering to talk about the facts. I want to talk about the human cost of the proposals. More than 100 workers will be affected. Because of the close-knit nature of the IPS, many of those workers could be husbands and wives or fathers and daughters. This is not the first time that their entire lives have been thrown into turmoil because of UK Government reforms, as many of them were transferred from the Department for Work and Pensions during previous reforms. We should always bear in mind the human and social cost of the proposals. Unions often get a bad name because they are not constructive, positive or optimistic when reforms are suggested. We must give credit where it is due. The PCS has considered not only the Glasgow passport office, but the entire UK infrastructure of passport offices. The union has made an incredibly worthwhile submission, arguing that if there is to be reform of the offices, we should consider everything in the round and not single out Scotland. Credit must be given to the PCS for that. It is clear that the workers and the union have been progressive, positive and optimistic, for which I commend them. I hope that every job survives and that the reforms are thwarted. The IPS has been completely irrational about the entire process. There are seven passport offices in the UK, but the IPS has decided that there should be three, for reasons to do with ID cards. Did the service consider the seven passport offices in the round and think about which to keep and which to ditch? No—it singled out Scotland's passport office and said that it is going. That is what the IPS has decided. It will go from seven offices down to six and worry about the other three offices later. Scotland's passport office is under  deep threat. That is not scaremongering; it is a fact. Some members are the lamest defenders of Scotland's jobs that I have heard in an awful long time. They must be stronger than they have been this afternoon. If a juggler has one of their arms cut off and somebody throws six balls at them and asks them to juggle, trust me, they will not be very good. The suggestion is not for a death by 1,000 cuts; it is for a death by two cuts—seven offices down to six, and then six down to three. Scotland will be out next time round in 2010 unless we resist the proposals. However, let us not be parochial. There is solidarity among all passport offices in the UK. Scotland needs a national passport service—it is a vital piece of Scottish infrastructure. The Conservative member talked about scaremongering. Some people have told scaremongering stories about an independent Scotland. I remember the stories that people in an independent Scotland would need a passport to visit their granny in Blackpool. Under the IPS reforms, people will not even be able to get a passport in Scotland, never mind use one to go down to England. The proposals are ridiculous. The passport office is a piece of Scottish infrastructure that must stay in Scotland. I will finish with a final anecdote about Scotland. The Proclaimers had a great idea when they said: "I would walk 500 miles". I thought that they were talking about unrequited love; I did not realise that it meant a 500-mile walk to England to get a passport.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way on that point?

To ask the First Minister what progress the Scottish Government is making to take forward the recommendations contained in the Gould report on the May 2007 Scottish elections. (S3F-798)

After the complete hash that the United Kingdom's Scotland Office made of last year's elections, Ron Gould and the Scottish Parliament have clearly stated that they believe that legislative competence for the running of our elections should be taken from Westminster and given to Holyrood. Given that it would be unthinkable in England if, say, the European Union were to dictate to Westminster how it went about elections to the House of Commons, does the First  Minister agree that the sooner that the Scottish Parliament has full legislative control of our nation's elections, the better?

When the cabinet secretary meets housing associations in Glasgow to discuss the Mazars report, will she work with them to make sure that those that are ready to go to second-stage transfer and which might be paying inflated valuations are not held up by any review of the Mazars study?

I, too, will focus on the parts of the motion that relate to housing stock transfer in Glasgow. Like other members, I have read the Mazars report, which was commissioned by the Glasgow and west of Scotland forum of housing associations. It makes compelling reading, and raises serious doubts about how GHA has arrived at its figures on the valuation of housing for second-stage transfer. As members have said, GHA was always supposed to be a transitional organisation—a stepping stone to community ownership by local housing associations. However, the Mazars report points to GHA unfairly pricing community-based housing associations out of taking control of the very housing stock that stock transfer was supposed to give them in the first place. The price that housing associations pay for GHA stock is supposed to be underpinned by the principle of financial neutrality. That is to say, no tenant should be worse off as a result of any second-stage transfer—a principle that I am sure we all support and the Mazars report accepts. Mazars identified a weakness in GHA's valuation process. GHA estimates that it needs to keep certain central financial reserves for its 70,000 houses. However, it estimates that it needs the same amount for managing 50,000 houses, 40,000 houses and 20,000 houses; indeed, if it had only one house, it would keep the same central reserves. Mazars considered GHA's finances and identified a series of GHA central  costs that one might reasonably assume would be reduced if it managed less stock. However, that is not the case, because GHA uses a highly questionable approach to housing stock transfer known as first and only. In other words, if only one housing association went to transfer, the reduction in costs would, at best, be marginal. The problem for GHA is that although there are 39 known business cases, totalling more than 20,000 units—or 38 per cent—of GHA stock, it does not anticipate any costs savings, except at the margins. DTZ, GHA's independent valuers, valued the stock proposed for transfer at £46.1 million, yet GHA intends to charge almost £300 million. Taken with the flawed first and only methodology employed by GHA, the Mazars study points not to a gap in funds that are needed to achieve second-stage transfer but to a potential artificially created black hole which, if costs were disaggregated appropriately, could easily be plugged. For example, GHA has not disaggregated £163 million for employee costs and support services. According to GHA's logic, even with 27,000 fewer units, those central costs remain undiminished—not one less computer operator, not one less telephonist or legal adviser, and not even one less cleaner in GHA's shiny offices in the Trongate in Glasgow city centre. Even £9 million that was set aside for tenant participation has not been disaggregated, despite there potentially being tens of thousands fewer tenants. I say to GHA that £9 million is a lot of glossy leaflets through the door of the poor last tenant who remains with GHA come second-stage transfer. They may be the most consulted tenant in social housing history.

I appreciate the tone of Johann Lamont's intervention and ask her to be patient, because I will deal with the issues she raises later. The Mazars report represents to me the possibility that second-stage transfer is structured by GHA in a way that puts unfair financial barriers before community-based housing associations and undermines the principle of financial neutrality. According to Mazars, at the end of a 30-year period, the planned cash reserve per GHA  household is £550. If 20,000 households go to SST, the financial reserve would increase to £763 per unit, despite there being 40 per cent less stock. That is not financial neutrality; it is a massive cash windfall for GHA at the expense of those of its tenants who democratically decide to transfer. An onlooker might say that GHA has come up with a charge to housing associations for SST that suits GHA, which casts it in the light of being an unwilling seller. GHA would claim that its charges are set fairly and independently, but housing associations have commissioned a weighty independent study that cannot just be brushed away. Indeed, the Mazars report's authors are the auditors of Audit Scotland. Mazars claims that the charges for SST are unfair. We have on the one side GHA and on the other the housing associations. GHA needs to respond in a meaningful way to the Mazars study. I welcome the Government's amendment, which offers to facilitate discussions and mediation between GHA and housing associations, and to commit to ensuring that the Mazars study is subject to open, transparent and independent scrutiny. The same should apply to GHA's calculations in relation to SST. I welcome the fact that the Scottish Housing Regulator will consider the issue. We need a neutral third party—an independent referee, not someone commissioned by GHA or housing associations—to get involved and consider which figures stack up, although that final referee does not need to be the regulator: I am open-minded about who it should be. Much has been made of community-based housing associations taking ownership in their communities. It is now time to deliver.

Does the member agree that a housing stock transfer vote in which tenants are told that they must vote yes or the council's housing debt will not be written off is UK Government blackmail, and that the Government should be prepared to write off the debt no matter what?

Does the minister agree that the Government anticipates that local authorities will make direct payments to kinship carers of looked-after children at the earliest opportunity during the three-year concordat? Does she also agree that that will mean additional support to kinship carers of 2,000 looked-after children—there are more than 550 in Glasgow alone—that the previous Executive failed to deliver? Does she further agree that there is nothing to prevent local authorities from supporting other kinship carers in any way that they see fit?

I begin by expressing my appreciation for all those who helped to secure the Commonwealth games for Glasgow and Scotland and all those who have been involved in the scrutiny of the bill. I welcome the Scottish Government's positive response to that scrutiny. A vital aspect of the bill that came up at committee and which I am pleased that the Government has taken seriously is the idea of the legacy of the games. I will be making a submission to that consultation, along with others, I hope. I want to explore two aspects of the legacy: first, the idea of how the sporting legacy can interact with a social legacy; and, secondly, the creation of a legacy for Glasgow and Scotland that will live on. The sporting legacy is not just about getting a clutch of medals in 2014, although we all want that to happen. Rather, it is about building on a raised awareness of sport in general and the inspiration that will be taken from cheering on our sporting heroes on their home turf. I hope that that leads to our young sportsmen and sportswomen getting an extra lift and to the seeds being sown for more sporting success, and that it encourages those who do a bit of sport and exercise to do even more. Far more important, however, is the need to reach out to those who do little or no exercise. All too often, they can be on the fringes of society, in some of our most deprived schemes and housing estates. Getting youngsters from such backgrounds to participate is our real challenge and would be a true legacy. A clutch of gold medals might go almost unnoticed in some communities or might seem to be of another world. We must ensure that the games are real to all our communities in Glasgow and Scotland. It will take community projects, youth workers, sports  coaches, local facilities and long-term funding if we are properly to engage with people who appear uninvolved in or excluded from the process and the celebration of 2014. That presents us with a challenge and an opportunity. Operation reclaim, an initiative that is run by the police in Glasgow, is an example of the sort of opportunity that I am talking about. The initiative, which involves people in participating in local sports in order to reclaim our streets, gives troubled youngsters in our communities a chance to be involved in sporting activities. It has resulted in a 37 per cent reduction in crime in the areas in which it runs and has led to young people becoming healthier. The initiative has received money as a result of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002, which I welcome. Ending violence and territorialism and impacting on grim health statistics in one fell swoop is a challenge for our nation, and operation reclaim is a perfect model on which to build a legacy for Glasgow and Scotland following the Commonwealth games. Sporting projects can be used as a springboard for social progress. The Commonwealth games give us a once-in-a generation opportunity. Legacy funding must use sport as a catalyst for tackling serious social issues. There is massive scope for inclusion. For example, with regard to volunteering, we should mobilise and involve Glasgow's grey power—the generations of Glaswegians who have contributed most to giving Glasgow its friendly reputation and image. We should also ensure that there are apprenticeships to fill the skills gap and give youngsters who need job a leg up. That would be a real legacy of the Commonwealth games. I will use my remaining time to suggest another legacy: a festival of Glasgow. Glasgow is a city that is known for festivals, and its artistic credentials precede it. The panoply of world-class festivals that complement the dozens of local fêtes and galas give a flavour of what Glasgow is all about. However, I think that we should go for a biggie. Can those individual events use the games to work towards a common, world-class arts festival and carnival that would draw in all Glasgow's communities? Celtic Connections might want to feature the links that it has within the Commonwealth. The Aye Write! festival might want to have a poetry section that celebrates the poetry of Inuits, Maoris and other indigenous Commonwealth peoples. The possibilities are endless. We should have such a festival of Glasgow the year before the Commonwealth games, in 2013, as a lead-in to the games. I can just see a parade of floats winding its way to Glasgow green in the sun. The diverse nature of Glasgow's communities  can be reflected in any festival and the social benefit that the arts can provide for Glasgow will be immense, if they can touch those in our most marginalised and excluded communities. If the festival is successful, why not have one every four years, and use that to build a special relationship with whichever country is holding the Commonwealth games? I am excited at the thought of the games coming to Glasgow, and at the thought of the world seeing Glasgow in its best light. I am also very much looking forward to the party.

If that is not what we are here to debate, why is it mentioned in the report's conclusions—not just our version of it?

As a member of the Local Government and Communities Committee, I participated in the Menie estate inquiry. During the inquiry, I asked the chief executive of Aberdeenshire Council whether the council had the power, at the beginning of the planning application process, to vary the council's scheme of delegation. In other words, could the full council consider the planning application? Mr Campbell said: "Yes. With the benefit of hindsight—which is always 20:20—we could have changed the scheme of delegation at the outset. We have now changed it so that matters of regional or national significance are reserved to the whole council."—[ Official Report , Local Government and Communities Committee , 16 January 2008; c 446.] Based on that response, I suggested that the committee might wish to consider the conclusion that Aberdeenshire Council had since changed its scheme of delegation in the light of its perceived shortcomings following the Trump application. However, not even that uncontentious suggestion was approved by the highly politicised majority of the committee. Partisanship was apparent right from the start and it badly let down our committee.

No. The member had six minutes. I have only got four. Please sit down. I and the two other SNP members of the committee made the fatal mistake of drawing conclusions that were based on facts and evidence. If only the other committee members had attempted to do likewise. I asked the First Minister what would have happened if the Menie estate application had been approved and he had been contacted by objectors to the plan. Would he have treated the objectors in the same way as he treated the Trump Organization? Mr Salmond said, "Yes, I would." He gave details of previous meetings with objectors, and he went on to say: "it is my job to help people on all sides of a debate"—[ Official Report , Local Government and Communities Committee , 23 January 2008; c 535.] It is clear that there was no favouritism, no preferential treatment and no wrongdoing. Every witness that was called before the committee was clear that they were dealing with Alex Salmond as the constituency MSP for Gordon and not as the First Minister. Why is that not fully reflected in the report?  Everyone who was involved in drafting the report accepts that the call-in decision was competent, that no rules were broken and that there is no evidence of wrongdoing. Other conclusions that appear in the report seem to have been drafted for future Labour and Lib Dem press releases. Those conclusions bear no relation to the evidence that was taken. [ Interruption. ] I and my SNP colleagues on the committee could not accept conclusions that were not evidence based. To do so would be to do the committee a disservice. Committees should scrutinise—they should not fantasise. When I entered the Parliament last May, the good reputation and strength—

You are fantasising if you think that you are getting in.

The inquiry was a fishing exercise, and what a bunch of anglers we have on the Opposition benches today. I say to them that the inquiry was more about politicking and point scoring. They should not drag down our Parliament's committee system with those things—that is simply not acceptable. The length of time that the committee took is appalling. The investigation took 22 hours of committee time. That is not acceptable, given that we spent only four hours on fuel poverty and delayed our inquiry into child poverty. That use of time does not reflect the priorities for which I came into politics. I would like us, as a committee, to move on together. We should put away the politicisation, bury the hatchet and help the people whom I and the SNP went into politics to help.

I have relatively recently returned from my first trip to Poland, where I visited Auschwitz-Birkenau, which made a deep impact on me. Does Ken Macintosh think that every time that England decides to act on something, we should be bound by a direct Barnett consequential? The amendment is well meant, but does it play politics with a serious matter?

On 21 June 2007, the Parliament stated its view that a local income tax based on the ability to pay was a much fairer system of local taxation than the discredited and unfair council tax. It is time to take the next step  and move to the delivery of that parliamentary position. That is what the parties that wish the council tax to be abolished are trying to do.

No thank you. I have only four minutes and I want to make my points clearly. What we have from the Labour Party this morning is an attempt to turn back the clock and defend the council tax. It is pretending that the Parliament has not already taken a view, that all is rosy with the council tax and that the Scottish public support the council tax. Such pretence and self-delusion will not help my constituents in Glasgow or the people of the rest of Scotland. In Glasgow, the council tax has increased by almost 51 per cent—by £408—since new Labour swept to power in the UK. It is hardly any wonder that 88 per cent of Scottish people favour taxation for local services based on income over the council tax. Citizens Advice Scotland is equally keen to see the end of the council tax. In 2005, it called on the previous, Labour and Liberal Democrat Executive to "examine fully alternative means of local government taxation, and introduce a fairer and more cost effective system as soon as possible." I am delighted that, free from the shackles of the partnership agreement with the backward-looking Labour Party, the Liberal Democrats can now play their part in answering the call of Citizens Advice Scotland, along with the SNP Government. Labour is determined to persevere with the council tax. I will highlight three problems with the council tax that would be solved by the introduction of a local income tax based on the ability to pay. The first problem is that we all know that the council tax discriminates against Scotland's pensioners and low-paid workers, because it takes no account of their ability to pay. A constituent of mine in Glasgow might have worked all their life to earn a modest salary and then find themselves retired and struggling on a fixed income. Labour does not seem to care about that. Is its advice to those pensioners that they should pay up or sell up? The SNP will treat our pensioners with a lot more respect than the Labour Party will. That is why, under a local income tax, the average pensioner couple will be £717 better off per year. The second problem is that at some point Labour will have to face up to the desperate need for a revaluation of Scottish properties if it wants the council tax to have a future. Labour put off the pain of a property revaluation when it was in  power, but it cannot possibly believe that in 2008 a property-based council tax should be predicated on the house prices of 1991. A Labour revaluation would be bad news: it would force an estimated 750,000 Scottish households to pay more. With a local income tax, the need for such a revaluation would disappear completely. The third problem is the potential unknown. Thousands of houses in Glasgow alone, and many more throughout Scotland, have been banded too high. I have discovered a number of such properties in Glasgow, and in conjunction with SNP councillors I have managed to get them brought down to the correct banding. That means that the householder, quite rightly, gets refunded previous overpayments, which often date back several years. It also means that there is a direct loss of revenue to local authorities, which, quite rightly, have to make good those overpayments from their funds. A local income tax will prevent future injustices to home owners on that front and prevent local authorities being exposed to such financial liabilities because of inaccurate bandings. The Scottish Government wishes to take forward a scheme of progressive local taxation based on the ability to pay. The Labour Party has no answer and no way of reforming the council tax. I would like to hear in its spokesperson's summing up what its alternative is.

Does the member accept that those 425 posts are being lost because of a restructuring of services in Glasgow and that it has nothing at all to do with the council tax freeze?

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

During local government reorganisation, I was fighting against Labour-led Glasgow City Council, which had council tax increases during its first three years of 20 per cent, 22 per cent and 12 per cent. Will Mr McAveety welcome for the third year running a council tax freeze in Glasgow, with the one difference this time being that there is a 3.4 per cent increase in funding from the SNP Government?

Many will be aware of a health care issue that has strong local government links. Symptoms include increased temperatures, denial, angry verbal outbursts and serious bouts of nausea. Those who are immune to the condition must avoid feeling smug or gloating. The condition can be cured simply by ensuring that the words "historic" and "concordat" are not used in proximity to each other and that the words "council", "tax" and "freeze" are never used in the same sentence. An alternative cure might be for some Opposition MSPs to grow up and own that the council tax freeze is a good thing for the people of Scotland. The Scottish Government's pledge to work for a council tax freeze has been delivered, not by the Government or local authorities working in isolation, but by both working together as equal partners. All parties in the Parliament should warmly welcome that. It is crucial that the Parliament respects the concordat and local authorities' decisions to freeze council tax, in the knowledge that by doing so they will gain extra revenue, which Pat Watters of COSLA estimated to be the equivalent of a 3.4 per cent uplift in revenue that will not cost council tax payers a penny. With that, hard-pressed council tax payers will experience a real-terms cut in their council tax, rather than the average 62 per cent increase since 1997. I know that many of our pensioners will celebrate the council tax freeze. That is why I urge every member to vote for the order, which will allow funds to be transferred to local authorities. I hope that we can build on that and soon deliver a fair local income tax. We often have political knockabouts in the chamber, and I admit that I am no innocent in the matter. When a Glasgow Labour councillor said "God bless" the SNP for the additional financial support that Glasgow City Council would receive as a result of the council tax freeze, a wee motion from me appeared in the Business Bulletin to welcome those comments. I thank all those who supported that motion. No Labour MSP has seen fit to sign it, but I live in hope.  That councillor, whose comments appeared in the Evening Times , also said that the Scottish Government was giving Glasgow City Council "money to do what we were planning to do anyway." That point is crucial. At a stroke, those comments put paid to the lies and scaremongering—spread throughout Scotland and fuelled by Opposition politicians—that a council tax freeze would lead to cuts. We know that that is untrue and we must remind ourselves again of the moneys that will be given to local government: £34.8 billion in the next three years, which represents a 12.9 per cent increase.

According to Lewis Macdonald, only Aberdeen MSPs are allowed to talk about Aberdeen, so I could not possibly comment—I apologise. For the first time, local government will receive an increased share of the spending cake rather than a smaller slice, as it did under the previous Executive. That spending cake will not be top sliced as it was by the previous Executive, which demanded efficiency savings of local authorities that had the disincentive of knowing that they would not receive a single penny back—they were robbed of those savings. The Scottish Parliament information centre estimates that the Government's end to top slicing and allowing local authorities to keep their efficiency savings will raise an additional £658 million for councils over the next three years.

On that point?

No, thank you. The previous Executive would have denied local authorities that money, but we will ensure that local authorities keep it. Let us have an end to scare stories. They cheapen the Opposition and the Parliament itself. We should support councils and hard-pressed council tax payers by approving the order.

I have been working closely with the Realise Community Project, which is an employability project in Maryhill in Glasgow that was formerly funded by the new futures fund. I met Glasgow community planning partnership, which has moneys under the  fairer Scotland fund from the new futures fund. Does the First Minister agree that community planning partnerships must be independent of Government and that working with voluntary sector organisations, as I am doing, is far more constructive than engaging in the cheap scaremongering and politicking that we hear from Opposition members?

To ask the Scottish Executive what rules are in place to allow the alteration of catchment areas for schools where more than one local authority is involved. (S3O-2682)

The minister will be aware of an on-going dispute between Glasgow City Council and East Renfrewshire Council over whether students who attend St Angela's primary school in Glasgow can continue to attend St Ninian's secondary school in East Renfrewshire, as they always have done. Depending on which local authority we speak to, catchment areas have been changed without consultation, or they have been reinterpreted but not changed. Either way, more than 20 pupils and their families are anxious, worried and having sleepless nights while the lawyers slug it out. Will the minister work with both local authorities to end the dispute and provide certainty and stability for parents and children who believe, as I do, that they have the right to go to the school that they were always going to attend, St Ninian's secondary?

Is Jim Tolson aware that in 2004 Mike Weir MP tried to amend the UK Energy Bill to ensure that additional tariffs in prepayment meters would not be allowed? In 2008, Alistair Darling has again refused to act. Does the member agree that, as a one-stop shop to tackling fuel poverty, competence for energy prices should be returned to this Parliament so that we can tackle fuel poverty?

Would Johann Lamont like to redirect the more than half a billion pounds that is being spent on the Edinburgh trams to tackle fuel poverty?

rose—

Realise Community Project in Maryhill, which is a voluntary sector organisation in my region, provides education and employability support for adults who are recovering drug and alcohol addicts. As a small local voluntary sector organisation, it is finding it difficult to work in partnership with the Glasgow community planning partnership and Glasgow works because of their criteria for funding and how they tender for providers of key employability services.

Will the minister meet me to discuss the plight of the Realise Community Project, which might soon have to close because of those issues, and to discuss what advice and support the Scottish Government can give it?

It is right that I begin my speech by congratulating all those who were involved in the successful bid to bring the Commonwealth games to Glasgow. I was in the Old Fruitmarket in Glasgow when the result of the bidding process was beamed back live from Sri Lanka. The atmosphere on that day was electric during the build-up to the announcement, and it was euphoric after the successful bid was announced. The sight of Wendy Alexander, Nicola Sturgeon and Annabel Goldie on stage dancing with one another was truly something to behold. Such unity and shared joy among political parties was a pleasure to watch—although perhaps the dancing abilities of those whom I have mentioned were not. It was a joy to watch the many schoolchildren and young athletes who made up the bulk of the crowd that day as they celebrated the announcement. Their energy and enthusiasm were inspirational. I know from subsequent news coverage that such scenes were repeated in schools and sports centres throughout Glasgow. On the way home that afternoon, my friends—one of whom possessed the largest saltire that I have ever seen—and I met a group of Glasgow workmen, who were aware that an announcement was to be made that afternoon. They asked us what the result was, although given the grins on our faces, they may have had a sneaking suspicion that the announcement had been positive. When they heard the good news, one of them asked my friend whether they could borrow the flag. I use the word "borrow" advisedly; in Glasgow, it means that you ain't getting back what has been borrowed. The flag was readily handed over. Thirty seconds later, it found its way to the top of a scaffolded building that the workmen had been working on—I also use the word "working" advisedly. A number of proud and patriotic chants and songs from our new-found friends followed in the dulcet tones that only Glasgow workies are capable of. After a while, the owner of the flag  thought that it would be best not to try to get it back, and we went on our way. I tell that story because it is connected to the idea of providing a legacy. If we could bottle the feel-good factor that was shown in the Old Fruitmarket, schools and sports centres and by the workmen whom we met that day, it would go a long way towards raising the expectations and aspirations of many of the most vulnerable and impoverished communities in Glasgow. However, life does not work like that, which is why the legacy for Glasgow and for Scotland is incredibly important.

Sporting infrastructure is incredibly important. Not just the large buildings and stadia that will host the athletes but infrastructure in working-class communities throughout Glasgow are important. Those communities should punch their weight in winning medals in Commonwealth and Olympic games. Warm talk and good intentions will not achieve the legacy. A co-ordinated approach to the build-up of the 2014 Commonwealth games and beyond is essential. Unless the feel-good factor is harnessed and built on through action and financial support, there will be no legacy. We have a wonderful opportunity. The Local Government and Communities Committee noted in its stage 1 report that sportscotland told the Finance Committee that "significant investment" will be required if we want a legacy. We should all be aware of that. People must put their money where their mouth is. The Local Government and Communities Committee endorsed the Finance Committee's view that lottery funding should be sought, to allow "more money to be invested in grass-roots sport development". I support the London Olympics, but it is accepted that the decision to divert money to the Olympics will directly affect grass-roots sport in Scotland. If the Government successfully sources an additional £150 million of lottery funding, we will be in a stand-still situation. Some members might argue that more money should be supplied, so that the UK can fund a legacy. Even if the Commonwealth games had all the funding in the world, it would be crucial to spend  the money wisely. A general principle of the bill is the development of grass-roots sport. I support that principle, but what do we mean by it? We must develop grass-roots sport in Scotland on the back of the games, but we must remember that the Commonwealth games will be not just Scotland's but Glasgow's games. I hope that consideration will be given to the host city, which has the worst levels of poverty and deprivation in Scotland, health statistics that would make some developing nations blush and the most serious youth disorder and gang problems in the UK. If ever there was a place on which we needed to focus £150 million of investment, it is Glasgow, and grass-roots sporting facilities in the city. I hope that the vast bulk of money raised from lottery funding will go directly to Glasgow. Good projects already exist in the city, which aim to break down gang culture and territorial boundaries and attempt to divert youngsters, via sport, from disorder. Such projects must be encouraged, funded and expanded. If we want to bottle enthusiasm and civic pride in the Commonwealth games and their legacy, it will cost money. If there is a pot of cash worth £150 million at the end of a rainbow, the vast majority must be spent in the deprived communities of Glasgow.

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government considers that lottery funding could make a contribution to building a legacy for the 2014 Commonwealth games. (S3F-00530)

I encourage all MSPs to read the Government's lasting legacy consultation paper and to submit their own response to that vastly ambitious document. However, such ambitions do not come cheap. Will the First Minister detail how the Government will attempt to recoup the £150 million that has been robbed from Scottish good causes by unionist MPs to fund the London Olympics and use it to assist the funding of a lasting legacy for Glasgow and Scotland from the Commonwealth games?

I welcome the single seller survey, which is an excellent idea. If I may, I will cut to the chase by mentioning one of its most positive aspects. Many first-time buyers are attracted to view a property based on an asking price of, say, £100,000. When they then obtain a basic valuation for which they need to pay, they might find that the property is worth £150,000 or £160,000—a sum that they could not possibly pay. The only people who win in such a system are the valuers, as it does no good to sellers of property to have an artificially low asking price. The property market in Scotland should not require first-time buyers to face an outlay for a valuation to see whether they can afford a property.

I will be interested to see the detail of those figures, but I am sure that Mr McLetchie knows very well that lawyers, solicitors and valuers always win. However, the new system will put in place some safeguards. Let me mention a second safeguard under the new system. At the moment, many people get only a basic valuation done. Constituents of mine have found out that they must pay a quarter share of a £230,000 bill for roofing repairs. As first-time buyers, they had no idea before they moved into the property that they would be liable for that because they got only a basic valuation. What protection was there for my constituents? None whatsoever. The Housing (Scotland) Act 2006 (Prescribed Documents) Regulations 2008 will put that protection in place. Let me mention a further protection that will be provided. Not that long ago, I was a first-time buyer of a property to which adaptations had been made before I moved in. At one level, the property that I bought after a basic valuation was quite simply a pig in a poke. I was fortunate that the adaptations had been carried out safely and to good standards, but I had no comeback on them. However, some constituents have not been as lucky. That protection must be available for everyone. It has been pointed out that the pilot schemes were unsuccessful, but compulsory implementation is sometimes required to achieve a Government objective. This is one of those  occasions, and that is why we must pass the legislation today. Finally, how could Mr McLetchie possibly oppose the energy report that will be required under the regulations? It is essential that we ensure that fuel poverty is tackled and that we increase the energy efficiency of properties. If a property's value comes to be measured by its energy efficiency, that is somewhere that we all want to be. I urge members to vote for the motion.

I begin by praising Parliament for passing the first budget by a minority Government in the Scottish Parliament. Without it, today's transfer of money to our local authorities would not have been possible. Without it, council tax payers could have been faced with a 22 per cent increase to deliver services. I will return to the council tax later in my speech. In one respect, the fact that the budget was delivered by an SNP Government is irrelevant. Because we have a minority Government, different parties with different priorities and perspectives were forced to work together in the best way to take Scotland forward. I know that the Scottish Green Party will not agree with all the SNP Government's priorities for local government. The passage of the budget yesterday and the transfer of funds to local authorities today will lead to a council tax freeze across—I hope—all Scotland. I also hope that we will use our fragile majority in the chamber to bring in a local income tax to replace the deeply unfair council tax. I am aware that the Greens favour a land value tax, but they know that freezing the council tax makes more likely the alternative that I support and which they do not. However, the Greens did not throw up their hands in despair and irresponsibly threaten to block the budget; they worked with the minority Government to balance the budget towards some of their objectives. For them to abstain yesterday was a mature and principled decision, although I hope for their full support in future years. Margo MacDonald similarly represented her constituents' interests in a forceful and constructive way and, in the end, supported our minority Government's budget.

No. Given Ms MacDonald's track record in the Lothians, I sometimes wish that she would  consider a transfer to Glasgow, although given her prowess at garnering list votes, perhaps not. I assure the Deputy Presiding Officer that there is no topic drift in my speech and that I will show the relevance of my points shortly. However, I must briefly mention the Conservatives. I am sure that Mr McLetchie, my fellow Local Government and Communities Committee member, will be able to guarantee that there is no rightwards shift in my politics on our subject committee. The Conservatives voted for the SNP budget yesterday, enabling this order to be passed today. They said that the budget is not a Conservative budget, but they searched for common ground with the Government and were able to find it, and so took a mature and responsible decision to support the budget. What can I say about Labour and the Liberal Democrats? As I intend to stay positive during this debate, I will say nothing whatever about them. Today, money will be transferred to local government—members will note that it has taken me more than three minutes to refer to the historic concordat between the Government and local government, which is probably a record for an SNP MSP these days. In some ways, the most historic aspect of the concordat is that it was signed at all. The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities has traditionally been perceived as a Labour-dominated organisation, but it worked with an SNP Government, which it has never had to do before. It has developed an excellent, professional working arrangement and the concordat is the provable result. The money that we pass to local government today will be better used because of the new arrangements underpinning the concordat and single outcome agreements, and all our communities will benefit as a result. A vast reduction in ring fencing will give local authorities the flexibility that they need to deliver the best services without costly and time-consuming bureaucracy. Local authorities will also be able to keep their efficiency savings for the first time so that they can re-invest in front-line services. If local authorities had had that right under the previous Executive, they would have had an additional £160 million.

It is a bit rich of Mr Kerr to mention free personal care. It is our party that has increased support for free personal care, which the previous Executive failed to do.  In Glasgow, the city that I represent, the controlling Labour group has said that it will support the freezing of council tax. The extra revenue that such a freeze will give Glasgow City Council is equivalent to a 3.4 per cent uplift in council tax revenue, but it will not cost Glasgow council tax payers a single extra penny. That is because of the additional £70 million that the Local Government Finance (Scotland) Order 2008 will make available to local authorities. The Glasgow Labour councillor who, in conversation with a reporter from the Evening Times the other day, said "God bless" the SNP might have had his or her tongue stuck in their cheek, but the reality beneath the comments on Glasgow's council tax freeze is spreading within local authorities throughout Scotland. Local authorities are able to work with an SNP Government to provide significant benefit for their communities—the concordat is testament to that. Councillors across Scotland are able to put party-political differences to one side and work together for the benefit of all communities. Parliament partially managed to do likewise yesterday: I hope that it will do so again today. However, I genuinely believe that, throughout the budget process, the Labour Party and the Liberal Democrats have let Parliament down with their scaremongering and negative attitude. I look forward to the order being agreed to.

Is the cabinet secretary aware that in 1993 the Conservative Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Employment, Miss Ann Widdecombe, messed up a Government review of equal pay gloriously by including a retrospective limit of only two years in the Sex Discrimination and Equal Pay (Remedies) Regulations 1993? Does he agree with Unison's submission to the Finance Committee's review of single status agreements that that "seriously undermined the ability of local government employers and trade unions to accurately project the costs of equal pay during single status negotiations in 1999"? Does he further agree that any additional financial support to local authorities for equal pay should come from south of the border and that we should look to successive incompetent United Kingdom Governments to pick up the bill?

I join David Caldwell, who is the director of Universities Scotland, in welcoming the additional £10 million that the Government has given the higher education sector. I ask for details about the  possibility of a concordat with higher education institutions. I hope that—

And higher education.

Will support for science be part of any future concordat with higher education institutions?

What does the member suggest would be a nationalist tinge to the teaching of Scottish history?

Thanks for that, Jim.

To ask the Scottish Executive what recent discussions it has had with Glasgow City Council. (S3O-1941)

Recently, in light of representations from the North Kelvin Residents Group, I have been in correspondence with Glasgow City Council on the problems with houses in multiple occupation in the area. The issue is whether the council's planning department is abiding by its quota of 5 per cent for HMOs in designated blocks. The council has made me aware that, even when a local authority refuses planning permission for an HMO, the council's licensing department has no power to turn down a licensing application on that basis but has to use a narrow set of criteria that bear no relation to the planning decision. Will the cabinet secretary review the relationship between local authority planning and licensing sections and how they operate with each other to provide an effectively managed and joined-up approach to the planning for and management of HMOs in their communities?

I am delighted to have the opportunity to speak in this afternoon's debate on the findings of the OECD review of the quality and equity of schooling in Scotland. As others have said, it is important to acknowledge that much in the review is to be welcomed. By and large, our education system compares favourably with many of our international competitors. For example, we are above average in the three literacies of science, maths and reading; we have one of the lowest levels of poorly performing pupils in OECD countries; and the gap between the top quartile and the bottom quartile is below the OECD average. However, the PISA findings show that our international position has slipped compared with 2003. Figures also show that the number of our students who end up in the not in education, employment or training category remains stubbornly and worryingly high: the 1999 figure was 37,000 and the 2005 figure was 36,000. I do not use those facts to criticise the previous Executive; I am simply stating the present position. We have to go forward together in the education debate in order to achieve success for our schools and our schoolchildren. It is in that context that we view the OECD review and its concerns about inequality in educational attainment. I note the point that the report makes about that: "Little of the variation in student achievement in Scotland is associated with the ways in which schools differ. Most of it is connected with how children differ ... children from poorer homes are more likely to underachieve, disengage from schoolwork, leave school earlier than others, and—if they continue—study at lower academic levels and record lower pass rates." Rhona Brankin touched on a similar section of the report.  The previous Scottish Executive attempted to progress the situation, and we must examine the schools of ambition scheme in that context. After a bit of research, I found that Springburn academy is working to incentivise parents from deprived areas to take a real interest in the progress of their children. The situation is not all bleak, but we have to improve and move forward together. The Government's early years strategy will assist in tackling social inequalities in education, and it is right that it should be monitored in years to come. Indeed, it will take a number of years to see the benefits that our youngest children will derive from the strategy and carry through to their secondary education experience. We must also ensure that pupils who are at secondary school today have the best possible education experience in terms of educational attainment and the quality of the learning experience. With the curriculum for excellence and the very interesting recommendations in the OECD report, we could be entering a period of great change in secondary schools in the next few years. I turn to one of the OECD recommendations—that standard grade examinations should be phased out as part of the new three-to-18 curriculum. There is much reasoning behind that recommendation, and much of it might even be logical, but ditching standard grades could be the proverbial throwing the baby out with the bath water, although I remain open-minded. When standard grades were introduced, there was a belief that students of all abilities could study across a full range of subjects and be assessed at an appropriate level. The concept was meaningful certification for all. Many students and teachers might now believe that a system in which the majority of students study, say, eight standard grades across a range of subjects and courses that seem to some to drag on for two years is in need of review and reform. However, I am not sure about scrapping standard grades completely. The OECD contrasts what could be achieved by abolishing standard grades with how it interprets the current system. It refers to "a reformed programme of studies that is seen as purposeful and meaningful and can aim at high accomplishment in a range of areas or a transcript of examination results which shows how little academic learning has occurred". The OECD says that that is the choice to be made.

I thank the member for that intervention. I was one of the guinea pigs in the first year of the standard grades intake. It was put to us that standard grades meant certification for all. I do not know whether that is a good or a bad thing to say about the standard grades system. Although there is an element of truth in the OECD review's comments, it misses the point. It may be true that some students are sitting in low standard grade sets waiting for two years to get the grade 6 that they and perhaps their teachers anticipated anyway. On entering S3, the standard grades route may not be the most appropriate for many. Greater flexibility and a variety of provision are needed in S3 and S4 to ensure that many students are not left disillusioned and simply marking time. That is what much of the new skills for work programme is about. I recognise the need for change. However, there is another story to tell. Although many students might not be high achievers or at the top end of the academic spectrum, they still enjoy the subjects that they study. Indeed, they might gain satisfaction from accessing the curriculum at an appropriate level for their needs and they might not want that opportunity to be taken away. In that context, I note Liz Smith's comment that if standard grades are to be replaced they should be replaced in S4 with intermediate 2 qualifications, which are at credit level and beyond. I am incredibly wary of such a move, as it could mean that summative assessment at the end of S4 would be for only the very highest achievers in academic subjects. I am open-minded on the matter, but I want to ensure that elements of choice and diversity in the current system are not lost. The OECD's apparent suggestion that summative assessment should be removed requires closer examination. However, I agree that it might be possible to merge the higher still S5 and S6 curriculum with what is happening at standard grade. As I have said, I remain open-minded about the future of certification and the curriculum in S3 and S4, and I am interested in hearing other members' comments on the issue.

As a member of the Local Government and Communities Committee, I have some information for the member. We are examining not the Scottish parliamentary elections but the council elections.

To ask the Scottish Executive what concerns it has in respect of workers entering Scotland under the fresh talent initiative, in light of reports of the exploitation of migrant workers. (S3O-1777)

Clearly, the level of exploitation that is experienced by different migrant worker groups varies. Migrant workers under the fresh talent initiative generally fare better than many others. The minister might be aware of last December's joint report from Citizens Advice and Citizens Advice Scotland, which warned that "exploitative practices such as non payment of tax and national insurance are putting good employers at a competitive disadvantage". It also said that many migrant employees suffer exploitation. For example, they might not receive the minimum wage, they might "be required to work excessively long hours or are denied proper rest breaks", and they could "be summarily dismissed simply for being pregnant". Does the minister believe that all migrant workers should have similar levels of protection in the workplace? Given the reserved nature of much of the legislation governing this issue, will the Scottish Government consider working in  conjunction with the United Kingdom Administration to tackle such inequality and social injustice?

The speedy conclusion to the Scottish Government's review of sportscotland has been both practical and radical and demonstrates clearly the SNP's active commitment to the people of Glasgow. I emphatically welcome the decision. Does the minister agree that it will not only enrich the forthcoming Commonwealth games, but support our nation's current and budding sporting heroes and play a significant role in the regeneration of the east end of Glasgow? When Labour was in power, we had words and uncertainty about sportscotland but, from the SNP Government, we have actions to benefit the people of Glasgow.

It gives me great pleasure to say that the local government budget and the concordat that was signed by the Scottish Government and COSLA mark a positive turning point in the way in which councils throughout Scotland are treated and, indeed, respected. They mark a welcome turning point not just in halting the decline in local government funding as part of the overall spending cake that Scotland's Government provides, but in reversing that trend. Under Labour and the Liberal Democrats, local authorities got an ever-decreasing slice of the overall spending cake and were, in effect, experiencing a relative budget shrink. It has taken an SNP Government to right that wrong, and we should all be proud of that. Local authorities will see budgets increase in real terms by 4.9 per cent over the lifetime of the budget, compared with 4.6 per cent for government as a whole. That is a clear indicator of the importance that our SNP Government places on local government. It is not only about the money that local authorities will get; it is about the relationship between the Scottish Government and local government—a relationship that engages  local government at an earlier stage in a much more meaningful way. There is "a firm commitment from both spheres of government to build a relationship of mutual respect and partnership. ... We welcome the tenor of the Concordat, which points out it is for the Scottish Government to set the direction of policy and then to jointly agree outcomes with Local Government." Members would expect me to say that, but I did not write it—it is part of COSLA's written evidence to the Local Government and Communities Committee.

No, thank you. There is a lot of good news to talk about and I do not have time to take an intervention. We should not underestimate just how significant and historic the concordat is. One aspect of the concordat has generated much political heat in recent weeks—ring fencing. COSLA and local authorities have welcomed the reduction in the amount of funds that are ring fenced—a reduction from £2.7 billion to £0.3 billion. COSLA has expressed clearly the benefits of the reduction of ring fencing to our communities and to the way in which local authorities are able to support the most vulnerable groups. I cast my eyes to the Labour benches and notice that none of the Labour members of the Local Government and Communities Committee have bothered to turn up for the debate, which is disgraceful and should not be allowed. They should be chastised for that. In providing reassurance, Councillor Pat Watters, the president of COSLA, made a telling contribution to my committee—it is my committee now, as the other members have not turned up—and I believe that it is right to mention it again in the chamber. Perhaps this time Wendy Alexander—who also has not turned up for the debate—and her propaganda machine will listen. Councillor Watters said: "There is not an authority that does not value highly the input of the voluntary sector in its community." He went on to say: "Is there an assumption that, because we have greater flexibility, we will be irresponsible? I do not think so."—[ Official Report , Local Government and Communities Committee , 5 December 2007; c 347-8.] Those are Councillor Pat Watters's words. What a bizarre situation we find ourselves in. Councillor Watters—a Labour councillor and certainly no flag waver for the SNP—heads up a delegation from COSLA, meets John Swinney, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable  Growth, a historic concordat is signed and Councillor Watters states that the settlement was the best deal possible in a tight financial settlement.

COSLA and the SNP Government agreed a watershed deal, having left party-political interests at the door to sit around the table for professional discussions—without political partisanship. There is perhaps nothing bizarre about that.

The bizarre thing is that Labour in the Scottish Parliament is doing everything in its power to run a wrecking ball through the concordat, for reasons of petty party-political partisan politicking, which shows the very worst in narrow-minded self-interest. Actually, I should offer an apology. I did not mean to use the word "bizarre"; the word that I was looking for is "shameful". Let a Labour MSP intervene now, in my last minute, to tell me about a Labour councillor or council group that they do not trust. Now is their opportunity. Now is their time.

Their silence is absolutely deafening. With the end of top-slicing, which robbed local authorities of £160 million in the last spending review—money that you stole from them—

—and the expected council tax freeze, we will not increase council tax by 3.4 per cent, which is what Labour would like to see happen. I commend the budget and the concordat to the Parliament.

The minister will be aware that, over the next three years, 19 per cent more will be spent on affordable housing—despite average growth in the Scottish budget from London Labour of only 3.8 per cent. That was confirmed by Professor David Bell, the adviser to the Finance Committee. Does the minister consider that a fair deal for affordable housing under such a tight financial settlement? Will he provide more detail on how housing associations might use their housing association grants better, to provide more new social rented properties at a better price to the public purse?

Before the election on 3 May, I met a group of kinship carers in Possilpark, Maryhill. That group in the north of Glasgow organised an election hustings and invited kinship carers from across Scotland to attend, ask questions and listen. At the hustings, I pledged to campaign to give kinship carers of looked-after children parity of esteem and financial support with foster carers. I returned to the north  Glasgow kinship care group after my election and gave the same pledge. It is with great pride and humility—something that I will return to shortly—that today I can say that the promise looks like it will be fulfilled. It will be fulfilled not just by our new Scottish National Party Government—this is not about party politics—but by local authorities throughout Scotland, whose representative body, COSLA, and 32 leaders have supported the local government concordat, which says that the allowances to kinship carers of looked-after children should be equivalent to those for foster carers. The concordat is also central to the fostering and kinship care strategy that was launched yesterday. It is a team effort by our nation's Government and local government that will vastly improve the lives of many of our most vulnerable families. As we have heard, the Fostering Network has recommended an allowance of between £119 and £198 per week, and that figure has been accepted by the Government as a minimum level of support. That money can make a dramatic difference to the lives of carers and the young people who are cared for. I approach the debate with great humility because I have seen the invaluable service that kinship carers provide, not just to children and their relatives, but to society in general, often in financially and emotionally tough circumstances. Many kinship carers struggle to cope, but they do. They cope because they have no choice but to cope. While I was talking to one kinship carer in Possilpark, I asked whether she would benefit from additional respite care. She said that her grandchild was not ready to be left alone with anyone bar her, but that if they could occasionally have just a short break—a day here and a day there—that would be something. At the moment, they cannot afford that. I hope that that kinship care family are closer to being able to have such an activity as part of their lives. It is something that most people would take completely for granted as a normal and happy part of the childhood experience. Children 1 st has welcomed the fostering and kinship care strategy. It has called it a bold new move and, in particular, praised family group conferencing, which is a model that it has championed and excelled at. There is a clear acknowledgement that the best place for any child is a loving and caring home with their parents, and that if that is not possible a kinship carer close at hand is the next best option, with fostering following that. The most expensive and poorest outcome for children, parents, families and society is when children unnecessarily end up as looked-after  children in a residential setting. That is clear in terms of educational attainment, life expectancy, a drastic reduction in quality of life and the likelihood of progressing to the criminal justice system, developing drug and alcohol abuse problems or developing mental health problems. It not only makes good sense but is socially just to provide kinship carers with financial support similar to that for foster carers. After all, kinship carers know their kids best and are best placed to deal with challenging behaviour and to provide the required emotional support. Moreover, they save the state money and improve the life chances and quality of life of looked-after children. I hope that the strategy and the parity of esteem, financial support and dignity that it affords the kinship carers of looked-after children will not only improve the life experience of those children and families but prevent more children from unnecessarily entering a residential setting under local authority care. I commend the motion to the chamber. It is fantastic that the chamber can sometimes get things right and that we can find cross-party support for a measure on which we can all agree.

Last week, during the equality and diversity debate, I mentioned educational attainment as being part of the equalities agenda. According to the PISA 2006 report, Scotland has one of the biggest gaps in performance, which can be related to poverty and deprivation. Besides reducing class sizes, what steps will the Scottish Government take to address that appalling situation, which was inherited from the previous Labour-led Administration?

Before and after May's election, I met a number of kinship carers and groups of grandparents who were caring for their grandchildren who are looked-after children. What does the concordat with local authorities mean for grandparents who are kinship carers when it talks about providing allowances for carers that are equivalent to allowances for foster carers?

In this debate on equality and diversity, many members have rightly focused on a number of groups in society, including females, ethnic minorities, the physically disabled, the visually impaired and the learning disabled. I had not included Scots speakers in that list, but I will now. Those are specific groups with particular equality issues that the motion rightly takes seriously. However, I will focus on an issue that cuts across all those groups, which is regional or area-specific equality, or the correlation of poverty with where someone lives. The motion talks about equality of opportunity and a fairer Scotland. Hard work and talent should be rewarded within society, but unless the conditions are right, many hard-working, talented people will struggle to flourish. Why is it that only 22 per cent of Glasgow's youngsters in fourth year received five credit level qualifications or equivalent this summer, while the figure was 57 per cent in East Renfrewshire? As a representative of Glasgow, I find such disparities deeply worrying. Glasgow is not alone—other areas show similar inequalities. Dundee and West Dunbartonshire deserve special mention. Youngsters in those areas are no less intelligent than those in East Renfrewshire. I suggest that while the reasons for poorer performance may be complex, when the complexities are stripped away, poverty becomes central to equalities in terms of regional equality and educational attainment. Education is at the core of equality of opportunity, and it is a crucial stepping stone to finding a route out of poverty. For many youngsters, such stepping stones do not exist or are more difficult to navigate. Consequently, it is not just in education that inequality of opportunity by location is a reality.

There has to be some form of correlation there. At today's meeting of the Local Government and Communities Committee, the Minister for Communities and Sport talked about how that would work. We are talking about regional inequality by location for educational attainment, but of course when talking about equality in education, it would be remiss not to mention visually impaired students, who struggle to get the necessary software and laptops, both at school and at home  for homework; learning-disabled students who do not always get the correct support; or students for whom English is a second language, who struggle to get the necessary support. As well as equality of opportunity, there is equality of condition. It is a central human rights issue that not only should everyone have a real opportunity to improve their lot, but that we all have a right to have certain basic needs met. For instance, to what extent can different groups—or, in my example, people from different locations—get access to a decent standard of housing, be able to walk down the street safely, or have basic leisure and recreational amenities close at hand? The poverty statistics for parts of Glasgow make woeful reading. One fifth of Scotland's poverty is based in Glasgow, and Glasgow has a disproportionate share of Scotland's poorest areas. With that comes environmental poverty. Something that brought home to me the qualitative aspect of equality was the fact that, while in Eastwood 23.1 per cent of the population stays within 500m of a derelict site, in Springburn the figure is 86.3 per cent. Those figures clearly demonstrate the poverty of environment as well as of income. I should mention a couple of other groups in connection with equality of condition. We must ensure access to decent local amenities. It is my understanding that, in the whole of Glasgow, there is only one hoist suitable for adults with physical disabilities who want to access a swimming pool. That is surely unacceptable. It is also unacceptable that, if two people who are in a same-sex relationship walk down the street in parts of the city, they are more likely to be attacked simply because they are in such a relationship. Those situations are unacceptable as part of the human experience. It would be wrong not to mention life expectancy when discussing regional equality. The projected life expectancy of babies born in Glasgow in 2004 to 2006 is 73.7 years, whereas the national average is 77.2. That leaves Glasgow 32 nd out of 32 local authorities. International comparisons do not look good either, particularly for those who live in Glasgow's Calton area, where male life expectancy is an appalling 53.9 years, compared with more than 70 years in the Gaza strip. If Mike Rumbles had hung around to talk about inequalities with regard to male life expectancy in Scotland, that would perhaps have been constructive. I was going to talk in a genuinely non-partisan way about the new Government's early years strategy, which I believe to be based on an equalities agenda. However, I do not have time for that, so I will point out one aspect of it of which I am proud: the extension of allowances for foster  parents to the kinship carers of looked-after children. That is incredibly important in equality terms. I have been talking about putting poverty at the centre of the equalities agenda because poverty bites. It does not distinguish colour, creed, sexual orientation or disability, it just bites. There are regional inequalities in where it bites, and we must accept that. Many people face not only inferior life chances because of where they live, but stigma because they come from a certain part of the country or even a certain housing scheme. I am sure that there is room in equality and diversity week for them and for the Equality and Human Rights Commission to acknowledge the scale of poverty and inequality. With that in mind, it gives me great pleasure to support the motion.

I congratulate Bill Wilson on securing this members' debate and on bringing such an interesting and potentially beneficial motion before the Parliament. Several members have used statistics. I am afraid that I will not be able to use any—although Dr Wilson handed me a small summary of his statistics before the debate began. I have not had the chance to dip into it yet, but I promise him that I will look at it. Later this evening, many MSPs will attend the politician of the year awards dinner. No doubt good food will be eaten and a few drinks will be had. One or two humorous stories may even emerge over the few days following the dinner. We all know how stories work: they are often funnier and more entertaining when exaggeration and embellishment are added to provide spice and seasoning. In Scotland, the cement that binds a good story is often the special ingredient of alcohol. I am always surprised by how many times grown adults exaggerate and embellish their behaviour—even their mild misdemeanours. It seems to make us far more windswept and interesting. The cement that binds stories is often alcohol—not only when they are created, but when they are retold. "How many drinks did you have last night?" That has been a common question over the years, but how many people give an honest answer? The answer is often, "I can't remember, but it was a fair few," or, "A bucketload." Why do people exaggerate? Why, according to the statistics, do teenagers in particular exaggerate? That is a vexed question, the answer to which likely involves a heady cultural mix, the ingredients of which would no doubt keep many a sociologist in employment for many a year. However, it appears that not only do we exaggerate our own stories, we believe other people's exaggerations.  Kenny Gibson's story of his student days struck me. I had a similar good friend who liked going out and participating in the drinking of alcohol. After two or three drinks that was him—that was his limit—but he would never say no to a pint of lager, and he would have to be seen to drink it. However, he did not drink it, and I knew that he did not drink it. He felt that, socially, for the company, he had to pretend that he was partaking of alcohol along with everyone else. It is of little surprise that when adults cannot have a mature, honest and responsible relationship with alcohol, our perceptions of the social norms of alcohol consumption become hazy, to say the least. It is also of little surprise that when it comes to the drug of choice for many, people overestimate their peers' consumption. Worryingly, the gap between the real social norm for consumption and the perceived social norm may fuel some to drink more heavily. After all, we all, in our own way—even the most rebellious among us—like to be part of the social norm and to be accepted by our peers. Surely we should tackle the social misconceptions that may lead to increased consumption of drugs and alcohol. I am sure that there are a number of drug and alcohol awareness initiatives in educational institutions. However, any tailoring of them—or, if need be, the provision of stand-alone projects that deal openly and honestly with our relationship with drugs and alcohol, including challenging misperceptions with regard to peer groups—would surely be worth while. I therefore thank Bill Wilson once more for lodging the motion. I am more than happy to commend it to the chamber.

The First Minister is aware of the 100 parents, many of whose children are in pre-school, who signed a statement of support for the SNP's family-friendly policies. After yesterday's historic first SNP Government budget, do those 100 parents have reason for optimism?

I pay tribute to Paul Martin for bringing the issue to Parliament's attention. The debate so far has been useful in shining a light on many of the problems that car parking charges are causing. I am keen to speak in today's debate and must declare an interest. My partner, Janet, is a nurse and has been affected by car parking charges at both Glasgow royal infirmary and Glasgow's Western infirmary, where she currently works. Although the motion mentions Stobhill specifically, this is a health-board-wide issue. That is why I support the independent review that the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing, Nicola Sturgeon, has commissioned and which is due to report shortly. I can speak with confidence and direct experience of the anger and frustrations that car parking charges are causing to staff across Glasgow, and which they will cause to staff at Stobhill. When charges were first introduced at the royal infirmary, nurses were charged £25 per month. By the time Janet applied for a permit there, the cost was £47 and the current charge is £57. That car park is owned by Impregilo Parking (Glasgow) Ltd and managed by a company called APCOA Parking (UK) Ltd, which is a private profit-making organisation. Profit is not the motive that Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board should have when it considers whether there should be car parking charges at its hospitals. My partner currently works at the Western infirmary, where—as at Stobhill—charges are determined by Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board. If staff at those hospitals cannot qualify for a permit—which costs up to £40 per month—they must pay £7 a day. Not everyone will qualify for a permit. Staff will be allocated permits on the basis of their need to access a car to do their jobs and of the frequency of journeys that they need to make. Staff who do not receive a permit will not be able to park in staff car parks. I have direct experience of the issue, as some of my partner's colleagues applied for permits, just as staff at Stobhill will have to. Although a member of staff from Bearsden received a permit, members of staff from Wishaw and Linlithgow did not. There is no  coherence, organisation, structure or fairness in how charges are applied and in who gets permits. Janet is quite fortunate, because she stays in Maryhill and can get to the Western infirmary relatively easily. However, I do not want her to walk down to it at 7 in the morning in inclement weather, and would prefer her to take her car. Doing that daily for a month would cost her £91 in car parking charges. I am mindful of the fact that in April 2004 the previous Executive issued guidelines on car parking charges and that at the time there was no opposition in principle to such charges. However, the Executive did put some criteria in place. In 2005, Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board committed itself to a strategy of car parking charges, but only to deal with specific problems. From what Paul Martin and others have said today, it is evident that many of those specific problems do not exist at Stobhill. Why is Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board applying a one-size-fits-all approach to car parking charges in the entire health board area? It is clear that the pending review must consider not just the general principles behind car parking charges but how they affect patients, staff, carers and visitors at all hospitals. It must certainly deal with the real concerns that patients, staff, carers and visitors have at Stobhill. I commend Paul Martin for bringing the issue to our attention.

Will Richard Baker give way?

Will Richard Baker give way?

Will Richard Baker give way?

Will Richard Baker give way?

We all hope that Scottish youngsters will be able to cheer on their sporting heroes and role models and that those role models will inspire youngsters to take an active interest in sport. We also hope to showcase the best of Scotland and Scots and to welcome visitors from abroad during the Commonwealth games. Will the First Minister endeavour to ensure that ticket touting, which is the scourge of many  people who support their clubs and country, is tackled? Will he try to stop that iniquitous trade and ensure that the Commonwealth games in Scotland offers an affordable and positive experience for spectators and participants?

To ask the Scottish Executive what conclusions and lessons for Scotland the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism identified in his meetings with economic, social and political representatives during his recent trip to Canada. (S3O-1005)

I am glad that the minister mentioned Albertan oil. Does he agree with Peter Day, the BBC World Service presenter, who stated: "This oil belongs to the Province of Alberta. It is making it rich: a big place with a small population of three million people. Alberta has paid off its debts and has such a budget surplus already that it has just given every provincial taxpayer a rebate cheque for 400 Canadian dollars"? Are there lessons to be learned for Scotland from that case study?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

To ask the First Minister whether the outcome of the 2007 comprehensive spending review places constraints on the Scottish Government's ability to deliver for the people of Scotland. (S3F-222)

Further to the massive let-down that was Scotland's settlement as part of the comprehensive spending review, will the First Minister comment on the reports of earlier in the week that the Scottish block is losing out on an additional £100 million as the result of a deal that the previous Administration made on council tax and housing benefit?

Before I begin my speech, I must note that parliamentary privilege in this chamber is nowhere near as comprehensive as it is in Westminster, so we must all be careful about what we say. It is a privilege to be able to facilitate this debate. Organised crime is a blight on our society and it affects the lives of far too many families and communities. In that respect, however, Glasgow Milton has suffered more than most. When organised crime takes a grip in the community, it does so for a number of reasons. The most obvious one is that there are people who are prepared to make money off the back of the misery and suffering of others. It also requires a base from which to operate and flourish, and a community that is compliant—not through choice, but through fear. In Glasgow Milton, there are said to be two main crime families of not just local, but city-wide, significance. They may even have national significance as part of an organised criminal network. One of the alleged crime families is the Lyons family. I mention them because a Mr Edward Lyons Snr was the co-ordinator of the Chirnsyde community initiative, which is mentioned in the motion, for a number of years. In fact, he was the co-ordinator until recently, when events last December brought his position there abruptly to an end. The centre remains closed. Many locals believe that it was closed not before time and that the tragic events that led to its closure could have been far worse. When locals made repeated complaints over many years about alleged criminal activities taking place in and around the Chirnsyde centre and about the centre being used as a base for organised crime, they felt that their complaints  fell on deaf ears. Seeming inaction by Glasgow City Council and Strathclyde Police only added to their frustrations and fears that the council would not look at the Disclosure Scotland checks that were carried out to assess the suitability of staff who worked there—the council said that that was a matter for the Chirnsyde community initiative itself. Locals knew that Edward Lyons Snr and other members of his family had been charged with the murder of Thomas McDonnell in the vicinity of the Chirnsyde community initiative and that the verdict was left at not proven amid fears of witness intimidation. The fact that the centre has received more than £1 million of taxpayers' money in the past 10 years has only added insult to injury. The council pulled the centre's funding only after a tragic triple shooting last December at a garage on Balmore Road owned by David Lyons, the brother of Edward Lyons Snr, where Michael Lyons, nephew of Edward Lyons Snr, was shot dead and Stephen Lyons, the son of Edward Lyons Snr, and one other were seriously injured. Court proceedings with regard to that shocking crime are pending and, for obvious reasons, I will be very careful what I say. The MOT garage was beside the local primary school and, had the hit on the garage been carried out earlier, or had it gone badly wrong, who knows how many innocent young people or parents arriving to collect their children might have been caught up in the mayhem and carnage. Given that the Chirnsyde initiative was another known location at which to find the Lyons family, it is only by the grace of God—or on the toss of a coin—that the initiative was not the location for the attack, which would have put staff and youngsters at risk of being caught up in terror. That is precisely why locals called not just for the closure of the Chirnsyde initiative but for its safe reopening. Nevertheless, the police, the council—and Bridget McConnell, the council's director of culture and leisure—acted too late to prevent such an escalation in gang violence, of which the local community activists had repeatedly warned. Being proven correct does not give those activists pleasure, but their belief that they were brushed off by officials makes them angry. Organised crime needs a base in which to flourish. Chirnsyde might have been such a base, run at taxpayers' expense, but there is a fear that another base might remain. In February 2006, there was a council by-election in Milton. During that campaign, when I acted as the election agent for Councillor McAllister, as he became, I received a number of anonymous survey returns that raised concerns  about the Chirnsyde initiative. One respondent said that they would not send a rabid dog to the centre. Billy McAllister won the by-election on a ticket to clean up Milton. Following December's triple shooting, he received death threats for his attempts to do so. Locals have put their lives on the line and their families in danger by taking a stand. I could give a number of examples of incidents that have left local campaigners terrified, but I do not want to bring back bad memories. Many are still living with the legacy of standing up against organised crime in their area. Indeed, on Saturday night, one local campaigner's car window was broken and his car was set on fire. The courageous and tireless work that community campaigners such as John McLean, Alex O'Kane and Charlie Traynor have carried out to draw attention to the possible inappropriate use of the Chirnsyde initiative must not go unnoticed; nor must the support of newspapers such as the Sunday Mail , which championed their campaign despite attempts to discredit them. I have evidence that the Glasgow City Council media affairs team described the campaigners as "bampots" to the press. Given events, I wonder who the bampots are now. Elected representatives and the police must also be more willing to take communities' concerns forward when they are made known to them. If that happens, some good can come from the pain and suffering that people have endured. That also becomes my challenge as a new MSP. The debate is about thanking people and looking forward. In that spirit, I urge Glasgow City Council to achieve the safe reopening of the newly named Ashgill community centre as soon as possible and to ensure that the pillars of the community that stood up against organised crime are involved in that. We also have to build up trust with the local police, which will take time. I pay tribute to operation reclaim, an initiative in the area based at St Augustine's playing fields that ran for six weeks over the summer. In particular, I pay tribute to the work of police constable Harry Faulds, who is trying his hardest to see the scheme extended. The area desperately needs such initiatives, and I call on Strathclyde Police and Glasgow City Council to look in the round about how to take the community forward. In closing, I return to my two initial comments. First, in Milton there is a community that is managing to rise up and beat the fear that holds many communities back in tackling organised crime. Criminals use fear to keep communities across Scotland under siege and on their knees. We should all be truly thankful that there are people such as John McLean, Alex O'Kane and Charlie Traynor around.  Secondly, and finally, I hope that our new Government will look imaginatively, creatively and determinedly at ways to disrupt and destroy organised crime networks throughout Scotland that work nationally and internationally. I hope that it will also give much-needed support to communities not just in Glasgow, but throughout Scotland.

Will the member give way?

rose—

Does the member agree that the previous Executive failed not only in relation to stock transfer but in not giving leadership and direction to Glasgow's housing demolition process? Many communities still have no idea whether their houses will be maintained or demolished and face uncertainty and fear in that regard.

On a further point of order Presiding Officer. I seek clarification on the matter. We thought that the appropriate way to raise the possibility that Wendy Alexander misled Parliament last week would be to raise it in committee because we believe that it was the committee's view on fuel poverty and the central heating programme that was misrepresented. That was done this morning and the committee convener, Duncan McNeil, recommended that we should raise the issue as a point of order in the chamber this afternoon. I therefore seek  clarification. If we believe that a member has misled Parliament, what is our next port of call?

I pay tribute to the work that Patricia Ferguson and others have done in assisting the victims and their families after the terrible events of 11 May 2004. I associate myself with the motion and echo the comments about the dignified and responsible manner in which families who were caught up in this dreadful event have conducted themselves. No one knows how they would cope in such tragic circumstances until they are thrown into them. The motion is trying to ensure that no one else will ever have to experience what these families experienced.  Lessons must be learned, but that cannot happen until all the facts are held up to public scrutiny. The fact that the guilty plea means that fewer lessons can be learned has to be addressed. I agree that a wide-reaching judicial public inquiry into the circumstances of the case will lead to such lessons being learned. I am encouraged that our First Minister, Alex Salmond, has asked the Lord Advocate to consider the matter and that she will report back by the end of the month. The comment of ICL Plastics on the disaster inadvertently reinforced the need for a public inquiry. The company said: "Whilst we have pled guilty to the criminal indictment we faced and have apologised unreservedly, we refute the suggestion that our working practices were persistently or routinely deficient or that we treat our employees unfairly." The company might well refute that suggestion, but that is just one of the reasons why all the evidence that exists must be scrutinised thoroughly and in public. Let us get to the truth; let us have the public inquiry. At the time of the disaster, the Health and Safety Executive had only 68 inspectors to police 81,000 workplaces, so an inquiry should investigate the relationship between the Health and Safety Executive inspection regime and workplace health and safety regimes, and the effectiveness—or otherwise—of that relationship. A public inquiry is not just about justice for the victims and their families; it is, as I have previously said, about learning the lessons, and ensuring that such an incident cannot and will not happen again. On justice, I am aware that compensation, whether in cash or any other form, cannot remove or make up for loss and suffering. However, the imposition of two £200,000 fines as the total sum of the consequences for ICL Plastics—for nine workers' lives lost and 40 workers injured—just does not seem to cut it. I understand the reasons behind the limitations on such fines—it was noted in the "The ICL/Stockline Disaster" report that the cost of fines might even be passed onto workers, who are most endangered by safety offences. An alternative—or an addition—to fining companies would be to have an equity fine system, which has been developed by lawyers in the United States of America. Such a system would target guilty parties effectively and leave at least some form of positive legacy for victims, their families and affected communities. It would allow courts to order guilty companies to issue a quota of new shares to be administered by a state-controlled compensation fund. My colleague Bill Wilson has lodged a motion on equity fines, which I hope that members will have a look at.  However, today's debate is about the call for a public inquiry. I reiterate my support for a wide-reaching public inquiry, and once more I pay tribute to the dignity of the families of all those who were tragically affected by the terrible events of May 11, 2004.

Will the minister reflect on the Communities Scotland report on the Glasgow Housing Association, which includes the comment that the GHA had "no clear operational policy or timescale for delivering SST at the time of the transfer"? Does the minister agree with me that the new Labour leader in the Scottish Parliament, Wendy  Alexander, as Minister for Communities at the time, was one of the architects of such incompetence? Will he reassure Parliament that Scottish National Party ministers will provide a more strategic approach on social rented housing in Glasgow?

I promise that there will be no flashing rabbits in my contribution. On the issue of probationary teachers trying to find posts, does the member accept that many of those posts are advertised around Easter time and that, last Easter, the Labour Party was still in power? Therefore, if any teacher was struggling to find a job, that would be a failure of the Labour Party and not the SNP. Three weeks ago—I draw a comparison with the member's comment—200 teaching jobs were advertised.

Okay. Does the member believe that it is encouraging that although three weeks ago only 200 teaching posts were advertised in the Times Educational Supplement Scotland , just last week there were 600 posts? Does he agree that that is a clear benefit of the extra 300 posts?

I congratulate Hugh Henry on choosing to lodge a motion on education for us to debate this morning. Indeed, that comes no great surprise, given that Labour made education a central theme of the recent election campaign. Following the campaign, Labour found itself no longer in government, but in opposition. In June, Hugh Henry brought to the Parliament a motion on skills and vocational education that called for 100 skills academies for Scotland. I disagree strongly with that Labour policy and spoke against it when the motion was debated. However, credit must be given to Hugh Henry and Labour for the fact that they were willing to step up to the plate and to advocate their policy—albeit one that is deeply flawed—as a party of opposition. On the day of the debate, despite Labour having allies in the Conservatives, the Scottish National Party and the Liberal Democrats voted down the Labour motion, which both parties considered would undermine the comprehensive education system. Thank you, Hugh. I mention June's debate because back then Labour was willing to let Parliament shine a light on its policies. I admit that, in doing so, it provided a degree of constructive opposition. However, today's motion departs from that model. I genuinely hope that that will not continue, for both Labour's and the Parliament's sake. The Labour motion suggests that the SNP Government has not given education high enough priority, despite the fact that the Government has already acted to remove the financial barriers that existed under  Labour in the form of the graduate endowment; that we are employing an additional 300 teachers and creating an extra 250 training posts for new teachers; and that significant capital expenditure has been made available to local authorities to enable them to take steps towards meeting the Government's targets for reducing class sizes in P1 to P3. From October, there will be a pilot in which P1 to P3 children in five local authority areas will receive free, nutritious school meals. This week we also launched our skills strategy, which was debated in the chamber only yesterday. Given those and other initiatives, it is laughable and plain daft to say that the Government has not given high enough priority to education. By all means let Labour put before the chamber a motion stating that it is against reducing class sizes, that it opposes the abolition of the graduate endowment or that it will not increase the number of teaching professionals in our classrooms—let it stand or fall by the weight of its arguments. However, when Labour members come to the chamber and say that education is not a priority for the Government, they lack credibility.

I know that the extra £9 million that the Government has provided will fund 300 more teachers than we would have had if the Liberal Democrats had still been in government. Education always attracts its fair share of political soundbites, whether it be the mantra of teaching the three Rs—reading, writing and arithmetic—or Tony Blair's famous, "Education, education, education". An analysis of today's Labour Party motion provides us with yet another. Instead of being about the three Rs, the motion is about the three Ws: it is whining, whingeing and wide of the mark. I will explain why. The Government has committed significant sums of money to making early progress on certain key elements of its programme. Those include the £25 million package for early years education, increased nursery hours, 300 new teachers and 250 new student teachers; the £40 million of capital spending that has been made available to local authorities to enable them to meet the class sizes targets; £15 million to fund the abolition of the graduate endowment; £5 million that has been provided for free, nutritious school meals; and £1.5 million to fund the further development of the Crichton campus, whereas the Labour Party would have been happy to preside over its closure. I would love Fiona Hyslop, the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, immediately to throw shovels of cash at every project imaginable, but that would be feckless and  reckless. The Government will not do that, even if Hugh Henry would. I am sure that the cabinet secretary would love to know from John Swinney what slice of the overall funding cake is coming her way. Indeed, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth would love to know how much he will be awarded. However, until the UK Treasury informs the Scottish Government of the final results of the spending review, large, grandiose spending commitments would not be about each portfolio getting a fair share of the cake but would be political pie in the sky. I am proud of the Government's commitment to education and of the speedy progress that has already been made. Everyone accepts that there is always a need to lever in more cash, where possible. We agree with Hugh Henry and the Labour Party that we should maximise the financial input into education. However, if the Labour Party, which is now in opposition, joined us in seeking full financial independence and full fiscal powers over our economy, we could increase the overall income of the Parliament and spend it on all our priorities, including education.

I commend the work that Sandra White has done over a number of years for asylum seekers, their families and groups and individuals who support asylum seekers. One of the reasons why I am here for the debate is to show my support for the good work that she has done. As a new MSP in Glasgow, I have seen at first hand the work that she has done. I am now coming into contact with individuals who are asylum seekers and can for the first time put a human face to asylum seekers. That is another reason why I wanted to speak in the debate.  I met a young man called Abdirahman Mohamed. When he first came to Scotland from Somalia, he was 16 years old. He will not go back to Somalia as his mother is one of the legacy cases. Indeed, he cannot go back to Somalia as he has no home there; another family stays there and he most certainly would not be made welcome if he were to return. He now stays in Sighthill in Glasgow. Over the past month or so, Abdi has been telling me about his case. When he came to Scotland as a 16-year-old, the decision had to be made as to whether it was more suitable for him to go to the local secondary school or to a further education college. It was decided that he should go to the local FE college to improve his core English skills, which he did. After that, he had a desire for higher education, so he took an access course at the FE college. Very quickly—in just under a year—he got the access equivalent of highers in computing and maths. At that point, he had no route into higher education so, rather than stay idle, he did the maximum amount of highers that an FE college would let him do. The next year, he took two highers and got fantastic grades. This year, he did another two highers and got fantastic grades. He had a thirst to learn, despite the fact that there was no obvious funding access into higher education. Learning was a privilege for him. Until recently, the only option open to him was to find roughly £11,000 a year to fund himself through university as an international student. Of course, the irony of it was that neither he nor his family was even allowed to work. There was light at the end of the tunnel for Abdi, and I was delighted to be able to confirm with the Scottish Government and with the University of Glasgow that he will be starting a full-time course at the university at the end of this month. The University of Glasgow has shown discretion in this case. Fees cannot be paid for young asylum seekers in higher education until next year, but the university has shown a fantastic willingness to accept year 1 fees in year 2. That flexibility shows that our academic institutions are willing to give such young people access to higher education. However, I should mention the situation in which Abdi now finds himself. Normally, young students can find a part-time job to fund themselves through university, but that is denied to Abdi, which is a travesty and a tragedy. It is part of the human experience. A further difficulty is that in three or four years' time, Abdi could be a highly skilled graduate who would not be entitled to use the skills that our taxpayers have invested in him to work in Scotland. That would be appalling. To me, Abdi is not an asylum seeker but a friend whom I have helped out on a constituency matter. I am keen to have Abdi as an intern, either at the Parliament or at my constituency office. We heard  stories about whether buying someone a can of Coke and a sandwich counts as payment for work. There are real issues there that we must consider again. This is a reserved matter, but a positive dialogue can be built up between the Scottish Government and the UK Government to bring about a positive resolution.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I thank the member for giving way. I remember well the debate on housing stock transfer in Glasgow. Some members feared that Glasgow Housing Association might become an entrenched provider of social housing and would be like a large company.

I will ask the question. Does the member agree that the best way in which to build confidence in social rented housing is for the Opposition to work with the Government to achieve second-stage transfer in Glasgow?

Will the member let me back in?

I have been referred to.

What about the poll tax?

I start by turning my thoughts to another system of taxation that we have already heard a little about this morning. It was brought in by the Conservatives—first in Scotland in 1989, and a year later in the rest of the United Kingdom. It was, of course, the loathed poll tax. I was at secondary school at the time, and my personal protest against the poll tax was the wearing of a T-shirt to school with a large, tabloid-style message on the front. The message would have left any reader in no doubt about how strongly I, as a teenager, felt about the poll tax. Strong feelings against the poll tax were the order of the day. Direct action, non-payment and even riots signalled people's anger.

No, thank you. We have limited time. I remember the pressure that the poll tax put on the relationship between my father—the head of the household—and me, over whether the poll tax should be paid and over whether we could even afford to pay it. The poll tax led to pressure and conflict in homes, and to anger, direct action and riots in society. I think that it was Tavish Scott who said earlier that Michael Howard had described the poll tax as the fairest form of taxation. However, in 2003 as Conservative leader, Michael Howard said: "Obviously the poll tax was a mistake and I have apologised for it." The only real surprise was not the apology itself but the fact that it took so long.

No, thank you—unless Mr Brown wants to defend the poll tax.

If, after this debate, Mr Brown would like a little synopsis of who was to blame for the poll tax, I will give him such a synopsis in the members' lounge. He really needs his memory jogged. A clear majority in our nation was against the poll tax. Ultimately, it was abolished. It is gone, but not forgotten—or forgiven. It was replaced by another form of taxation that, on one level, bore an important similarity: when the council tax was introduced, it also took no account of people's ability to pay. That structural flaw in the poll tax  was doppelgangered in the creation of the council tax. The detestation that society felt for the poll tax in the late 1980s and early 1990s still exists for the council tax. In my maiden speech in the chamber, during the wealthier and fairer debate, I said that I believed that there was a clear majority in Scotland in favour of scrapping the council tax. We must strive to find such a majority in this chamber too—a majority that cuts across traditional party lines to serve our people. Earlier this year in Aviemore, the UK Lib Dem leader, Ming Campbell, said: "Our principle is simple. People should pay taxes in accordance with their ability to do so. Those who earn less should pay less." On the SNP benches and in the Government, we agree with those sentiments. I am sure that others will agree too. There will also be others who believe in taking 500,000 pensioners out of the local taxation system and stopping them living in fear of the annual council tax bills that they cannot pay coming through their doors. Tackling poverty is high on the political agenda, and rightly so. A number of points have been made recently about how best to define poverty. Definitions have included when a parent cannot afford a bike for a child, or a school trip, or when parents cannot take their children on a family holiday. Different people will put the poverty bar at different levels, but no matter where it is placed, a tax on earned income will ensure that people who earn less will pay less—not more as happens at the moment. In a fair and just society, that is surely right. That basic principle, put into the form of a local income tax, will benefit not only our pensioners, but nine out of the 10 income decile groups in society—and the 10 th group will pay only moderately more. Members will remember Michael Howard's belated apology in 2003. I would not like members on the Labour or Conservative benches to have to make a similar apology for the council tax in five or 10 years' time. This Parliament has the power to abolish the council tax. Members who fail to abolish it will not be forgiven by the people of Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress has been made towards finalising plans for its £5 million pilot scheme to provide free nutritious school meals. (S3O-258)

I know that the cabinet secretary agrees that the pilot scheme should eventually be rolled out across Scotland, starting in the most deprived areas. With that in mind, I ask her to examine closely the deprivation figures for Glasgow in general and for north Glasgow in particular. In north Glasgow, only 8 per cent of people consume the recommended five portions of fruit and vegetables per day, whereas the figure for Glasgow as a whole is 34 per cent.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. As a new member, I would like some clarification for those who might intend intervening in subsequent debates. If a member gives way to an intervention, can they stand up again if they do not like what the intervening member is saying? I understood that Jackie Baillie had given way.

Will the member give way?

I am sure that each of John Paul academy in Glasgow's Maryhill, Oban high school and Greenfaulds high in Cumbernauld deliver a vital service to students, parents and the wider community. Those schools are but three of 381 publicly funded secondary schools in Scotland. I am confident that every one of those schools is an asset to its community. Indeed, I am happy to describe them all as skills academies. The Labour Party manifesto had a commitment to provide 100 skills academies. That is roughly a quarter of the overall number of secondary schools in Scotland—a significant proportion. It is important that the new Labour Opposition tells us whether the 100 schools that would have made the cut would have been the lucky ones at the expense of the others, or whether 281 schools would have been lucky to escape untouched. Who are the lucky ones, and who are the losers? There is a sneaking suspicion that what is really being served up by new Labour in its motion is an end to the comprehensive education system. If so, the Labour Party should be deeply ashamed.

No thank you.

If Mr Henry does not mind, I would like to continue without being shouted down. Only recently, the Conservatives in England got their cravats in a twist over grammar schools, and now new Labour in Scotland may be offering us the converse—ghetto grammars by stealth in some of our most vulnerable communities. Labour's ghetto grammars would not be about selection but about deselection by social class.

No thank you. New Labour's motion could even be a TARDIS to take us back to the dreaded days of junior secondaries and the "quali". If the Labour Opposition wishes to work constructively with our new SNP Government, I am sure that it will want to engage with the Scottish skills strategy. If so, I am sure that we will see an expansion of the school-college partnerships and links, and that we will ensure that an increased number of suitable courses are brought on line for 14 to 16-year-olds to address the skills gap and best meet the needs of our youngsters. There is a real need to tackle the issue of the number of youngsters in the group that is now described as NEET—youngsters who are not in education, employment or training. The Labour Opposition needs to be careful that it does not confuse the acronym NEET with another demonised acronym—ned. I was alarmed during the election campaign by Labour's idea of compulsion—keeping 16 and 17-year-olds in schools unless they were in employment or training. Why is that not mentioned in the new Labour motion today? May I suggest that a few Labour MSPs pop into a few random staff rooms across the country and run the idea past the teaching staff? Indeed, they should gauge the opinions of the pupils who make a positive choice to stay on beyond 16. The MSPs would quickly learn that their idea is not popular. It is not reasonable, it is unworkable and, more important, it completely admits Labour's defeat.

Yes.

I am sure that Mr Purvis will put his views forward strongly during the spending review that is about to take place. Of course, we would all like more funding for schools; indeed, some funding might be available if we do not go ahead with the tram system in Edinburgh. If, right now, youngsters had access to a worthwhile training course or job, they would be accessing that training course or job; and if any youngsters refused to do so, I could not think of a worse thing to do than to shoehorn them back into a classroom. We need imaginative and innovative plans to improve, expand or indeed replace existing training schemes—whether it is skillseekers, the modern apprenticeship scheme or the get ready for work initiative. Let us work in an improved and more effective fashion with schools, local authorities, further education colleges, private companies and Government agencies, and let us improve the lot of our students and our business community. However, in doing so, we must ensure that no two-tier system is created whereby our most vulnerable, poor and disaffected youngsters are told, "You're off to the skills academy," while others from more affluent backgrounds can head off to the universities and be the professionals of tomorrow. Our Parliament must raise the aspirations of our youngsters, not stifle them. I fear that that would be the result of letting the Labour Party loose on our schools. Let us reject the new Labour motion at decision time, and let us back our new Government's skills strategy, which is based on the needs of youngsters and businesses, and is based on fairness for all.

To ask the First Minister whether extending the provision of good-quality, local social rented housing will be a priority for the new Scottish Government. (S3F-20)

I inform the First Minister that the guarantees that were given to the former tenants of Maryhill's Butney area back in 2001 by Glasgow City Council and, subsequently, by Glasgow Housing Association, which promised them new local housing within two years of their old homes being demolished, remain unmet. Will the First Minister monitor the situation—significant further demolitions of social rented housing within Maryhill and across north Glasgow are planned—in order to ensure that, as opposed to broken promises, good-quality social housing is delivered? That would respect local communities.

The idea of a wealthier and fairer nation is surely one on which all of us can agree. We might have different perspectives on how we can best create wealth for our nation and what constitutes the best way to spend to achieve fairness in society, but we should all warmly welcome the tying together of the ideas of wealth and fairness as a foundation on which to build cross-party consensus.  I am greatly encouraged by that underpinning of social values and by their going hand in hand with wealth creation. The former First Minister's approach to helping the people of Malawi won praise across the traditional political divide, because we all recognise that wealth creation comes with the responsibility of helping people who have been left behind by society, whether locally, nationally or, in the case of Malawi, globally. It was revealed earlier this year that in 2006 more than 1,900 people who were seen in Scottish hospitals were diagnosed with malnutrition. In a modern society that is simply unacceptable. As our society becomes wealthier, such figures must be monitored closely. When necessary, we must use society's wealth to assist in curing society's ills. That is why it is vital that nutritious free school meals should be available to all our children, beginning with the early years in primary school. Their introduction would bring a positive lifestyle change, with consequent massive long-term health benefits. I am proud that our Government is keen to do that. In 1979, one in eight children lived in poverty. Today, the figure is one in four, which is a scandal—that is almost 250,000 children. In total, more than 900,000 people in our nation are living in poverty. Our nation has not only a responsibility to help them but a direct economic self-interest. People in poverty must also be seen as potential wealth creators. They are a massive, untapped, wasted and often alienated resource. Education is rightly seen as a route out of poverty for many people. Our new Government's aspiration to extend free child care for three and four-year-olds by 50 per cent, its aspiration to ensure that there are fully qualified nursery teachers in our nurseries and our intention to reduce class sizes dramatically for the early years of primary school will not only provide a positive social platform but put in place the building blocks of future economic prosperity. There are many other examples of how we can make society fairer. The policy of abolishing the unfair council tax and introducing a local income tax that actually takes account of people's ability to pay has substantial support in the chamber and, I believe, overwhelming support in our country. I hope that the Parliament will not let society down on that—and, in particular, that it will not let our pensioners down. I welcome our Government's ideas on significantly reducing business rates for small businesses. If implemented, that policy could lead to boards being removed from shop windows throughout Scotland. It could breathe new life into our villages, towns and cities. In Glasgow, which I represent, small businesses will warmly welcome  that move. There, 15,000 small businesses will pay no business rates at all, and another 3,800 will benefit from a significant reduction in rates. The results of excluding fairness from wealth creation are clear, nowhere more so than in Glasgow, which suffers from the lowest life expectancy in the UK—and it is lower than in most parts of Europe. The numbers of economically inactive adults and of young men who are not in employment, education or training are woefully high. In Scotland, 13.9 per cent of people can be described as income deprived; for Glasgow, that figure is almost 25 per cent, or one in four. In my home constituency of Maryhill, 51.4 per cent of children are in families that claim benefits. That is double the national average, which is an absolute outrage. Traditional working-class communities in Glasgow feel under threat. Many people see bulldozers on the horizon, with no guarantee that their community will be kept intact. Such unfairness only increases the social alienation that many feel. It is little surprise that antisocial behaviour finds a breeding ground in such circumstances. I give Maryhill in Glasgow, where I stay, a commitment to defend those communities and others throughout the city that need help, rather than being demolished out of existence. They must be treated with respect, which I strongly believe previous Governments categorically failed to do. Glasgow has many deep-seated issues that have been present for more than a generation. It should be the engine room of the Scottish economy. A legacy of neglect might have taken its toll, but with appropriate investment from a Government that takes into account its special circumstances, combined with a fresh approach from Glasgow City Council, Glasgow will be able to flourish once more. I hope that that will include a successful bid to host the Commonwealth games in 2014.