Will Jamie Hepburn give way?

I should perhaps state my position as a fellow of the Chartered Institute of Housing and a former housing association director. Jamie Hepburn has been talking about the discussions that we have been having. If the DWP does not agree to respect any decision that this Parliament makes on discretionary housing payments and we move to debt write-off, I have a concern about the legalities of that in terms of the constitutions, rules and governance of housing associations. I refer not to the larger associations that Jackie Baillie spoke about, but to small, community-based ones—

Yes. Such housing associations are often run by voluntary committee members. Does Jamie Hepburn agree that we need clarification on the legalities from both Jenny Marra and the cabinet secretary when they sum up?

I think that the member misunderstands my point. I understand what she is saying and I know how those moves are working. I am concerned about small, community-based organisations that operate under specific rules and whose voluntary committee members might be legally liable. I wonder whether the ability to write off arrears that are solely attributable to the bedroom tax might perhaps mean that arrears that were due to other punishing welfare reform measures also had to be written off. I am concerned that people could end up in trouble, and I want to ensure that the possibilities are properly investigated.

It is an absolute delight to be in the chamber today and to pass the bill very soon, I hope. I thank not only all those who have worked hard to bring to fruition the principles that many people have worked for for years but those who have worked hard on the technicalities and have tried to ensure that, as far as possible, as the convener of the Equal Opportunities Committee, Margaret McCulloch, said, everyone was heard with dignity and respect on a subject that evokes strong emotions on all sides. I am glad that we are here but, for me, it is not really the detail that matters; it is the principle and the ethic that says to me, “This is absolutely the right thing to do.” Everybody can think of people, whether from their childhood or family members, who have been badly affected by the discrimination that has happened. Let us not forget that it was only in 1980, I think, that we decriminalised homosexuality in this country. That is not that long ago. I want to see the kind of society that has said at a top level, “We’re creating equality by allowing same-sex marriage,” and in which people such as my great-uncle do not have to run down to London and live apart from their family, as my great-uncle had to do so that he could live with someone he loved. There was also my uncle, who had an absolutely rotten childhood, adolescence and adulthood, very much based on his psyche and his having to live a life that was a pretence. Members will notice that I am not saying their names. That is because there are still people out there to whom that would be a bit of a revelation. I respect the memory of both men; they hid what they were for very valid reasons. I also want to live in a society in which actors do not have to portray in real life the characters that they portray on screen. Yes, we have come a long way on that but there is still a bit of discrimination going on in that area. I want to live—and represent the constituency of East Kilbride—in a country in which I do not have the occasional young person coming to me and saying, “I have to admit to everyone that I am gay,” or “I have to admit to everyone that I am bisexual,” and asking, “Do you know anyone who will support me or help me?” I do not want people to have to admit to anything. I want people to just be people and to be the way that they are, and I want everyone to be treated equally in the eyes of the law. To go back to the earlier discussion about civil marriage, religious marriage and civil partnerships, everyone should be equal and have equal chances and equal opportunities. My colleague Stewart Maxwell was quite right about that. The reality is that we have civil partnerships now—they are there. There should be equality for anyone who wants to take part in any of those options. I am not married—I have chosen not to be married. Duncan may have something to do with that as well, right enough, so we have chosen not to be married. If we choose to have a civil partnership—if that comes in—it does not matter what the differences are between civil marriage and civil partnership. It will be my choice and absolutely no business of anyone in the chamber or anyone else what we choose to do if the law says that we have that opportunity—that everyone has that opportunity. I loved Stewart Maxwell’s comment that sometimes people are forced to choose between different kinds of apples; it is not always about choosing between apples and pears. I will leave my colleagues to decide whether I am a soor old Granny Smith or a sweet Pink Lady. [Laughter.] Maybe I do not want to hear the answer to that. Yes, we have done something pretty wonderful today and I am really pleased about that, but let us not kid ourselves that everything is solved just because we put this into legislation. There is still a long way to go. There is still discrimination out there and there are still a lot of people who need support before we get to the point at which, in reality, it just does not matter a toss what someone’s sexuality is. I cannot mention everyone who has been involved in the bill but I will mention the Equality Network—

Absolutely. The Equality Network is saying that there is still a lot more work to do to tackle prejudice and to ensure that LGBT people receive equal treatment across society—yes. It is time for change so let us move on and build on what we have done today.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what assessment it has made of the effectiveness of the 101 non-emergency police telephone number. (S4O-02859)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that very informative answer. I am aware that the 101 number costs a flat rate of 15p wherever it is called from and for however long the call lasts, and I recognise that Police Scotland does not make any money from it. Nevertheless, I wonder whether consideration could be given, further down the line, perhaps with the cabinet secretary’s encouragement, to making the 101 number free to call. Many people rely on mobile phones these days and if they had no credit they would find it difficult to phone 101. That could keep people phoning 999 when doing so is not appropriate.

Rhoda Grant and the minister have already referred to the Scottish Youth Parliament. The event it held last Friday was excellent, as indeed is its campaign. There is one element of the action it is looking for that surprised me, because I had not realised that this is an issue. There are anomalies in the administration of the education maintenance allowance that can result in many young carers losing their entitlement. Will the minister undertake to meet the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning fairly quickly to discuss that issue?

Michael McMahon is quite right: beneath the 21 recommendations and all that is going on in NHS Lanarkshire, there are a lot of staff doing an absolutely excellent job. Is the cabinet secretary aware that an NHS Lanarkshire initiative—the integrated community support team, which is based in East Kilbride—won the older people award at the 2013 Scottish health awards? That is about providing more care at home, in communities, and trying to keep elderly people out of hospital or reduce their stay in hospital. It has been a great success and has a great staff team. Would the cabinet secretary or the Minister for Public Health like to visit the team in East Kilbride to see what great work is being done?

13. To ask the Scottish Government what the economic benefits to Scotland are of the revenues from North Sea oil. (S4O-02789)

The minister will be aware of the many occasions on which the United Kingdom Government and its allies have quoted the Office for Budget Responsibility’s 2012 oil price forecast as reliable and credible. Does he therefore share my surprise that the OBR’s recent change in forecasting methodology passed without any comment, and does he agree with Alistair Darling that the OBR seems to be not much more than an extension of the Conservative Party, with little credibility at all on this vital issue?

I congratulate the Scottish Government on the high level of coverage that it has already negotiated for my own area of East Kilbride. However, can the Scottish Government instigate discussion with South Lanarkshire Council and BT to ensure 100 per cent availability of next-generation broadband to businesses and domestic properties, thus maintaining East Kilbride as a prime technological and industrial location?

It was interesting to hear Iain Gray disparage the motion’s contention of positive signs of recovery in the Scottish economy over the past year through the good management of John Swinney and his colleagues. Perhaps he recognises in the motion the reality of Scotland’s inheritance from staying too long in a union that is certainly not working in Scotland’s interests. The structural problems in the UK economy that came to a head in 2008 have been rehearsed in this Parliament many times. No doubt that will continue this year. It is our view that, if Scotland stays in the union, any benefits of an economic recovery will be more than outweighed by the continuation of macroeconomic and social policies that are neither supported by most Scots nor suited to enabling Scotland to achieve its full potential. That is especially the case given that it seems clear that a central plank of the UK recovery plan is about reflating the home counties property market, with scant regard being paid to the effects on the rest of the country. It is not just the Tories who back the coalition policies. Lib Dem Danny Alexander and Labour’s Ed Balls have both made it clear that there is a Westminster consensus on the need for further austerity. Rachel Reeves MP has said that Labour will be tougher than the Tories. She did not mean that Labour will be tough on the people who caused the financial crisis; it is the people on benefits she wants to hammer. Therefore, regardless of the outcome of the UK election in 2015, I do not think for a minute that there will be a serious attempt to tackle the growing inequality in the UK. The inequality is not just national but regional. Nationally, the top 20 per cent of income earners in the UK earn on average 14 times what people in the bottom 20 per cent earn. Regionally, London and the home counties are like a completely separate economy from the rest of the UK and are set firmly on the path to boom and bust—again—by a Tory party that increasingly represents the interests of only that area. As I have said before, Westminster’s skewing of economic and fiscal policies to suit the south is matched by a shift of public expenditure from other parts of the UK. Scotland is the worst hit, having lost more than £8 billion between 2008 and 2012, during which time London and the south received an extra £11.5 billion. It is no wonder that Vince Cable likened London to “a kind of giant suction machine, draining the life out of the rest of the country.” In September, Opposition members, including the Labour members who voted yesterday against free school meals and increased childcare, will, along with their Lib Dem and Tory partners, recommend to the Scottish people that they vote to endorse continuation of such policies, in preference to Scots taking the power to make their own decisions. I find that bizarre. We have become used to speakers who back the union emphasising that Scotland faces big challenges, such as the difficult public finances, the overhang of debt—despite 40 years of oil revenues—and a reducing working population. However, such speakers overlook the fact that those challenges are the product of the union and are among the reasons why we need the powers to do things differently. With the limited powers that are available to this Parliament, the SNP Government has been able to pursue advantages for Scotland, for example by supporting small businesses. That is a policy to which Labour now seems to be opposed: Patricia Ferguson said today that Labour will look again at the small business bonus, and last night Kezia Dugdale talked about business rates levels. We support the renewables sector, which provides more than 11,000 jobs, and we support growth areas such as food and drink and life sciences. As the Deputy First Minister said in St Andrews the other day, Scotland has the opportunity to choose between two futures. For too long, and despite its many assets, Scotland has been in decline relative to every country with which it shares a land or maritime boundary. Only with the powers of independence do we have any chance of building a fairer and more resilient economy. As the Deputy First Minister said on Monday, we know what yes means. We heard some stuff from Iain Gray today. Will he get together with his better together partners and put something in writing, so that the Scottish people can judge what a no vote in September would mean for the future of Scotland?

Will the member give way?

As I was a member of the Finance Committee in the previous parliamentary session, before the most recent election, I am always interested in reading the Finance Committee’s reports. I was particularly interested in this one, because I am a believer in having a national performance framework, such as Scotland performs, and I was interested to see it reviewed after five or six years of operation. I participated in the first inquiry into preventative spend that the Finance Committee undertook. If I remember rightly, Malcolm Chisholm was also a member of the Finance Committee when it undertook that inquiry, before the most recent election. Those two things tie in very well. I was truly delighted in 2007 that not only did the SNP win the election, but we came to government with what I believed to be an absolutely fresh approach. That approach looked at Scotland as a whole and asked what kind of country we wanted to be, how we should target policy towards that and how we should monitor ourselves to see how to achieve that. I believe that the national performance framework, Scotland performs, set us on that road. It was a bold initiative—an integrated framework for policy delivery, in the parlance that is used—and it was a mechanism to assess Scotland’s performance and give us the discipline to look at successes, look at failures and look at what is best for our society as a whole, to move forward. We heard the cabinet secretary talk about the measurements of GDP, employment, unemployment and economic inactivity and I was very glad to see in the report that he was open to reviewing and revising the indicators, based on discussion, because that is very important. Along with Patrick Harvie, I was a member of the steering group that Oxfam ran on the humankind index, and I know that the cabinet secretary was interested in looking at some of its findings. The wider discussion beyond the findings of the Finance Committee is certainly worth having. That brings me to preventative spend, which is a major issue. Anne McTaggart just talked about cross-party action. One of my great wishes and aspirations for our Parliament, from the very start, was that we would get beyond the petty party politics that we hear so much of in here and recognise that our country faces some big issues, over which surely we could have consensus, and that no matter who was in power, we could move towards attaining some of those aims. That ties into the assessment of the nation through Scotland performs. I found the Finance Committee’s first preventative spend inquiry quite difficult, because I had to recognise that although we had the boldness of single outcome agreements for local authorities, for example, and different initiatives to look at public service in general, our society very much works in silos. Sometimes, we found far too much of an emphasis on health boards or local authorities wanting to hold on to their own budgets and not have any kind of sensible sharing across budget lines, not only to make things better for people—it is all about people—but, in the longer term, hedge our resources better. That brings me on to working together. I was interested to hear that, all of a sudden, the budget consequentials from the autumn statement at Westminster have all to be spent on childcare and mitigating the remnants of the bedroom tax after the mitigation that we have already carried out. I sat on the Welfare Reform Committee and the point that we should look at the bedroom tax again was not even raised as part of the budget scrutiny. I welcome the fact that, in the budget, we are trying to mitigate and alleviate some of the effects of the welfare reform that has been imposed on us. In the news this week, I see that more than 500,000 people in the UK have turned to food banks since April and thousands have been hit by welfare penalties. Willie Rennie said at First Minister’s questions that we have turned a corner and things are good. I repeat that it is about people and there are an awful lot of people that it just ain’t good for. I find it a bit galling that we have an Opposition party that talks about working together but could not even vote together to try to bring some of the powers over welfare reform to the Parliament. We hear Opposition members saying, “Use the powers you have. Use the powers you have,” but we could have had many more powers. We could have been doing better than just tinkering around the edges of trying to alleviate some of the issues that are being imposed by Westminster. It is back to what Anne McTaggart said—

I am just finishing. It is about working together, cross party, to determine what is best for Scotland and how we want Scotland to perform. Let us get on and do it.

I will try very hard not to chunter, Presiding Officer. I note in the report published this morning both examples of good care in East Kilbride and bad practice in Hairmyres hospital. How will the cabinet secretary ensure that, both immediately and beyond the three-month period, the top level of NHS Lanarkshire is forced to face up to its responsibility to provide good management to very committed staff and good service to the Lanarkshire public?

Selective memory is a wonderful thing. I seem to remember that it was one Mr Miliband who formed the big six in the first place.

No, thank you. When I read the motion, I thought that it seemed quite upbeat, but then I remembered what the people of Scotland have long since learned: to beware of Tories bearing gifts. Further scrutiny proved interesting. The Institute for Fiscal Studies has branded Mr Osborne’s business rate changes a “deadweight ... giveaway”, which will deliver no new developments, so it is not clear what advantage there would be in our following Mr Osborne’s example, as Gavin Brown suggests that we should do. Surely it would be better to consider John Swinney’s package of expansion of the small business bonus scheme, which is targeted on the smallest premises and businesses.

No, thank you. The national insurance changes for under-21s sound sensible on the surface, but 20 per cent of our young people are unemployed and the changes will not start until 2015. The lack of urgency on youth unemployment is another example of the UK’s failure to engage with the challenges that face Scots. On corporation tax, the issue that is not being tackled is that the biggest companies seem to pay none at all. Vodafone gained more than £80 billion on a United States share disposal but paid no UK tax on the profit. Given that Vodafone’s chief financial officer is one of Mr Osborne’s tax advisers, it is unlikely that Mr Osborne will move to close the loophole—and given that Gordon Brown, with Ed Balls as his adviser, created the loophole, I would not hold my breath waiting for Labour to do anything about it.

Our having the power over corporation tax is what is important, because then we can target, in all sorts of ways, to the best economic advantage of our country.

As we watch the effects of the autumn statement unfold and as we see the spring budget, we will be able to see what Scotland’s direction of travel will be if we vote no. It is already clear that there is no appetite in Westminster for tackling the growing dominance of London and the south in the United Kingdom economy. The message that is coming through in the press is clear. The Daily Telegraph said: “London’s astonishing boom can lift the whole of Britain”. The Guardian said: “London’s economic boom leaves rest of Britain behind”. A headline that I thought was certainly true was this one, in Estate Agent Today: “London’s house price boom is outstripping 2007 bubble”. That is worrying—look what happened the last time. When Osborne says that the UK is booming, he means that he has turned the tap on for a property boom in London and is pretending that that benefits the rest of the UK. That is his strategy to win in 2015. By contrast, Labour seems clear on just one thing: it does not believe that it can win power in the UK without Scotland’s help. However, Labour’s message to Scots has changed. Until fairly recently, we were told that we were too vulnerable for independence. Now, Anas Sarwar and Douglas Alexander are telling the opposite story and saying that we are too wealthy for independence. They are trying to convince Scots that we would be callous to leave the poor of Preston to get by without our money. The problem for Messrs Sarwar and Alexander is that there is an absolute lack of evidence that Scotland’s extra taxes ever get near places such as Preston. The Treasury and successive UK Governments have ensured that Scotland and many other parts of the UK have lost out, whether by bending the rules to spend billions of pounds on regenerating London under the Olympic banner or by keeping expenditure off tax and putting it on to energy bills. Members here are in denial about losing £4 billion a year if we vote no. If we look back, we see that we are already heading that way. In 2007-08, 9.9 per cent of identifiable public expenditure came to Scotland, but in 2011-12 we got less than 9.6 per cent. In 2011-12, every part of the UK with the exception of London and the south got a lower proportion of identifiable expenditure than it had received in 2007-08. In real terms over that period, Scotland lost more than £8 billion and the north lost over £0.5 billion while London and the south received an extra £11.5 billion. Is it any wonder that Boris Johnson is backing the better together campaign? Talking of the better together campaign, I was appalled to see that the Labour amendment contains absolutely no criticism of the Tories and simply has a go at the SNP. It is about time that Labour realised that Scotland taking control of its own resources will mark a break with the UK economic policy that has seen an increasing gap between rich and poor and between the wealthy south and the rest of Great Britain, let alone Scotland. It is time to tackle the paradox that Scotland has a higher GDP than the rest of the UK but has more poverty and less wealth. I believe that, despite that paradox, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth has steered Scotland well with limited powers and resources. I say that we should look to Scotland’s future as an independent country, so I support John Swinney’s amendment.

The First Minister explained earlier to the Opposition benches the reality of the £4 billion cut that is coming down the line from Westminster. Will he take this opportunity to explain to the Opposition the potential impact of that on this Parliament’s efforts to tackle poverty?

I thank all those attending the debate tonight and all those who signed the motion. Until I read in my local paper, the East Kilbride News, about the achievement of East Kilbride resident Michael O’Neil, the term “maxillofacial prosthetistry” was not one that slipped easily from my tongue—it still doesn’t, as members will appreciate as the debate proceeds. Indeed, it had not registered in my thoughts. I did a bit of research, and my interest was kindled. When I visited the west of Scotland regional maxillofacial prosthetics service at Glasgow’s Southern general hospital, I was absolutely fascinated to learn about the work that is carried out by eight maxillofacial prosthetists, who work between the Southern general and Glasgow royal infirmary. The service is responsible for the provision of treatment for patients with a disfigurement in the head and neck region. The deformity can be trauma related or congenital, or it can be the result of cancer surgery. The work ranges from the fitting of simple surgical plates, which are used to aid healing, to the recontouring of a patient’s skull after trauma using a custom-fabricated titanium cranial implant. The laboratory runs prosthetic clinics and fabricates custom-made noses, ears, indwelling eyes and orbital prostheses for patients who have lost part of their facial contour through trauma, cancer or congenital deformity. I am grateful to Michael O’Neil, Fraser Walker and their colleagues, who provided an in-depth tour and presentation during my visit to the Southern general’s max fax lab—which I have decided is much easier to say. I am glad to welcome some of the team to the Parliament this evening. The presentation detailed how far maxillofacial technology has come, from post-war prosthetics—which, I mention for interest, were generally attached to spectacles—to new, life-like silicone prosthetics, which can be attached using magnets or by fixing them to bone. During the visit, Michael and Fraser demonstrated by showing personal cases where maxillofacial technology has been used to correct abnormalities in the jaw or skull. It was clear to me that the work is life changing. Small or major enhancements to appearance promote confidence and self-esteem, and they help to remove the stigma that so often unjustifiably applies to those who look different to what we deem to be normal. I was very much struck by the personal bond between practitioner and client. Sometimes, it is built up over years. There is a closeness that, in many cases, is beyond that of the general practitioner or dental practitioner, because of the respect that is given to the clients. In return, there is an absolute trust granted by the client to the practitioner. That caring relationship can be demonstrated by Michael O’Neil’s charity work to raise funds for related causes. I was also very much struck by the cutting-edge research and technology at the heart of the discipline, and that brings me specifically to East Kilbride’s own Michael O’Neil. A maxillofacial prosthetist, Michael O’Neil from the Southern general hospital scooped a prestigious award recently at an international conference. Michael received his Wim de Ruiter Delft plate award for pioneering a technique that enhances surgical results for patients who undergo jaw surgery operations. His technique involves pre-planning the operation on 3D models of the patient’s skull that have correctly proportioned teeth. The technique has been greatly successful in the correction of facial asymmetries and for difficult craniofacial operations. It allows pre-planning work to be done alongside head and neck cancer surgeons, which can greatly cut down operation time. Using a computerised tomography scan, digital models can be created that allow for careful planning of the patient’s operation. The use of those models, together with 3D physical models of the tumoured site, allows large bone plates to be prepared with location clips to enable accurate placement of bone grafts that have been taken from another part of the patient’s anatomy. That breakthrough has helped to reduce operation time and has made reconstructive bone grafting more accurate. I thank the Presiding Officer for allowing me to use a prop in the debate. I was very honoured to receive a miniature version of a skull that has been used for the technique. I know that the boys in the company, in particular, will be fascinated to learn that it was produced on a 3D printer. I have christened it wee Mikey—I should say that I have done so in honour of Michael O’Neil, just in case our minister, Michael Matheson, takes it the wrong way. There is a great deal more that I could say about this work, but time prohibits me from doing so. I know that many of my colleagues would be as fascinated as I am by the work of the team in Scotland, so I hope that many will attend when I arrange an information session in our Parliament in the new year. I have some concerns that I would like to express. There is no specific training for maxillofacial prosthetists and technologists in Scotland. Currently there are 14 qualified maxillofacial prosthetists in Scotland, but in six years’ time there will be a 25 per cent reduction in that number because of retirement. The lack of training and discrepancies in pay structure make it difficult to attract maxillofacial prosthetists and technologists to Scotland. Because of the low number of prosthetists who are required, it may be that it is not practical to form an exclusively Scottish education programme, but imaginative thinking and recognition of a service that is vital to many people and which has such potential—as is demonstrated by the work that is being carried out by Michael O’Neil, Fraser Walker and their colleagues—can surely reach a solution. I hope that the minister will consider those points; I will write in much greater detail. I suggest that he should consider visiting the unit to speak directly to those who deliver the service and perhaps some of those who receive it. I am sure that he would find that as fascinating as I did.

There are no current plans to use committee rooms on a regular basis for exhibitions.

It would never cross my mind to describe Christine Grahame as particularly grumpy. I believe strongly that another remit of the Parliament is its openness and accessibility to the public. The exhibition that we are talking about was the Andy Warhol: pop, power and politics exhibition, which was announced in April this year. There are many reasons why it was held in committee room 1. As we were the first Parliament in the world to host the exhibition, we should be very proud of it. No committee meetings were cancelled because of the exhibition. More than 22,500 people visited it during the 30 days and more than 500 people participated in screen printing workshops, which I believe is a great triumph for the Parliament. My SPCB colleagues and I will stand by our belief that the exhibition was excellent and was a good example of our Parliament being accessible and encouraging to the public.

As I said, there are no current plans to use committee rooms on a regular basis. I repeat that no committee was prevented from meeting because of the exhibition. I would have thought that the chamber would be an excellent place to meet, as it reflects the importance of our committees.

I have the figures on that and I can certainly pass them to Mr Wilson after question time. We include cyclical maintenance in our planned maintenance figure, which was £1.52 million in 2012-13, the same in 2011-12 and £1.56 million in 2010-11. Reactive maintenance was £233,000 in 2010-11, £158,000 in 2011-12 and £179,000 in 2012-13.

No. Nothing like that is planned. As has been reported to the Parliament already, the security screening facility is now complete and it came in on cost and on time. We are pleased by that. The facility is being seen as a welcome addition to our Parliament. On-going, planned cyclical maintenance and reactive maintenance go on day to day, week to week and year to year. I do not have in front of me the plans for the next few years, but no major capital items that would require planning permission are planned at the moment.

The Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body has six parking spaces for disabled people and those are booked and monitored through the facilities management help desk. There is also of course a disabled parking space out on the street across the road from the Parliament entrance, which can be used by visitors.

Dennis Robertson is quite right: we would like this Parliament to be an exemplar. A recent example is that one of our members was hosting a group that had quite a few disabled persons in it and we were able to arrange for them to use the spaces in the Parliament car park. If the six disabled persons parking bays in the car park are not booked by noon, they are sometimes released for general booking for the following day. I stress that that is, and will continue to be, monitored very carefully. This is such an important issue and Dennis Robertson is right to bring it up, especially in the light of his member’s bill. We should always be held as an example.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Will Drew Smith give way?

As we know, Westminster continues to cut UK civil service jobs in contrast to the Scottish Government’s policy of no compulsory redundancies. That affects my East Kilbride constituency, so what does “Scotland’s Future” say about improving job security?

That description “of the glorious diversity of human beings” from Elaine Murray just sums everything up. That was great. I am pleased to take part in the debate today because I feel that it has been a long time coming, although that might be a mark of my own frustration about things. I looked back at the debate that took place during the passing of the 2004 legislation for civil partnerships, and at that time, I asked: “How can anyone sit here and say that it is equality if same-sex couples are not allowed to manifest their faith in the same way that mixed-sex couples can”—[Official Report, 3 June 2004; c 8935.] even if the minister is happy to carry out the ceremony? I still feel that way. I just cannot get my head round the idea that some people should be treated differently from others; it just very, very wrong. However, it may well be that, although I saw civil partnerships as a temporary solution that ought to be quickly overtaken, it was right at the time that that step was taken, so that we could move on. The figures that Jackie Baillie cited on how social attitudes have changed perhaps indicate that it was correct to introduce civil partnerships. I have been struck by the amount of personal testimony that has been given; members have been extremely brave. No one need get their notebook out—I am not about to say anything stunning—but I would like to illustrate how time moves on and attitudes change. Thirty-odd years ago, my standing up and saying, “You know what? I’m not married. I live in sin,” might have been as stunning as saying the things that we have heard some members say today. Now, no one cares about that. In the 1960s, it might have been stunning to hear an 11-year-old say, “You know what? My mum’s just run off with another man and my mum and dad are going to get divorced.” I was that 11-year-old. I hid that from people at school, from neighbours and from other people I met for a couple of years because I was ashamed of it. According to social mores at the time, a child’s parents getting divorced was extremely shocking. What we are doing today is extremely important and represents a natural step forward. I hope that we get to the point—when I am no longer here—when someone, in the course of explaining to Parliament something that had been taboo for many years, says, “You’ll never guess what. It’s not that long ago that same-sex marriages were something that people found it really difficult to talk about. People found it hard to say that they were in a same-sex relationship because that was what was right for them.” To me, the issue is just about equality—straight, simple equality. It is about accepting people the way they are. Why cannot everyone just accept people the way they are if they are not hurting anyone else? It is extremely simple. That brings me on to the spousal veto. I had intended to talk about it more, but I am aware that other members want to speak. I was pleased to hear the minister say in his opening remarks that he would look at the spousal veto on legal gender recognition, whereby the spouse of a person who has been through the whole process can still prevent them from having their gender legally recognised. That must be looked at, so I am glad that the minister said that he would do so. I would like to give due recognition to everyone who has worked so hard for same-sex marriage. There is a great wee book called “Six Reasons to Support Equal Marriage” by the Equality Network. What struck me when I looked through it was how happy everyone in it looks—it is such a happy document—and when we were standing outside in the wet mud getting our photographs taken earlier today, it struck me how happy everyone is that the bill is going ahead. Let us not lose that sentiment. We should be extremely happy that we are moving forward in such a way. It is true that we still have a way to go, but what we are doing today is very good for Parliament and—in the longer term, even though some may not feel that way now—for everyone in it. It is also very good for Scotland, and we should celebrate that.

I am absolutely delighted to be standing here after agreeing legislation that will allow us to have a referendum on Scottish independence, because that has been an aspiration for so many people. It is about having the right to elect our Government of choice and thus influence policy and direction, and it is about the decisions about Scotland’s future being made by the people who care most about Scotland: the people of Scotland. In parliamentary terms, it seems like the independence referendum has been a long time coming. However, as Drew Smith said, those of us who believe in independence have been campaigning for it for decades. When someone has a vision and belief that things can be better and fairer, months, years and decades go past and despite the scare stories, the tactics, and project fear, the campaign continues. During the decades that people have been campaigning, things have changed markedly in relatively recent years. Devolution came here in 1999 and it has been good for Scotland. Gains are made for people, their families and communities when decisions are taken in Scotland. From early on in our reconvened Parliament, and through successive Governments, there have been gains such as free personal care, assistance for veterans, the smoking ban and the rejection of the privatisation of the national health service in Scotland. The converse of that is that there is a heavy cost when we leave decisions in the hands of Westminster. In the 2010 budget, 76 per cent of Scottish MPs voted against further austerity cuts, but they were still imposed on Scotland. In the Welfare Benefits Up-rating Bill, 81 per cent of Scottish MPs voted against welfare cuts, but they were still imposed on Scotland. Sixty-seven per cent of Scottish MPs voted against privatisation during the passage of the Postal Services Bill, and we all know what is happening there. Sixty per cent of Scottish MPs voted against the replacement of Trident in 2007, yet the UK is pressing ahead with new nuclear weapons. The big thing is that only 36 per cent of voters in Scotland voted for the Tories and the Lib Dems, yet we got the coalition in Westminster with all the problems that it has brought for Scotland—and with a lot more yet to come down the line. That is why I aspire to independence. It is about always getting the Government that Scotland chooses and putting Scotland’s future in Scotland’s hands. Our opponents like to go on about it all being about the constitution. They say that we never talk about anything except the constitution. The reality is that it is about so much more than that. It is about using the constitution to have the ability to do more than mitigate the awful effects of welfare reform. I have the privilege of sitting on the Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee. However, I do not consider it a privilege to have to sit on the Welfare Reform Committee when the only powers that we have are to scrabble about for money to create a Scottish welfare fund to mitigate the excesses of a Government down south. Everything that that Government does is to deal with the problems that it perceives it has in a part of the United Kingdom towards which all the money is drawn down.

No, I do not think so. Independence is about the ability to do so much more. It is about having the ability to create policies to suit those that they most affect. It is about having the same opportunities as citizens of other small, independent, successful European nations that think it is normal to take their own decisions and to look after their own people. I think that is normal. That is the way I want things to be. This week illustrates perfectly why independence is about not just the constitution, but the issues that affect Scots. Jamie Hepburn referred to this, too. At the start of the week, there was a sense that Labour and its leader down south, Ed Miliband, had grasped the reality of the bedroom tax and was going to take the Government on over it. Apparently, even the shadow Scottish secretary, Margaret Curran, thought that that was the case, because she wrote to the Lib Dems to try to shame them into coming and voting with Labour to get rid of the bedroom tax. On Tuesday, the reality became clear: Ed Miliband’s agenda was just another Westminster game. We have had our fill of Westminster games. A deal had been done, the coalition knew that it faced no threat and back here in Scotland people could only watch in disbelief. I, for one, am sick of it.

No, thank you. I have heard enough over the years. I really do not want to hear any more.

I will finish, Presiding Officer. As one of Sir Walter Scott’s characters said of members of the previous Scottish Parliament—this is written on the Parliament wall— “we could aye peeble them wi’ stanes when they werena gude bairns—But naebody’s nails can reach the length o’ Lunnon.” That is absolutely true: they play the games down there and we can do nothing but sit and watch and shake our heads in despair. When we started this journey we wanted a referendum made in Scotland. With the passage of the bill, we have that. Now I want to see us use it to return the full powers that this Parliament needs for Scotland’s future and to take us all forward.

Does the minister agree that although the theory is often excellent, the practice can be a very different thing? Certainly as far as buses are concerned, I am finding in my constituency that people with disabilities sometimes have issues with getting on buses. The problem may be with how helpful the drivers wish to be, for example, or sometimes it is about other passengers not being willing to fold pushchairs. Would it be a good idea to ask operators and providers to run an awareness campaign for their staff and the general public about the needs of people with disabilities and their rights in relation to buses and trains?

4. To ask the Scottish Government when it last met representatives of South Lanarkshire College and what issues were discussed. (S4O-02555)

There seems to be a problem with the cabinet secretary’s microphone; I heard barely a word of what he said. I will assume that he was very positive about my local college. Is the cabinet secretary aware of the excellent work that South Lanarkshire College is doing on youth employment and certificates of work readiness in conjunction with employers such as Burn Stewart Distillers Limited? Will he commend that work? Does he recognise the strategic importance of South Lanarkshire College to the county and to East Kilbride as a member of East Kilbride’s task force?

I know that the cabinet secretary is aware that many things impact on the workload and case load of GPs. However, I draw his attention to the current difficulties with waiting times in NHS Lanarkshire. Does he recognise and understand that those difficulties cause great frustration for GPs because of the backlog that they build up and their inability—as they see it—to get the best service for their patients? Does the cabinet secretary agree that the current review by Health Improvement Scotland could examine the impact on GPs and consider healthcare for people in Lanarkshire holistically?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what its response is to reports that local authorities are owed more than £3 million in rent as a result of the so-called bedroom tax. (S4T-00501)

Of course, the discretionary housing payment is meant to mitigate some of the effects for some and to enable people to stay in their homes. Will the minister give me her view on the level of discretionary housing payment funding that comes from the Department for Work and Pensions and the way that the Scottish Government is able to top it up? Is the combined sum adequate to keep people in their homes?

Although that funding helps some, others feel very much threatened by the potential loss of their home. Does the minister share my concern about the recent report that the Tory and Labour-run South Ayrshire Council is sending out threatening letters to families who are finding themselves in arrears as a result of the bedroom tax?

12. To ask the Scottish Government when it last met South Lanarkshire Council to discuss economic development. (S4O-02483)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that it is vital that South Lanarkshire Council prioritise economic development in East Kilbride so that the town’s position as Lanarkshire’s most successful business location is maintained? Will he assure me, therefore, that the Scottish Government’s support for the work of the East Kilbride task force is on-going?

6. To ask the First Minister what progress the expert working group on welfare and constitutional reform is making. (S4F-01606)

At Tuesday’s Welfare Reform Committee meeting, the expert working group confirmed that the Scottish Government will be able to abolish the bedroom tax immediately from independence in 2016, despite Labour’s claims to the contrary. Will the First Minister reaffirm that, if it is elected as the first Government of an independent Scotland, the Scottish National Party will scrap the bedroom tax?

8. To ask the Scottish Government what progress it has made on implementing the home energy efficiency programmes for Scotland. (S4O-02409)

How many households have been helped by the scheme so far? Could the minister arrange for those figures to be collated?

The cabinet secretary, while talking about big numbers just now, will know that sometimes very small numbers matter and that if particular specialist posts remain vacant, as is the case in NHS Lanarkshire, it can create great problems for constituencies and for clients. Is the cabinet secretary able to discuss with NHS Lanarkshire how it can move forward out of that quite unacceptable situation?

I was looking forward to this debate on Scotland's future, because it is very welcome on this day, one year before our referendum. I find it exciting because, following the referendum, we will have the opportunity to shape the nation’s future in order to help Scotland to achieve its potential. That is such a privilege. So, why is Scotland not achieving its potential? Scotland is blessed with an ample supply of good quality land. We have oil and gas reserves worth an estimated £1.5 trillion and our potential for renewable energy is second to none. We produce renowned food and drinks, we have an educated population, a skilled workforce and a diaspora that has a foothold in every corner of the globe. However, our population is stuck at 5 million—a relative loss that is equivalent to the population of Glasgow at its peak—and, after 40 years, not a penny of oil revenue has been invested for the long-term. By contrast, our neighbours have an oil fund of about £100,000 a head. As Neil Findlay confirmed, successive UK Administrations have made the UK one of the most unbalanced and unequal countries in the developed world. The richest 10 per cent control more than 40 per cent of the wealth and the richest 20 per cent have average incomes 14 times those of the poorest 20 per cent. While Scotland’s population stagnates, London and the south booms.

Mr Smith has just proved the point that the Labour Party here has no idea what the debate is actually about. It is about their country’s future, so Labour members should rise to the challenge of talking about it. Scotland’s GDP per head, excluding oil, is the third highest of any part of the UK, yet we have deprivation that shames our country. All the measures tell the same story, which is that the union is not working for Scotland. While Scottish Labour helped to privatise England’s national health service, we argued for a Scottish welfare system. When Alistair Darling signed off high-speed rail to just north of Watford, we wanted Scotland to control its own resources, and while Gordon Brown funded the Iraq war, we campaigned against nuclear weapons on the Clyde. As the contrast with Norway shows, another future is possible. We can change Scotland for the better if we have the courage. I was struck by the contrast between two statements. The first is: “It is by being confident—confident in ourselves, in our communities, and in our values—that we can remain an open, liberal nation.” The second is: “I’m not quite sure there are unique Scottish values.” The first was Clegg on the UK; the second was Willie Rennie on Scotland. Dare Scotland be confident in itself, in its communities and in its values? Not if the better together campaign has anything to do with it. Labour calls us a “something for nothing society” and the Lib Dems deny us our values and they pretend to offer us a positive vision for Scotland’s future. In asset-rich Scotland, one in five children lives in poverty. There is no prospect of this Parliament, within the UK, getting the powers that it needs to tackle child poverty. How can we say that? It is because—George Adam was right—Anas Sarwar said so on Monday, live on the BBC. According to Scottish Labour’s leadership, child poverty in Scotland must be the fault of this Parliament and not of the Tories. How bizarre. According to the Joseph Rowntree Foundation, the powers to tackle child poverty reside with Westminster.

The Joseph Rowntree Foundation said clearly that the powers to tackle child poverty reside with Westminster. I wish that Labour would stop creating smokescreens for its Tory partners in better together. Does a single figure in the better together parties have the courage to demand additional powers now, in order to let us consider that issue? I have talked about this many times. Let’s face it. We can forget the unionists’ promises; they will not deliver. They had the chance during the Scotland Bill to bring welfare to Scotland and to get together and go for it. They have no intention of doing so. Willie Rennie spoke about more powers. I heard him on the radio talking about a Glasgow agreement. As I said, they had the chance but they did not take it. There is such a thing as a London agreement. That is legislation. I say to all the people who say that there will be more powers: “Put your money where your mouth is and insist that it’s in legislation, because the Tories will never go for it and Labour MPs in the north of England would be off their heads to vote for it.” No one knows today what Scotland’s future will be 10, 20 or 30 years down the line. That is up to us next year; a year from now—opportunity, or status quo and decline. What I do know, though, is that the people who are best placed to make Scotland thrive are the people who care most about Scotland—the people who live and work here. I passionately believe that, as I passionately believe that voting yes in 2014 will give the people of Scotland the power to deliver. They will grasp that and they will deliver.

Is the cabinet secretary aware of the lack of capacity in neurology departments in NHS Lanarkshire hospitals? I know of cases where people are so worried about the length of time that it is taking to get scans and so on that they are potentially putting themselves into debt to pay to have the scans carried out privately. Will the cabinet secretary consider meeting me and perhaps Siobhan McMahon and other members to discuss the apparent capacity issues in NHS Lanarkshire to try jointly to find a way forward for the benefit of all patients in Lanarkshire?

I am pleased to support the general principles of the Scottish Independence Referendum Bill, just as I was pleased to serve on the Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee and contribute to the report that informs the debate. Coming to the chamber at stage 1 follows a great deal of effort by members on all sides of the independence question to ensure that all Scots have an open, fair and democratic opportunity to decide our constitutional future. I endorse Rob Gibson’s words and restate the Parliament’s unanimous commitment to Gaelic and its status as a national language. I call on all agencies to ensure that Gaelic remains at the heart of our referendum. The process of designing the referendum has been inclusive, extensive and exhaustive. It gives the lie to the Westminster fantasy that this Parliament cannot be trusted with such a significant issue. That view apparently extends across Westminster from Lord Forsyth’s attempts to scupper the Scotland Act 1998 (Modification of Schedule 5) Order 2013 to Anas Sarwar MP’s contention that the Scottish Parliament is not democratic. The Parliament has already addressed the critical matter of the referendum franchise and this bill takes us further. It covers the practicalities of meeting the main objective of the bill, which is to provide for a referendum following “a fair, open and truly democratic process which is conducted ... to the highest international standards.” The important role of the Electoral Commission in that has, of course, been recognised. There are important roles for many, of course, not least the press and the broadcast media. The referendum challenges powerful interests throughout the UK and internationally and, in the years ahead, Scots are entitled to rely on the media to ensure that views expressed by, or on behalf of, such interests are exposed to scrutiny. Funding should always be exposed to scrutiny. It is always an issue and the committee discussed it at length. James Kelly referred to it earlier and got himself in a little bit of a muddle. The bill recognises the need for campaigns to have the resources to get their messages across but attempts to guard against the referendum becoming a plaything of the powerful and wealthy. There may well be opportunities for mischief-making by those with more money than principles or sense, and wealthy individuals based outside Scotland have already taken a highly prominent role in the debate. We should be beyond 18th century ethics in that stuff in the 21st century. A no vote secured by imported funds would leave a bitter legacy from which a continuing union might never recover. At the end of the referendum, Scotland must not be seen as having been bought and sold in any way.

It is interesting to note that the yes campaign has already said that it will only take donations from Scotland. As we work our way to 18 September 2014, attention will increasingly turn to the real choice that faces people in Scotland. The pro-union parties tell us that Scotland’s constitutional settlement is not fixed and that, if we vote no, Scotland will get significant new powers. It sounds familiar—shades of 1979. I have already called many times on pro-union parties to ensure that the settlement against which Scots will test independence is clear and locked in but, instead, they focus on a negative campaign that is designed to misinform and undermine Scottish self-confidence. It is in that context that we must judge the promise of a UK Government magnanimous in victory and committed to fulfilling Scots’ desire for more control over their own affairs. Reality will be very different. Interest in a Scotland deemed to have voted itself out of existence will be extremely low on the agenda of all UK parties. I cannot envisage Scottish leaders turning up at party conferences to receive grateful thanks for saving the union getting any merit or ground at all if they argue that there is a new, as yet unspecified bill to pay for that. Fearing the UK Independence Party, no Westminster party—none—will tell voters in England that a top priority is to give Scotland more financial and economic powers. David Cameron has already backed a UK-wide constitutional commission. The Lib Dems’ rediscovery of a federal future for the UK is largely irrelevant, but the Campbell commission at least makes it clear that further devolution would lead to the demise of the Barnett formula, costing Scotland billions of pounds every year. Ed Miliband has not made his position clear either, but we know that it would be guided by his need to win seats throughout England. With 15 per cent of English voters in favour of regional Government and one in five in favour of a Parliament for England, any kind of devo, whatever we want to call it, would hit the buffers of UK electoral arithmetic. At the heart of it, we should remember that the people who promise further powers are those who voted against welfare powers for Scotland when we discussed that under the Scotland Bill. That all weakens the argument for voting no. However, the record of the Scottish Parliament strengthens the case that it is better for all of us if decisions about Scotland’s future are made by the people who care most about Scotland—that is, the people who live and work here. That is why a clear and decisive yes is the only future for Scotland and why we must have a yes vote in September next year.

Will the member take an intervention?

I rise to speak to the motion, which sets out an amendment to the Scottish Parliament salaries scheme. Recent events have highlighted concerns about how, in circumstances in which an MSP has been convicted of an offence, he or she is treated both by the Scotland Act 1998 and under the rules governing this Parliament. Questions have been asked as to whether a member who is serving a prison sentence should receive their full salary. Recommendations on what provision the Parliament should make for the payment of salaries to members of the Parliament and members of the Scottish Government is a matter for the SPCB and I move this motion on behalf of all my colleagues on the corporate body. Having considered this matter carefully, we are in unanimous agreement that the salaries scheme should properly reflect the reciprocal relationship between salary and the performance of functions. We recognise that a number of factors could prevent a member from being in a position to perform their parliamentary functions. After looking at the range of circumstances in which that might occur, we consider that the Parliament should be invited to agree a mechanism whereby any member who is sent to prison by the courts should have his or her salary reduced to reflect the fact that any member in such a position would not be able to fulfil the full range of their parliamentary duties. I will explain the reasoning for this position in more detail shortly. First, though, I stress that this is not a punitive measure. Questions of punishment are strictly for due legal process and the courts to decide and are not a matter for us. However, all of us on the corporate body believe that once the courts have exercised their role the salaries scheme should reflect the impact of any sentence on the performance of a member’s parliamentary functions. In considering this motion, the Parliament will be given the opportunity to arrive at its own view on the matter. Last week, members received a letter from the Presiding Officer, explaining the corporate body’s decision on a salary reduction. It might be helpful to add that our initial consideration of advice from officials looked at the Parliament’s powers in respect of the disqualification of a member and of recall. I therefore assure members that we have considered those issues. There are complexities with regard to legislative competence and policy that will require careful consideration and the Parliament might wish to look again at such issues in the future. We also looked in detail at the “Code of Conduct for Members of the Scottish Parliament” and it is clear that, as the code presently stands, it covers only members’ parliamentary duties and specifically does not extend to a member’s private and family life. In the light of that analysis, the Presiding Officer instructed officials to examine the issue of payment of salary to a member who is serving a prison sentence and to bring forward advice to the corporate body. We met as a corporate body last Thursday morning to consider that advice and, having looked carefully at the matter, we reached a unanimous conclusion that any serving member who is unable to carry out the full range of an elected representative’s functions as a result of serving a prison sentence should not receive a full salary provision. We were also advised that modifications could be made by resolution of the Parliament under section 81(1), as read with section 83(5), of the Scotland Act 1998 to give effect to that policy. It is under those provisions that we have lodged the motion to which I am speaking today. I again stress that the modifications set out in the motion do not seek to encroach upon the role of the courts. Our approach should in no way be interpreted as a punishment—that is for the courts. We have been mindful of the legal advice that we have received, namely that our decision should be underpinned by the following principles: first, that the provision made should respect the principle that salary is payable in return for the performance of parliamentary and other public functions; secondly, that the provision must not be motivated by punishment, retribution or censure; and thirdly, that the provision should be proportionate, of general application and consistent across the scheme in its treatment of members, office-holders and members of the Scottish Government who receive a salary supplement. In agreeing with those principles, we then had to consider the scope of the modification and the amount of any reduction proposed, taking account of the availability of a member to perform his or her parliamentary duties while in prison. I turn first to scope. We agreed that any action we were proposing should not reduce the salary of any member who could not fulfil their parliamentary role for reasons outside their control. I stress, therefore, that when members are unwell or require compassionate leave of absence, or when something such as adverse weather conditions impacts on their role, they will not be affected by this proposal. In our view, that would be a proportionate approach and it is important that we place that on the record. We have taken the view that the proposed reduction should cover any member of the Parliament who has been sent to prison by the courts. That would include anyone who has been imprisoned for a criminal offence, who has been committed to civil imprisonment or who has been imprisoned for contempt of court. It also includes a member who is on remand, as they would similarly be unavailable to undertake the full range of duties. It is also important to make it clear that the modification will not affect members’ staff, who should be entitled to be paid, as we would expect that a member’s office would remain open for the duration that a member is in prison. This provision concerns solely the Parliament salaries scheme, which does not cover staff. I turn to the proposed reduction in salary. In looking at the range of duties to be undertaken, we have based our decision on the definition of “parliamentary duties” that was previously agreed by the Parliament and that forms part of the reimbursement of members’ expenses scheme. The definition has the support of the Parliament and has stood the test of time. It is, therefore, a definition that we consider can be relied upon to determine broadly the range of key duties of members. It was evident that a considerable amount of a member’s duties relate to attending meetings of the Parliament and its committees. There is also a key representative function requiring the ability personally to be present and to pursue matters on behalf of constituents. Prisoners’ ability to communicate with the outside world is severely restricted. We therefore consider that that has to impact considerably on any role for an imprisoned member.

No, I am sorry but I do not have time. I must get on. We also recognise that there is limited confidentiality available for any prisoner dealing with the range of parliamentary and representative issues. We have, however, recognised that there is a possibility that, despite the restrictions that would apply, a member, through limited personal contact with his or her office, could direct motions or parliamentary questions to be lodged. Some limited constituency correspondence might also be undertaken, but all of that would be subject to the regulations of the prison and, of course, subject to data protection requirements. Therefore, based on our assessment, we propose that a member’s salary be reduced by 90 per cent for the duration of the term of imprisonment. To be clear, this restriction would apply to any person entitled to a salary under the scheme—members, office-holders and members of the Scottish Government. Again, we consider the reduction to be proportionate to the availability of a member to carry out his or her parliamentary role in the circumstances. In moving the motion, the SPCB recognises that there may be some consequential impact on pensions. As I am sure all members appreciate, pensions are a highly complex area. Our intention is that any change to the salary provision should have a similarly balanced and proportionate impact on pensions. We have, therefore, asked officials, should the motion be passed by the Parliament, to consider this further, involving the pension trustees, and to bring proposals to us in due course. If such a change is required to the pension rules, we will, of course, as we are required to do, consult with all members of the scheme affected by the proposal. We also believe that, in considering the issue, we have acted with due regard to the principles of fairness and proportionality. I emphasise to members once more that the motion before the Parliament is founded on our view that the salaries scheme should reflect the fact that any member in prison would not be able to fulfil the full range of their parliamentary duties. I invite members to support the motion, and I move, That the Parliament, in exercise of the powers conferred by sections 81(1), 81(5)(b) and 83(5) of the Scotland Act 1998, determines that with effect from the day after the date of this resolution the Scottish Parliament Salaries Scheme approved by resolution of the Parliament on 21 March 2002 is amended as follows: (a) after paragraph 7 insert- 8. (1) For any period during which a member of the Parliament is imprisoned, the salary payable to that member by virtue of paragraph 2(1) shall be reduced by 90%. (2) For any period during which a member of the Parliament holding the office of Presiding Officer or Deputy Presiding Officer is imprisoned, the salary payable by virtue of paragraph 3(1) shall be reduced by 90%. (3) For any period during which the holder of an office to whom a salary is payable by virtue of paragraph 4(1) is imprisoned, that salary shall be reduced by 90%.”; (b) in paragraph 2(1), after “sub-paragraph (2)” insert “and paragraph 8”; and (c) at the beginning of paragraphs 3(1) and 4(1) insert “Subject to paragraph 8,”.

I am grateful to Christian Allard for reminding me that, in March, I turned on my radio and heard Mary Fee, who was then convener of the committee, talking about the inquiry and the report. She talked about it very well, if I may say. However, what struck me was that nothing had changed since I was on the Equal Opportunities Committee in the first session of the Parliament when the original report came out back in 2001. That got me to thinking back to 2001. At that time, I was extremely shocked at what we learned—like, I suspect, members who came to the matter new on the Equal Opportunities Committee in this session. I thought that I knew a bit about what we called the Gypsy Traveller community through reading, a love of the culture, song and storytelling and the fact that, for some time, I lived and worked in Argyll, where there are a lot of Travellers. However, I was totally shocked at what I learned during that first inquiry. I learned about the life expectancy of members of the community, which Malcolm Chisholm talked about. I was extremely shocked by the discrimination that people suffered when they tried to access GP services or to get into hospital, and I was horrified at the level of bullying of Gypsy Traveller children that was prevalent in schools, particularly secondary schools, which was such that the drop-out rate of Gypsy Traveller children from education was extremely high. Looking back, I am struck by a couple of things. Ours is a very privileged job, because we meet people whom we would not otherwise meet, and there are things that stick in my memory. One of them is being on a site—a pretty bad site—in Argyll, where I met a lady who invited me into her trailer. She had been part of what is called the settled community—she had been given houses by the local authority and had given them up. When I asked her to explain to me why she had done that, she said, “It’s very simple: I don’t like living in a house, because you have to stand up to see out the windows.” I was struck by a recognition that I would never understand that. Part of the problem with what local authorities, Government and we as individuals who have got used to all the trappings of being settled try to do is that we try to understand, but we will never understand, so why do we not just accept that there are people who require to live differently from how those of us in the main stream of society have chosen to live, make an accommodation and get on with it? A United Nations rapporteur is looking at housing generally across the UK, and I know that she is meeting representatives of the Gypsy Traveller community again today. I hope that we can reach an understanding when it comes to what she reports. The other thing that I remember strongly was going into a cafe in Argyll with a representative of the Travelling community. On realising that we were finding it extremely difficult to get served and wondering why, I asked him, “Is this cafe always like this?” He said, “No—it’s because you’re with me.” I was shocked that such an open form of discrimination was happening in a decade in which the Parliament had been re-established. That impression was reinforced when his wife came and stood outside the door and motioned to him to come out. I said, “Tell her to come in for her lunch,” but he said, “Oh no, she won’t come in—she’s too frightened to come in here.” It is absolutely awful that we are allowing people to live like that in this day and age, especially when—as Siobhan mentioned—on some of the sites in question, we are talking about rent-paying tenants who do not have tenancy agreements or any real rights. They have occupancy agreements, which amount to nothing. I am conscious of the time, so I want to move on to discuss negative stereotyping and discrimination, which I think we all have a responsibility to address. I know that the National Union of Journalists has recently produced guidelines for its members. I was struck by the fact that one of its main guidelines is: “Resist the temptation to sensationalise issues involving travellers”. Everything that I have seen on television lately involving Travellers has definitely sensationalised the story. Some of the headlines in newspapers are absolutely disgusting. I go back to what I said at the beginning—I was part of the Equal Opportunities Committee’s inquiry in 2001, yet here we are in 2013 and, sadly, nothing has changed. At around that time, I remember lodging an amendment to the Housing (Scotland) Bill on the issue, which was voted down. I am not convinced that the same would not happen again. As Mark McDonald said, this is an issue on which we are all frightened to put our head above the parapet. I think that we need a champion, who I hope will be Shona Robison in her inequalities leadership role. We need to be much more vocal on the issue and to recognise that there are times when it is necessary to do things that are extremely unpopular, but which we must do because they are right. I would like to see that happen on this subject.

11. To ask the Scottish Government what assistance it gives to small businesses. (S4O-02332)

The minister’s announcement was indeed welcome. In my constituency, and indeed throughout South Lanarkshire, SMEs have benefited from young people being placed with them through the youth jobs fund wage subsidy programme. That programme is currently producing sustainment rates of 96 per cent of young people still in work after one year. It is a credit to South Lanarkshire Council and its partners. Would the minister consider extending that success and using funding from the youth employment Scotland initiative to support that programme in delivering what could be a short, uncomplicated subsidised wage programme such as the youth jobs fund for small employers right across the country?

2. To ask the Scottish Government what impact the new system for disability living allowance will have on poverty in Scotland. S4T-00394

Is the minister aware that despite “Government Expenditure and Revenue Scotland” showing that spending on social protection as a share of gross domestic product is estimated to have been lower in Scotland than in the rest of the United Kingdom in each of the past five years, practitioners such as Capability Scotland warn that the changeover to PIP could have a catastrophic effect on the Scottish economy while hitting the most vulnerable in our society?

Is the minister also aware of the worrying evidence that the Welfare Reform Committee has heard during open sessions with those who are already directly affected by the welfare reform cuts: that work capability assessments are not fit for purpose, as shown by the number of successful appeals; and that those assessments are causing great stress to those who are already dealing with the effects of ill health? Does she share my concern that such bad practice has been further extended to those on disability allowance?

Does the First Minister agree that in an independent Scotland, Scotland’s universities would not only continue to be world class but no longer face the threat caused by Westminster’s damaging student visa policies—[Interruption.]

—which have been described by the Scottish Council for Development and Industry as “a huge challenge to universities socially and financially and to Scotland economically”?

No. The Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body has no plans to procure a resident cat. Members: Shame! We do, however, have a specialist pest control contractor who visits the building regularly.

May I say to the member that she is not half as dispirited as the poor wee mice were, with the panic in their breasties as they saw Mistresses Scanlon and Grahame advancing upon them in Queensberry house? We have considered the suggestion of having a Parliament cat, but lots of issues arise, such as the issue of the security doors and the issue of cruelty, in fact, to a resident cat, which would not be able to get out and about the building. In addition, members have said to us that they have an allergy to cats. We are satisfied that the pest control measures that we can undertake are sufficient to stop the infestation of mice that Mrs Grahame is obviously terribly concerned about.

We do not have problems in ensuring that we are in control of any potential mouse sightings in the Parliament, and therefore the answer to Mr Eadie is naw.

No work is currently being done on the timber louvres; the word is louvres, rather than shutters, Mr Lyle—I am afraid that I gave the member the wrong advice earlier. Maintenance work is planned to take place during the summer recess. That will include the removal and maintenance of the timber louvres on the MSP and Canongate buildings at a cost of approximately £25,000, and in situ recoating of what we call the bamboo poles, but which are actually oak veneer, at the public entrance canopy at a cost of approximately £2,000. External timber maintenance is an on-going requirement that is budgeted for in the long-term maintenance plan. The timber of course is part of the palette of materials used in the overall Parliament complex.

I am tempted to ask Monsieur Allard to intervene and tell us the correct pronunciation of louvre. Richard Lyle makes a serious point. I feel very strongly that we have an absolutely wonderful parliamentary complex. Visitors and construction professionals often comment about the quality of the finishes and the palette that we have used. There must be on-going maintenance with a zero tolerance policy towards defects so that we do not let things look shabby. I am a wee bit concerned about what Mr Lyle has said about the shabbiness of some of the louvres and windows. I will take a look, and I will ensure that the Parliament’s very professional maintenance and procurement teams have a look, too, and that they consider what can be done in our on-going and cyclical maintenance to ensure that we never allow our parliamentary complex to look in any way less than its best.

It seems to be me again, Presiding Officer. We are pleased that we have reduced the total energy used in the building by 12 per cent over the past three years. We have done that by reducing electricity consumption by 15 per cent and gas by 7 per cent, which has delivered savings of around £200,000 a year. We have reduced the Parliament’s carbon footprint by 19 per cent over the same period.

The process is on-going. We all have a responsibility to meet the Government’s target: members of the Parliament have agreed that that is right; the Parliament, as an institution, has agreed that, too. We have plans for further action. We have an ambitious target to reduce carbon emissions by 42 per cent by 2020 compared to 2005-06 levels. In fact, the corporate body approved at yesterday’s meeting a carbon management plan to ensure that we achieve that target, which we are on course to meet. We will do that by reducing electricity consumption by 40 per cent and gas by 14 per cent. Of course, it is important that, as technology develops, we invest in new equipment that delivers energy savings when there is a good business case to do so. We had an interesting discussion yesterday about LED lighting in that regard. We will be improving control of equipment in the building and making the heating and ventilation more responsive to requirements.

Although I am in there a lot, I do not make a point of sitting at the door and taking notes of the numbers using the lounge. We do not record the number of customers who use the Queensberry house lounge on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays before 4 pm. We record the number of transactions that take place, but that does not tell us the number of people who use the lounge because a single transaction often involves multiple individuals. Members—as I and a lot of my colleagues do—and their guests can use the Queensberry house lounge as a meeting area without purchasing any refreshments.

If our staff tell us that that is the situation, of course we accept it. However, I repeat that there are members who use the lounge as a private meeting place without making any purchases. I have seen members buy coffee at the coffee bar outside and wander into the Queensberry house space. The corporate body felt that it was very important that members of this Parliament have somewhere they can take people to have a meeting that is private. We felt that the best way of achieving that to the benefit of all was to say that before 4 o’clock the lounge would be for members and invited guests only, in order that there could be a degree of confidentiality for meetings with constituents who come to visit us at the Parliament. The corporate body has not reconsidered that, because we feel that it is a very important principle.

Alex Johnstone finished by calling on the Scottish Government to do some things; I start by calling on Iain Duncan Smith, Lord Freud and David Cameron to show a bit of humanity and stop stigmatising people in rented houses. I declare my fellowship of the Chartered Institute of Housing, albeit that it is a long time since I worked directly in housing. Even longer ago than that, I worked in Clydebank Housing Association, which was a new association in the mid-1980s. We began to do shared accommodation for young people, which was innovative some 20-odd years ago. Those who represent that area might like to know that that accommodation was in Alexander Street. I think that it was converted later to mainstream tenement housing and is no longer there. I use that example to show that, all that time ago, we were worried about how young people setting out could sustain tendencies and felt strongly that it was not as simple as putting someone into a house and saying, “There you are. Get on with it.” It took intensive management. I can say that with confidence because I was the sowl who had to manage it. It was not easy. I have some concerns that the current move to much larger housing associations and registered social landlords will mean that we lose some of the ethos of community-based housing associations and that that will take away from the intensity of management that is sometimes required. What has changed since 20-odd years ago? We have excellent homelessness legislation and recognition that young people have rights, which is really important. We also have recognition that life has changed and that expectations and aspirations are a bit different these days. That is the backdrop against which the Equal Opportunities Committee’s report was written. There are examples of good practice, as outlined by Mary Fee. In my area, South Lanarkshire Council runs homelessness sessions for all fourth year pupils across South Lanarkshire as well as mediation services and housing options services. However, there appear to be variations in service delivery across the country. It is quite right that the committee has asked the Scottish Government to take an overview of the area. Education is important, but if there is one plea that I would make it is that, as well as the financial education and the stuff that goes on in schools across the board, we need practical education on things such as how to change a plug, what to do if a boiler packs in and how to paint a wall. It is about more than just the financial side. It is about making a house a home. That is the tenet of the report—it is about having and keeping a home. Over the years, I have found that benefits are always an issue in that regard. I remember one case that I dealt with some years ago in North Lanarkshire. A young lass who had come out of care, who had had hard times in her life, ended up with a lovely wee flat. It was absolutely great and she got her life together. She went to night school and got her highers and then she wanted to go to university, but she could not, because she would not get housing benefit. The choice for her was to get educated with a view to having a career and lose her home, or to stay in her home and look at working in the same kind of job for years on end. We have got that wrong, too. We have to join up some of these services. That brings me to the bedroom tax. What is happening is absolutely ridiculous. We sit in the Welfare Reform Committee every week taking evidence. This morning, we heard from the chair of the Scottish Human Rights Commission just how pernicious the bedroom tax is. It goes against all the human rights that we stand for in Scotland. He said that he does not believe that this Parliament would have introduced it. I look forward to the other parties in this Parliament—apart from the Tories and the Lib Dems, who obviously support it—standing up and saying, “We would reverse the bedroom tax if we had the ability to do that.” I received some information from Crisis, which is the national charity for single homeless people. It is really concerned by the latest stuff that Iain Duncan Smith and David Cameron are coming out with, which involves cutting benefits for the under-25s. Currently, nearly 35,000 people under 25 claim housing benefit in Scotland, for many different reasons and in many different circumstances. Some 17,000 have dependent children. We must also bear it in mind that quite a lot of the 18 to 24-year-olds who claim housing benefit are also working. It is not the case that those who claim housing benefit are getting their whole rent paid. There are people who work really hard and just need a help up. Eight per cent are sick or disabled and claim employment and support allowance, and 28 per cent are jobseekers. In 2012, David Cameron said: “Choice one: work hard. Go to college. Get a job. Live at home. Save up for a flat ... Or ... Get housing benefit. If hard-working young people have to live at home while they work and save, why should it be any different for those who don’t?” I will tell him why it should be different for some people. It is because they get a rotten chance in life. It is all very well for David Cameron to say that those people have responsibilities, but so does the Government. It has responsibilities to look at the rights of children and young people. Not every young person is able to stay at home until they can save up the deposit for a flat. I do not want to go into personal details, but I had to leave home at 16. It was not easy, but I got there by a lot of luck and a lot of good opportunities. An awful lot of youngsters just do not get that. I know that I have to finish, Presiding Officer. This is about much more than just getting a home. It is about keeping it. I am glad that the committee’s report recognises that. I finish with something that a young lad in Motherwell said to me a few years ago.

He said, “Do you know what, Mrs Fabiani? They gave me a house, but they didnae tell me how to work it.” That is the key to what we have to do.

6. To ask the Scottish Government what the process is to appeal a historic finding of the Lands Tribunal for Scotland. (S4O-02130)

I thank the minister for that answer. A constituent of mine believes that he has recently had sight of documents in the National Archives of Scotland that were not shown some years previously and which, in fact, prove his case. Having exhausted all available funds in trying to prove his case over the years, does he have any other recourse?

It was interesting to hear what Richard Lyle said about prisoners. I have been wondering what the Lib Dem position is on the matter. The coalition Government at Westminster said recently that offenders who are sentenced to custodial sentences of less than four years would have the right to vote in UK Westminster parliamentary and European Parliament elections, unless the judge considered that to be inappropriate. It explicitly stated that the ability to vote in referendums was not included, so it is interesting that the Lib Dems in Scotland are trying to put the Government under pressure on the issue.

It is also, of course, Patrick and Margo.

What I would say about that is that Patrick Harvie and Margo MacDonald do not have representatives at Westminster in a Government that is taking a completely different position—their points are valid.

No, thank you. That is not the only issue on which the Lib Dems have—I think that they made up the term—flip-flopped. At a recent committee meeting, I was a wee bit concerned that the Lib Dems seemed to be pulling back from expressing confidence in the Electoral Commission. I put it on record that the leader of the Lib Dems in Scotland, Willie Rennie, backed the Electoral Commission, “whatever their advice”, and that Michael Moore, who is the Secretary of State for Scotland, is on record as saying that the commission is “a highly respected independent body which provides essential oversight and advice on the neutrality of the referendum process.” Aside from that, I would like to talk about the extension of the franchise to 16 and 17-year-olds, which I hope we will endorse at decision time. As we have heard, it has for many years been SNP policy that the franchise be lowered to 16 for all elections, and I know that many other members are of that view. The fact that there have been great campaigns on the issue outwith the Parliament, such as those of NUS Scotland—on behalf of which Robin Parker gave such fine evidence to the committee—and the Scottish Youth Parliament, should be recorded. Others have commended Emily Shaw and Andrew Deans, who gave us evidence. I would like to commend the Youth Parliament and all its members for its campaign, which was ably led by its chairperson in the East Kilbride zone, Grant Costello, who publicly espoused the case with such conviction and passion. It should be noted that the participation of the Scottish Youth Parliament and NUS Scotland in discussions was extremely helpful to the Government in formulating the proposals in the first place. Of course, if one is to vote at the age of 16, one must register at a much younger age, which the committee realised could be as young as 14. Therefore, committee members were extremely concerned that young voters be protected; it is absolutely crucial. We took careful evidence on that subject, so I am pleased that appropriate witnesses such as Scotland’s Commissioner for Children and Young People, the Association of Directors of Education in Scotland and the Scottish child protection committee chairs forum are generally content with the proposals in the bill. Again, it was extremely useful to be informed that they had spoken to the Government before the bill’s introduction and that a lot of their advice to civil servants had been taken on board. The cabinet secretary told the committee that she is still very open to taking on board advice from experts in the field.

Perhaps I did not make my point clear; it relates to the point of registration. For people to be able to vote at the age of 16, they must register at a younger age than that. For example, if we are talking about someone as young as 14 or 15, we would not want their details, including their address, to be obvious on the electoral register. That is the kind of thing that was taken on board. There will be a separate register of young voters, which will be limited because of such issues. Discussion is on-going about dates of birth as opposed to age. At a point further down the line when they become voters—when they are 16 and not a child of 14 or 15, who warrants such protection—the registers would be merged. I am content that all those who are experts in the field think that we have that right in the bill and that we can move forward in the knowledge that we are widening the franchise to allow 16 and 17-year-olds to vote. That is very important because—as we have heard from others—this is about the future of our nation. I hope that we move forward to independence. I also hope that in the independent nation of Scotland, 16 and 17-year-olds will be eligible to vote in all future elections.

What is the cabinet secretary’s view on the credibility of the OBR, given that its recent forecasts of Government revenues from oil used the futures curve over 10 working days, a methodology that the Bank of England has described as “no better ... than a random walk”?

8. To ask the Scottish Government when it last met South Lanarkshire Council and what was discussed. (S4O-02022)

Given the further potential job losses in East Kilbride that were announced this week, does the minister agree that it is even more important that South Lanarkshire Council, through the East Kilbride task force, comes up with a vision and strategy for the future of East Kilbride? Will he reconfirm the Government’s commitment to Scotland’s largest town?

The minister might well be aware of the content of a recent meeting of the cross-party group on architecture and the built environment, which was about learning from Norway’s use of high-quality architecture to punctuate the country’s main tourist routes. It seems to me that, in the year of natural Scotland, the canals strategy is an ideal opportunity to utilise architectural competition to give young architects much-needed experience and to quickly procure small capital projects that would enhance our tourism offering. Given that such a project would meet the seven principles that the minister outlined in his statement, will he give it due consideration?

First, let me say that standing in queues for post office services is something that many people in East Kilbride do every day of the week. The post office provides an absolutely necessary service for some people, including those who are not online, to whom we owe that as an obligation. I thank Jamie Hepburn for lodging the motion for debate. I also thank the Post Office representative and the CWU’s Liam Murphy who—separately, I might add—met me and gave me some super information. One point about the Post Office’s stuff is that, interesting though the material might be, the language that it uses is very different from the reality. In any information that the Post Office has ever sent to me or any other MSP, the word “franchise” is never used. Instead, the Post Office talks just about what a wonderful service will be maintained, with no mention of the potential loss of services. East Kilbride post office has 14 members of staff, covering approximately eight positions, with a combined experience of 280 years—280 years of service. I was privileged to meet some of those staff on Friday, when they were campaigning against the proposals. What struck me was that every member of the public to whom the staff explained why the post office was shut that afternoon was fully supportive of maintaining East Kilbride town centre’s post office as a Crown post office. On language, I think that it is also interesting that the Post Office’s note about the vote in favour of the first planned industrial action states: “The result is therefore based on the votes of 68 per cent of Post Office Crown network staff, with the overall vote ... equating to 60 per cent of those staff. ... The result shows that a significant proportion of our staff” back our plans. Hey! That reminded me of the 1979 referendum. It is absolute sophistry. It is ridiculous. The Post Office says that there will be no redundancies, but that is only because the union won that argument in a court case. The Post Office talks about a compromise agreement costing up to £20 million—or about £3,500 per person—as if that is hugely generous. For 280 years’ combined service, that is not hugely generous at all to people who have shown commitment and dedication all those years. The Post Office also says that it could redeploy people, but for the staff in East Kilbride their nearest Crown post office is in Motherwell or Glasgow. That is difficult enough for staff, but it is also not right that residents of Scotland’s largest town would not have access to a Crown post office. Many franchisees do very well and give excellent service, but I contend that in a city or large town the franchise outlets should be complementary to the Crown post office. I have been told that, on more than one occasion lately, customers have been directed to the big post office in the town centre when they have had queries that proved to be difficult. As we have heard, surveys have shown that the Crown post offices are top for service. That is due to the staff’s dedication and commitment to on-going and regular training. That service to the public is becoming more and more important in the hard times that people are currently going through. With the move into financial services, I understand that the Post Office intends to trial current accounts—somewhere in England, initially—so it is more important than ever that we maintain good staff training. I was particularly interested to hear that, after shutting two Crown post offices in Newcastle, the Post Office now says that a Crown post office is needed there. That is proof that there is a difference between a Crown post office and a franchise post office. Even if the Post Office wants to save money by ditching dedicated premises, why, rather than franchise to a supermarket, cannot it look at doing a deal to rent space while maintaining that Crown status? Finally, we have heard that the Post Office says that its Crown post offices run at a £40 million loss. That has been scaled down from the £70 million that was originally reported. Mary Scanlon said that, in the stuff that she looked at, the Crown post offices were said to run at a loss of £46 million. It looks to me as though that figure is coming down all the time, so it may be that we will get to the reality. This matters very much. I hope that, when a public meeting is arranged in East Kilbride—which I know lots of people will attend—I am able to be there, too, because I feel passionately and strongly about the issue. A Crown post office is a service that people deserve, and the people of East Kilbride certainly deserve it.

Was that an offer, minister?

Would Willie Rennie like another idea?

I will give him an idea that we heard this morning. It concerns people who are in supported accommodation who have to pay the bedroom tax. Perhaps people for whom councils administer care packages should be exempt.

I was not a member of the Welfare Reform Committee when the report by Professor Steve Fothergill and Professor Christina Beatty was commissioned, but I am so glad that the committee did commission it, because it is such an interesting report. It was well presented last week by Professor Fothergill and has been encapsulated today by Michael McMahon, the convener of the committee. There is really interesting stuff in it about the £1.6 billion a year—or £480 a year for every adult of working age—that is being taken out of the Scottish economy. The report is very stark. It finds a clear and unambiguous relationship between the level of deprivation in a community and the financial hit from welfare cuts. It questions whether employment will be any higher as a result of the reforms, although that is the intention of the UK Government, and concludes that the cuts will add a further twist to the downward spiral. The reform is further entrenching the UK’s already deep income inequalities. The report is excellent. It does what the title says: it shows what the impact of welfare reform in Scotland is likely to be. Behind the economic and financial impacts, there are people. There are single people, couples, single parents and two-parent families, some of whom we met in Glasgow this morning. I say to Willie Rennie that none of those people was a “spineless” complainer. I do not believe that anyone who is complaining about the welfare reforms is a “spineless” complainer.

No, thank you. We heard enough earlier. George Osborne was in Glasgow this morning, too, but he did not come near our informal committee meeting. Rather than scaremongering about independence, he would have been better to have come to the city hall to try to justify why his Government is intent on shafting the most vulnerable people in Scotland. This morning we heard from Agnes, who has already been mentioned. A phrase that she used was repeated by Michael McMahon and Patrick Harvie. Agnes said how upset she was when she heard the language “skivers and strivers” being used. As she said, David Cameron, Iain Duncan Smith and Lord Freud have absolutely no idea what striving is. Striving is what many people do day in day, day out—folk whose children were born with, or who have acquired, physical and mental disabilities; folk who have become ill; folk who have hit hard times and do not have the cushion of wealth to land on; folk who are poorly paid; and folk who have worked hard and work as best they can. The majority of benefits claimants are decent ordinary people. We have heard from them at formal and informal committee meetings, and I am sure that MSPs in the chamber today have heard from them in their offices, in their surgeries and by phone, e-mail and letter. I am sure that some of us have family and friends who are directly affected by the welfare reforms. I know that I do; I have a pal with learning difficulties who suffers from regular panic attacks and depression in relation to work assessments. He will never be in a position to hold down a full-time job, so why is he being forced regularly to go through all that stress and strain? I have a very close friend who is practically housebound due to serious illness. She had worked full time for many years before she hit hard times. Her greatest pleasure is having her son and his family come to stay over for a few days from their home some 200 miles away. She has her first grandchild, and she loves that. A two-bedroom flat has been her home for more than 20 years. She has now been served with a notice of bedroom tax due, of course. She cannot afford it. Will she lose her home? Much more could be said and much has already been said in the chamber this afternoon. I am sure that if Parliament had power over the welfare system, much of the rhetoric would be unnecessary. It is clear to me that there is no stomach for any of the reforms—except among the Conservatives and Liberal Democrats.

No. During the deliberations on the most recent Scotland Bill, we had the chance to send a cross-party demand to Westminster about devolving welfare to this Parliament. As the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations said at the time, and as it reiterates now, “devolving welfare” is “a policy which would enable a Scottish Government to more effectively protect and help the most vulnerable in our society.”

No, thank you. Our Government here is doing what it can, but more could be done if welfare was devolved. Even now, we could work together and we could send that message, from one side of the chamber at least—I include Patrick Harvie, Alison Johnstone and the other members at the back in that. I will end with some words that we heard at the Welfare Reform Committee this morning. I asked witnesses what they would like to say to members of Parliament who represent Scotland but who were not represented at the committee meeting this morning. To the Lib Dems and the Conservatives, the message was quite clear: help us to get it stopped. Another witness posed a question to all of us. She said that, if people voted for independence, some would surely be exempted. I believe so; I believe that an integrated tax and benefit system in an independent Scotland would be fairer and sustainable. As per the terms of the motion, I note the Sheffield Hallam University report. I also note that independence is the only way forward for Scotland, as far as I am concerned.

I thank the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee for holding this debate. It is an excellent idea to ask—as the motion states—for “members’ views on the efficacy of current public procurement processes and on the scope and potential for improvements”. Procurement is an important issue that warrants much consultation and discussion. The number of submissions that have been forwarded to MSPs since the debate was publicised backs that up, as does the level of discussion across the board whenever the subject is raised. I do not believe that one bill can—or, indeed, should—be a panacea for all procurement ills, but it can provide a framework and send very strong messages coupled with sensible, innovative and ambitious guidance to those who operate procurement processes. As I have said before in the chamber, I served as a member of the Royal Incorporation of Architects in Scotland president’s commission on building a better Scotland, and I declare an interest as an honorary fellow of RIAS. The president’s commission focused on the construction industry, and some of its findings very much reflect the need—as I mentioned—to ensure clarity and a degree of uniformity in procurement processes, particularly for services. Many processes are too time consuming and costly relative to a project’s scale. We have many times in the chamber discussed localism and the idea of keeping work in Scotland wherever possible, but in some cases the costs for the portal are very low, and common sense suggests that we can bring them down further to community level when we are engaging in procurement projects. In my constituency of East Kilbride, we have many companies that could benefit—as could the overall economy—from the ability to make procurement truly local—[Interruption.] It is quite apposite that we are talking about the construction industry. There they are, drilling away outside. It is nice to hear that there is work going on out there. It is the application of regulations rather than the regulations themselves that can be a problem. The pre-qualification questionnaire is one example: there is sometimes a degree of going completely over the top in relation to questions. If something is already the law, perhaps there can be a presumption of compliance rather than a constant need to restate things. We also have a risk-averse culture, to which my colleague Chic Brodie referred. Perhaps covering one’s back in our current blame culture would be a more honest way of putting it. There is often a misunderstanding of the regulations, with procurement being run on occasion by people who do not fully understand what is required. I thank the Deputy First Minister for meeting me and the RIAS recently to discuss some of those issues. The RIAS is a membership organisation for the architectural profession, which has been hard hit by the economic downturn, and which—to my frustration—has over many years not been granted the respect that it is due for the contribution that it makes to our environment, economy and sense of wellbeing. That lack of respect is often manifested in the public procurement process. In the past 20 to 25 years in particular, there has been a move away from the traditional appointment of architects as heads of design teams, and towards design-and-build initiatives that put large companies in the driving seat, with the potential to drive down quality in the name of cost and returns for shareholders. Very often when a project has been commissioned, the architect has not even met the client, which I find to be a very bizarre state of affairs. I am not convinced that that approach always offers the best value. As I have said before, research has shown that in the construction industry there can be 50 to 60 bidders for a project. Again, that is a waste of money overall. In addition, there is the competition form of design procurement, of which the most notorious recent example has been the debacle involving Glasgow City Council’s George Square project. There were respected architectural professionals such as David Mackay and Andy MacMillan on the judging panel, and respected practices working up designs for submission, only for the competition to be abandoned. That seemed to me to be a ridiculous state of affairs. It was a waste of time and public money, as well as a waste of time for all the practices that worked so hard. So, not only do we have bad procurement processes, we have bad pre-procurement. That is not good treatment of a profession that, in the words of Colin Donald in the business section of the Sunday Herald, has the “potential to lift public spirits while promoting economic growth” and is an area in which Scotland has shown “unique, world-class quality over the centuries”. We should celebrate that more. We should look at our procurement processes in the round and see how we procure all services for the public. Again, I thank Maureen Watt and her committee for giving me the opportunity to make those points.

In recognising that point, does Mr McMillan also recognise that very often in local situations there is gold plating of European procurement rules, perhaps because of a lack of understanding or because we have such a blame culture, in which people are always looking to have a go, that folk are very worried and think that they have to go over the top? Does he think that it would be useful to have a more level playing field across the country, so that people could feel confident that they were operating as they should be operating and as others operate?

I thank Kezia Dugdale for lodging the motion that we are debating this evening. Even as someone who has long cared about and campaigned on gender violence, I have learned a couple of things tonight. I sometimes think that I am getting really dopey as I get older, because it never dawned on me what “Hollaback!” meant. I thought that it was perhaps somebody’s name. One billion rising is a super initiative, which has references to the early feminist movement, as we call it. There were a lot of feminists around before the 1960s, but the term was not used. The campaign started on—I think—the New York subway, to encourage women to shout out when they were harassed in the way that Kezia Dugdale talked about, in order to embarrass the perpetrator and to put them on the spot. It is sad that an awful lot of those initiatives have been lost. I do not know why; all of a sudden people said that feminism was not something to be proud of and that we had to keep it quiet, and girl power became the thing. To me, the whole girl power thing was just the kind of stuff that promoted the page 3 photographs that we are trying to get rid of as some kind of female choice. Instead, we should recognise that in our society and throughout the world there is gender stereotyping and there is abuse, from the mild pornography that is the page 3 photograph to absolutely horrendous abuse in all its forms, I guess the ultimate of which is rape as a weapon of war, which is happening all over the place. It was interesting to read about the Eve Ensler initiative, which I did not know much about. I like the idea of flash dancing, which sounds pretty good. Something is far wrong, because I missed the dance strike at the Parliament. Let us hope that if there is another one, Kezia Dugdale will have us all—women and men—out there dancing in support of ending violence against women. I have been reading quite a lot lately about the atrocities in Sierra Leone and Liberia, where women were subjected to terrible sexual harassment; they were battered and all sorts. The lack of respect was about power; the use of women as sex objects is about enabling men to feel that they have power. I learned about another terrible form of abuse when I did some work in East Timor. Women were being sterilised by the Indonesian occupiers of the country, as a way of preventing them from reproducing, because there was an attempt to transmigrate Indonesians into East Timor. Abuse went on in Peru, too. I was there during the dictatorship of Fujimori. There was abuse of women by Shining Path and by the Government side. Women activists who were deemed to be getting a bit too lippy and mouthy were abused. In the Parliament, I think that all members have listened to people’s testimonies. I remember in particular the testimony of a young woman from Rwanda—I think that Sarah Boyack was there to hear that, too—who had hidden in her village and watched all her female relatives being raped. Unfortunately the problem is spread right across the world. In eastern Europe, we heard that people who were supposed to stop such things happening, including people who worked for the UN, were trafficking women and using them as sex objects. The campaign will go on. Anything that we can do to raise awareness of the issue, such as the one billion rising campaign and the dance strikes, is good. Let us all work towards the day when every woman in the world feels able to dance like no one is looking.

I would like to respond, Presiding Officer.

Dave Stewart, Liam McArthur and I visited the site today and, when we told your man in charge how disruptive the noise had been when it happened before, he was profusely apologetic. I think that we can certainly go back to him with a degree of—what will I call it?—annoyance that this has happened again and ensure that something is put in place.

Is the cabinet secretary aware that Iain Duncan Smith, following a severe heckling by victims of his brutal welfare cuts in Edinburgh this morning, is on his way to meet Welfare Reform Committee members? The meeting will be held in private, at his request. Does the cabinet secretary share my disappointment that instead of showing a united front to stop the cuts happening in the first place, the Labour Party here is choosing to act as a human shield for the Tories? Does she agree that Labour members should be utterly and completely ashamed of themselves?

Does the member have a memory of one Jim Murphy, who was incumbent at the Scotland Office at the time, having to retract his press release analysis of the GERS figures and admit that Scotland was in a far better position than the UK? Given that, can she tell me what the UK has done over the years about all those issues that she is concerned about?

As my colleague Aileen McLeod detailed earlier and as John Swinney’s motion details, the facts are there: the latest GERS report clearly shows Scotland’s financial strength and the work of the fiscal commission working group confirms that Scotland has the potential to be a successful independent nation. It is that financial strength and potential combined that makes the future so very exciting: having the ability to decide for ourselves how our nation and those who live here can turn from the mismanagement of the past and head for a successful future. It is about having the ability to decide what kind of society we want ours to be. How can anyone not welcome that? For me, at the very least we would not tell those who live in council or housing association properties that they are not entitled to call their house their home if they hit hard times. We would not force those with disabilities to endure additional anguish and stress through cruel welfare reform or threaten to withdraw free prescriptions, free education and even concessionary travel. I despair when I look at what is being imposed on my fellow Scots, which is particularly galling when we consider the financial strength and potential here that can surely no longer be denied by any clear-thinking person. After all, even when one discounts oil and gas output, Scotland has the third-highest GDP per head in the UK, behind that of London and the south-east.

No, thanks—away and talk to your people in Westminster and tell them to stop being so cruel to people in our nation.

Taking energy into account, Scotland is one of the richest nations in Europe, but still the nay-sayers talk us down, as evidenced by today’s amendments from Labour, the Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats. Those better together guys tell us that we need to be careful that Scotland does not take too high a risk by opting for independence. However, what risk are Scots taking if we stay in the union? It is easy to judge that, if we look back over the period of the debate about the management of our oil. As even Jack McConnell recognised some years ago, population change is a powerful measure of economic performance. Any country that has enjoyed the bonus of 40 years of oil revenues and development should be doing well internationally, retaining its existing population and attracting more. Uniquely, that is not the case for Scotland. Westminster managed the impossible in creating a population decline in an oil-rich country. In all our near neighbours—Ireland, the rest of the UK, Denmark, Norway and Iceland—the population grew between 1970 and 2010. In Scotland, it stagnated for most of that period and people left to pursue lives elsewhere. At the beginning of the debate over Scotland’s oil wealth, two big unionist parties dominated Scottish politics: the Tories, who have been reduced to a rump across the country; and Labour, which has retreated into an increasingly narrow heartland. That heartland has seen little benefit from 40 years of oil exploration off Scotland, unless we count—I say to Margaret McDougall—high levels of deprivation and unemployment as a benefit of the union. Looking at past performance, can anyone who represents people in Scotland really believe that Westminster will manage our future resources in the interests of members’ constituents? If the no campaign succeeds, we will see a continuation of Scotland’s resources draining south to prop up a failing UK economy. With half the value of oil still to extract, it is time to recognise the truism that those who fail to learn from history are doomed to repeat it. It is sad that, in its desperate efforts to bolster the union, even the Labour Party has lost any sense of acting in Scotland’s interests. It was so busy telling us that oil is not Scotland’s salvation that it allowed it to be drained off to fund an unsustainable boom in London, for which we are now paying the price. Scottish people are now paying the price. For 40 years, the driving force has been the needs of the London Treasury and not the prospect of building a sustainable energy future and a sustainable social future. Opposition parties demonstrate their lack of concern for the long term every time they welcome Westminster’s misrepresentation of the industry’s future. We hear a lot about recent OBR forecasts. They bear little relation to those of other commentators, yet members of the better together parties, whether in the UK coalition or not, simply trumpet them as proof of Scotland’s lack of potential in the industry. I heard Willie Rennie on television the other night talking about the OBR’s track record. Margaret McDougall talked about that today. The OBR was only formed in 2010. How can it have a track record? It is ridiculous.

According to many UK Government forecasts, the Scottish oil industry should have shut its doors long ago. Instead, the Treasury has extracted up to £12.5 billion annually to prop up its financial mismanagement. I started my speech with straight facts and I will end with the same. Yes, the oil market is volatile, but peaks and troughs can be well managed—look at Norway. Scotland is a marvellous country. It is buffeted by wind energy, its glens flow with hydro power, much of the landmass is built on coal and it is surrounded by oil. Only Westminster could turn Scotland into a land from which people emigrate to escape poverty. Only better together could tell us with a straight face that it is a risk to leave decades of mismanagement behind us.

We can make Scotland better. We have a resource in our people and we have resources all round our land. That is the vision for which we should vote yes, because the alternative is, at best, more of the same.

Will the member give way?

I very much welcome the report, “Count us in: it pays to listen”, by the National Autistic Society. The event in the Parliament was excellent. I learned an awful lot that night about, among other things, the absolute potential that so many people with autism have, which goes beyond anything I could ever aspire to. It was truly enlightening. I welcome, too, Scotland’s first autism strategy and our Government’s investment in that. However, while it is great that our strategy is there, there are always further steps to take after first launching a strategy. I know that the minister, Michael Matheson, is always looking to see how the strategy can be improved. There is always more to be done: bits we might have missed or could add to. I do not necessarily mean that that is always the Scottish Government’s responsibility, because some things that could be much improved are the responsibility of local government, in its areas of operation, or of the Westminster Government—issues such as benefits, for example. I would like to quickly outline a few examples of issues that I have come across through talking to constituents who have autistic children or are looking after autistic adults. I always find the terminology difficult. Mark McDonald was saying that people just do not understand it. Part of that is because of the huge variation among people who are on what we call the autism spectrum. That variation can be physical, as well as in terms of ability levels. I am not an expert in these things but I am told that the autism of one young chap in my constituency is so severe that it affects him physically as well and gives him very particular special needs. I find that, very often, at a local authority level, services are not quite matched up. I know one family in which there is quite a severely autistic child who needs a high level of looking after. His mother, Catriona, also has responsibility for looking after her mother, who suffers from dementia. She finds that she can get support to help with her mum and she can get support to help with her wee lad, but she can never get both elements of support at the same time. As a result, she never gets any time on her own because, on the day when she gets respite care for her lad, she is looking after her mum, and vice versa. Meanwhile, her husband is working every hour he can to give his family as good a life as possible. There seems to be no way of bringing the services together so that she gets a break every now and then. If there were someone who could sit down with a family and look at all their needs in the round, that might make things a bit easier. The transition from childhood to adulthood is important. I recently had an interesting discussion with people with varying needs—some were autistic and others had various physical needs. They were a group of people who have gone to the wonderful Sanderson high school in East Kilbride together. All of a sudden, they are leaving school, they do not have a youth club to go to anymore, either, and they have nowhere to go where they can meet as friends and feel comfortable in their routine. There is nothing there to help them. In this case, parents are getting together to provide something, and we are trying to help with that as far as possible.

The final thing that I wanted to say was about how funding and benefits cut off at that transition point, too. A young constituent of mine, Anthony, has very severe needs and requires the same level of care from his mum at 18 as he did at eight, and her income has been cut—for all sorts of reasons that I will not go into—by up to £500 a month. They are going through difficult times and every agency that is able to help ought to be doing an awful lot more.

Would Margaret Mitchell consider the fact that it is the person’s home to be a mitigating factor?

The current sound and voting system was installed during the 2011 summer recess and has in place a 10-year support and maintenance contract, so we have no current plans to upgrade it.

That is an interesting point. I remember that that was the case with the previous consoles. However, the agreement to upgrade the consoles and the specifications to which they were be upgraded and for what we would see on the screens were decisions taken by the previous corporate body and Presiding Officers. Those decisions are reflected in what we have here today. The Presiding Officers have clarified that if members want to know any of the things that Maureen Watt mentioned, they are more than welcome to send a note to the desk. They will be given any information that they require.

There have certainly been a few recent discussions with our catering contractor, which has assured us that all meat products served at the Parliament have full traceability and are either red tractor or Quality Meat Scotland certified. That certification requires the meat product to be fully audited from the source to the plate.

Certainly. Our current catering contract requires food standards to comply with certain assurance schemes that include animal welfare standards, such as the red tractor and Quality Meat Scotland standards. There are also the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals freedom food standards. I am interested in what Alison Johnstone has said. We can ask that it be looked into to see whether it might be worth considering in future contracts that go out to tender.

How will the procurement reform bill increase the Scottish Government’s efforts to support both sustainable procurement and fair trading in the public sector?

10. To ask the Scottish Government what assistance it is giving to the task force set up by South Lanarkshire Council in relation to the proposed closure of the Rolls-Royce plant in East Kilbride. (S4O-01871)

I ask that the cabinet secretary recognise the importance of East Kilbride within South Lanarkshire and the west of Scotland as Scotland’s largest town and a prime business location. Will he ensure that appropriate assistance is given at all times to the town to promote innovative responses to major employment losses?

Is the minister aware that East Kilbride Credit Union in my constituency has recently agreed to provide much-needed homes on the piece of land where it is building its new headquarters? Does he also agree that credit unions can be a hub of such innovative practice in their own communities?

10. To ask the Scottish Government what recent progress Healthcare Improvement Scotland has made in inspections of care for older people. (S4O-01778)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that an important part of care for the elderly is ensuring that people have dignity? Will he consider how that is measured during inspections? Should hospitals be encouraged to implement robust procedures for encouraging and paying heed to feedback from users and their families and friends?

Will the member give way?

When we talk about human rights at an international level, people tend to understand very quickly and look to places such as Syria and recognise that the people there do not have human rights. However, when we talk about human rights at a domestic level, all too often that relates to bad publicity. Annabel Goldie alluded to the erroneous statements that are sometimes made about who benefits from human rights in this country. The Human Rights Act 1998 has had a positive impact on the lives of many people across the UK. It has been used, for example, to ensure that the dietary requirements of patients in hospitals and care homes are met; to prevent or remedy abuse or neglect of the elderly, learning disabled or otherwise vulnerable; to prevent disproportionate targeting of black or ethnic minority people by police and other authorities; and to ensure that children with special educational needs are not prevented from receiving an education. I am particularly interested in how the Scottish Human Rights Commission investigates those areas and comes up with recommendations. I commend its independent evaluation, care about rights, which has done much to inform those in the care sector about how people should be dealt with with dignity. However, we should not be complacent. We must monitor the situation because there are always things that can be improved. For example, I am working on a case concerning the right of a constituent—an incapacitated adult, whose care resulted in physical disability—to have the perceived shortcomings in his care properly investigated. I am hugely concerned about the impact of Westminster’s welfare reforms. I have no time to go into all that, but I suggest that members read the Official Report of this morning’s Welfare Reform Committee. How people are being treated makes for harrowing reading. I want to ask about the rights of someone who has lived in a social rented property for decades and who has spent years turning their house into a home only to be turfed out because of the imposition of the bedroom tax come April, with no consideration being given to why there is a spare room or, indeed, to the trauma and expense of their having to move house. That is further stigmatisation of the social rented sector. Is that not in itself an attack on the human right of dignity? It is a bit rich of Lib Dems to talk about legislation in this place when they and their coalition partners are imposing heinous legislation on people in Scotland. A witness said at this morning’s meeting that he did not believe that people in Scotland wanted to behave in that way. I certainly do not want to behave in that way and I hope that no one in this Parliament does. The motion in the name of Roseanna Cunningham is on promoting and protecting human rights in Scotland, Europe and the wider world. That is a recognition of the brotherhood of man, which is why we must tackle trafficking in this country and detention at Dungavel. We might have stopped the practice of keeping children in Dungavel for any length of time, but children are just being punted down the road to detention centres south of the border. That is not looking after human rights. I want a national human rights action plan that is meaningful. I do not want it to be eroded by people in Westminster who think that we in Scotland want to be cruel to people who live in this country and to deny them their basic human rights and dignity. I am not about that and I do not want any member in the Parliament to be about that. I ask all members to think on, about how we can have meaningful human rights in our national plan.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what the environmental benefits are of using LED lighting in commercial applications. (S4O-01742)

Does the minister agree that we need to place much more emphasis on reducing the amount of energy that is required and consumed, rather than on the constant production of energy? Does he agree that it is important to investigate ways of encouraging potentially high-volume users such as hospitals and schools to take advantage of LED technology?

I, too, thank James Dornan. For me, the sentence in his motion that stuck out was this one: “there is a false perception that young people who come straight from education are not ready for the workplace and ... this perception makes it harder for young people to gain work experience”. The motion goes on to say that the UK Commission for Employment and Skills survey “noted that 68% of businesses found that school leavers were ready for work ... and 86% of university leavers were ready for work”. The perception that young people who come straight from education are not ready for work is therefore very much a false one. Over the years, when I have been fortunate enough to take on a young person on work experience, whether they were at school, college or university, I would have considered employing the young person straight away in quite a high proportion of cases, if only I had been able to do so. I suspect that if such a study were carried out with other age groups, we might well find that the differences between age groups are not great. When young people are trying to gain experience but get rejection after rejection, they begin to feel hopeless and that no one cares. Their self-esteem is lowered and they can develop an attitude that becomes almost self-fulfilling. We very much have to guard against that. All communities have a responsibility in that regard. I am pleased that in my constituency, East Kilbride, many businesses are fully engaged in programmes with schools and colleges to ensure that young people are aware of what employers are looking for and can work to achieve some of the required skills. I want to pay tribute to a few groups. Rotary clubs are active in East Kilbride. For more years than I care to remember and certainly during my previous career, before I was elected to the Parliament, I was very much aware of Rotary clubs’ work on skills improvement to help young people on their way. Coca-Cola Enterprises has just welcomed its 30,000th visitor to its education centre in my constituency. It has been working hard with young people in our community for a long time. However, it is not just the big companies that work with young people; small companies do that too. James Dornan mentioned the proportion of small and medium-sized enterprises that are capable of employing people, and I think that it was Margaret McCulloch who mentioned a programme in which companies take on a young person to help with a specific aspect of their work, which can be helpful. It is important to make such initiatives local and to work with communities, because the programmes become much more personal for the people who can offer jobs and for the people who are looking for jobs. That is one of the reasons why we launched our youth employment initiative in East Kilbride recently. I want to show the young people in East Kilbride that their community cares about them and will work with them to try to secure a better future for them and give them the opportunities that they need if they are to succeed. We have done that in partnership with East Kilbride Jobcentre Plus, Voluntary Action South Lanarkshire, the inclusiveness project, the Scottish Government, South Lanarkshire Council, Ingenis, the Prince’s Trust and many others. It is early days, but I hope that we will see success. A couple of young people have already been given opportunities to work through the scheme. For example, Jordan Campbell from East Kilbride has a work placement at the Optical Factory in the town. As MSPs, we all have a duty to be advocates for young people and to work as well as we can to promote just how capable our young people are. I like James Dornan’s idea of an information pack for MSPs, because it is a difficult landscape to work our way through. We have some Westminster initiatives, some Scottish Government initiatives and some initiatives of associated agencies. I like the idea of an information pack, but I like even more the idea of something simple that can go out to businesses and young people on a local, community basis. Let us draw some of this stuff together.

Successive Scottish Administrations and this Parliament have made mental health a priority. We have made much progress, and that progress continues with the strategy, which is to be very much welcomed. I want to focus on two areas, which are inextricably linked: stigma and self-esteem. Let us look at stigma and what goes along with it—bullying and humiliation. Whether we are talking about depression, bipolar disorder, psychosis or schizophrenia, and whether it is a one-off, periodic or on-going condition, the effects on the individual concerned are marginalisation and isolation. Those effects do terrible things to people. If something presents in childhood or adolescence, we can imagine the legacy that the person has to carry into adulthood having suffered stigma and its associated problems for so many years. That is why the work of the see me campaign is so very important. That campaign does tremendous work, and I do not think that any member of this Parliament has not at some point taken part in an event through the see me campaign and been very impressed by the work that it does. I also believe that if we can alleviate the stigma along the way towards eradicating it, there will be a direct effect on wellbeing and self-esteem. I do not think that we should ever underestimate the value of self-esteem and wellbeing. That fact was brought home to me a few years ago by the work of the East Kilbride dementia carers group. I remember watching the joy of dementia sufferers who, even for a short time each day, took part in something that made them laugh or smile and made them feel good. It may have been that, later that evening, those people could not remember or tell their partner, daughter or son what they had been doing, but at the time they felt good—and that is important. What helps to promote wellbeing and self-esteem? Two things are participation and creativity—in the arts, drama, song, dance or culture. That is not to deny necessary medication and treatments but to enhance and maintain wellbeing and, in some cases, to prevent progression. The work of Theatre Nemo is well cited in relation to the use of drama and the arts in the health and justice services. Nemo began its life in East Kilbride but has expanded through its work and recognition awards, and it is now Glasgow based. We heard Mary Fee and Christine Grahame talking about the justice system and prison. In an article in The Herald last summer, the governor of Barlinnie prison, Derek McGill, claimed, in giving a snapshot from that time, that “Of a prisoner population at Barlinnie of around 1100, as many as 260 could be classed as having mental health problems.” He also said: “there are people routinely here who are mentally ill, but not so ill they should be in a hospital. If we can stabilise them, get them taking medication and improve their self esteem, there is less chance they will reoffend when they go back into the community.” One of the Theatre Nemo participants talked about “Working as a team, knowing you can contribute to society and create something positive, can see yourself in a new light as someone with strengths and skills.” The group has done a lot of good work in Leverndale, Rowanbank, Stobhill, the Southern general, Gartnavel and Carstairs. Over the years, I have attended many Theatre Nemo events. The first time one sees someone, they are perhaps standing on the sidelines, slightly away from the crowd, watching what is happening with a bit of disdain or shyness, and it has been an absolute privilege to see the difference three or four years later. In fact, that happened recently: there was such a person at the front of the choir, singing at East Kilbride arts centre. That is wonderful—the self-esteem that such experiences bring is absolutely tremendous. There has been a long history of the creative arts helping people to adapt to or recover from mental disorder, and there have been many academic studies on the subject. Back in 2003 to 2005, there was the arts, creativity and mental health initiative. It evaluated four arts therapies trial services across sites in Scotland. In a summary of the project, Dr Andrew McCulloch, chief executive of the Mental Health Foundation, said: “the art therapies have a valid therapeutic role and ... arts in health projects can improve the resilience of individuals and communities.” The findings showed that, overall, participants experienced significant improvement in their mental health and social functioning. In particular, they highlighted improved self-esteem, communication skills and social interaction. That further emphasises the need actively to reduce the stigma that is associated with mental ill health. Society has overcome other deeply ingrained prejudices, and we must keep working on that one. For academic and practical reasons, I am pleased that our mental health strategy has commitments. Commitment 4 concerns working with the see me campaign and commitment 15 concerns increasing local knowledge of social prescribing opportunities. We need more of that. Both those commitments work towards the prevention agenda and joined-up policy implementation. I look forward to that implementation.

3. To ask the First Minister what the impact of changes to child benefit will be on families in Scotland. (S4F-01103)

The First Minister will be aware that the vast majority of Scottish MPs voted against this attack on child benefits at Westminster. Does he agree that that is further proof that this Parliament should be the one that has responsibility for welfare, in order to protect Scotland from further Tory cuts?

1. To ask the Scottish Government when it will publish its proposals for the third national planning framework. (S4O-01556)

The minister will be aware of the recent task force set up by South Lanarkshire Council to address the specific issues in East Kilbride and the town’s economic future. How will the proposals for the candidate national developments align with Scottish planning policy so that the challenges presented by significant economic situations can be met?

It is an honour for someone who believes in independence for her country to speak in this debate, which I believe is a step on the way to independence, as was serving on the committee, which was also a huge honour. The first task—I am with Patricia Ferguson on this—is to say that we all understand the order as a draft section 30 order. The order is a result of the Edinburgh agreement, which was agreed on 15 October 2012. The agreement committed the two Governments to “work together to ensure that a referendum on Scottish independence can take place”. As part of that, a memorandum committed the two Governments to “continue to work together constructively in the light of the outcome of the referendum”— whatever it is— “in the best interests of the people of Scotland and the rest of the United Kingdom.” For me, that was a major shift, given all the nonsense that was spouted not that long ago when we announced that we wished to have a referendum. The sense of mutual respect that came from the agreement was so worth while. It was apparent when our Deputy First Minister and Westminster’s Secretary of State for Scotland came to the committee that they had mutual respect for each other and intend to go forward in that way.

I remember Rob Gibson raising that issue at committee and Stewart Maxwell following up on it. My view on that is clear: how the referendum is run should be decided by a democratically elected Parliament and it has got nothing to do with a bunch of unelected lords and ladies. Our referendum will be made in Scotland and it will be for this Parliament, in the words of the Deputy First Minister, “to make the final decision on how the referendum will be run and to ensure that it meets the highest international standards.” The Deputy First Minister was clear in her evidence to the committee about the respect that will be given to the Electoral Commission and the respect that the Scottish Government gives to this Parliament and to all the different players in the process. She also said: “Any Government anywhere in the UK would not depart from Electoral Commission advice unless there was a very strong reason for doing so, and any Government that did so would have to justify itself before the Parliament.”—[Official Report, Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee, 15 November 2012; c 77, 78.] There are proper roles for Government and Parliament in the process, and we have to respect the process. I think that that is the way in which we can move forward, if everyone decides to carry on along the road of respect. There are those who have tried to suggest over the piece that the Scottish Government is cavalier in its attitude to such things. However, the issue is far too important for anyone who believes in independence.

I look forward to addressing the other elements of the committee’s interest: votes for 16 and 17-year-olds, and the referendum bill itself. I believe that we are on a journey to independence, with all the potential that that brings. I commend the order as a step on the way.

I thank those members who supported the motion, with particular thanks to Patrick Harvie, Malcolm Chisholm and Mary Fee, who quickly signed up to allow the motion to have cross-party support and thus the debate to take place. I also thank the Scottish Refugee Council and the Refugee Survival Trust for the open your eyes to destitution in Scotland campaign, the petition and of course the assistance that they have given today. An example of what the motion talks about—destitution of asylum seekers—is a man who, having fled, sought asylum in 2007, hoping that his wife and children would be able to join him when his claim had been recognised. He was dispersed to Glasgow, but in 2008 his case was refused and he found himself destitute. He was able to gather evidence to submit a fresh claim but, again, his case was refused and he found himself on the streets, suffering from a complex range of health problems, including hearing problems, heart disease, high blood pressure, diabetes and depression. At one point he slept under a bridge; at other times he used the basic night shelter set up by the Glasgow destitution network in a church. He began to suffer from insomnia and additional mental health difficulties. His health continued to deteriorate as he struggled to survive without any support for food or shelter. Earlier this month, he collapsed on a Glasgow bus. He was rushed to hospital in East Kilbride in my constituency, where he died. He was aged only 52. He had not received support since 2009, save for emergency grants from the Refugee Survival Trust and Positive Action in Housing. He had not seen his children for eight years. It is because of cases such as his, seen daily by organisations such as the Scottish Refugee Council and the Refugee Survival Trust, that the campaign has been launched. I have deliberately not said where the man came from or explained his asylum case because those details do not matter. What matters is that in this day and age, in our country, we have people living in destitution and suffering in that way. It does not matter whether they fled here or were born here; they are flesh-and-bone people with human needs like the rest of us—for shelter, for belonging, for sustenance and for esteem. How do such things happen to asylum seekers? People can become the victims of destitution for a number of reasons, including errors, delays and complexities at certain points in the asylum process and support system. The United Kingdom Government is following a deliberate policy of making refused asylum seekers destitute in order to force them to return to the countries that they fled and to deter new applicants. That is quite clear in the UK Government’s regulations. If someone faced going back to a country where they believe they would be killed or tortured or become homeless and starve, what would be the incentive to leave the UK? The policy does not seem to be working as the UK Governments thinks that it is. The UK Government says that those who do not qualify for international protection should return voluntarily to their country of origin. How many Iraqis from central and southern Iraq who have left there over the past few years would consent to go back, irrespective of how hard life is made for them in the UK or whether they were given a lot of assistance to encourage them to return to where they fled from? Many in the Scottish Parliament have campaigned on this issue for many years. I think that it was about a year after the Parliament was set up that the dispersal programme started for folk coming to Glasgow. I can see the faces of members from all parties—starting with the Deputy Presiding Officer and going round the chamber—who have been campaigning on the issue since then. Successive Administrations have tried to do the best that they could within their devolved competences. I think that in this Parliament we have always felt very strongly that these matters are not reserved. It does not matter whether asylum and immigration are reserved; regardless of party affiliation in this Parliament, we have felt that they are not reserved and that we shall do whatever we can do here about them. Meanwhile, those of us who have fought successive Westminster Governments over the way in which they have dealt with the issue will carry on that fight. I want to be clear that having the right policy for dealing with asylum seekers not only is the right thing to do but pays dividends for the country. The UK topped a recent poll in Monocle magazine on international soft power, soft diplomacy and so on. That success owes much to this year’s Olympics, not least because the Somalia-born refugee Mo Farah, who came to the UK as a child from his war-torn homeland, won two gold medals for this country. The campaign against dawn raids run by school pupils from Drumchapel high, fronted by a group of asylum seekers and indigenous girls, is well known to the Scottish Parliament. The National Theatre of Scotland has now translated that campaign into one of the most powerful pieces of modern theatre, which has been a big success at the Citizens Theatre and is off to Stratford. It carries a positive message of a community working together to challenge some of the injustices faced by asylum seekers. The campaign had successes, but I do not have time to go into them. Unfortunately, we still have people being carted off from their homes and sent away, but some gross excesses were prevented by the work of the Glasgow girls. I am sure that members who have seen the theatre production will recognise it as a particularly powerful expression of the values that we want Scotland to project to the world. It is unacceptable that asylum seekers can be forced into destitution in this country and left in legal and financial limbo for months, if not years. The open your eyes to destitution in Scotland campaign is a reminder to us all that it is time to tackle that injustice. We need improved decision making and proper support, as well as something for which we fought for years and which was given for a short time but taken away again: why the heck should asylum seekers not be allowed to work, given the skills that they bring to this country, to support themselves and stop their stigmatisation? I do not think that such things are an awful lot to ask for. I hope that the Scottish Parliament will again send that very clear message down to the UK Government.

Our contract with Sodexo requires it to provide a range of dishes for different dietary needs, including vegetarian, vegan, ethnic and health-related requirements. We also label dishes, and have information on our menus and on the intranet. We have in the past noticed inaccuracies in the labelling and a new process is now in place to avoid that. Our officials are always happy to meet with any member or staff member who has a particular dietary need to discuss how best we can help.

Yes—that sounds like an extremely interesting idea, and it is always good to have participation from those who use the service. I am happy to have a chat with the Sodexo management and include Marco Biagi in those discussions to see whether we can find a way forward.

Can the cabinet secretary comment on the feasibility, as part of the audit, of looking into a system of clearing for college students that is similar to that which exists for universities and which may take away from some of the issues regarding numbers?

When I first saw that the title of the Opposition debate was “Scotland’s Future”, I thought that we would be debating the fact that six months after Scottish Labour’s leader announced her intention to appoint a “let’s try again to kill independence stone dead” commission, she had finally confirmed its members and timetable. However, this debate is about a different Labour commission—the “let’s kill the principles of the Labour Party in Scotland stone dead” commission, or, as Johann Lamont called it earlier, the cuts commission. The motion invites us to agree with Campbell Christie that we require open and transparent consideration, rather than consideration on the current polarised terms. Yesterday on BBC Radio, Johann Lamont called for “a mature debate”. However, last week, Johann Lamont made it clear that for her, the debate is over. In the language of The Daily Mail, she targeted Scotland’s elderly, her sick, and her young people to carry the can for the economic crisis that was precipitated by Labour and worsened by the Tories. The welfare state—trumpeted by the better together campaign as the “glue of the Union”—was dismissed by Johann Lamont as the “something for nothing culture”. She tells us that we misunderstand. She simply wants a debate and claims not to know in what direction Labour’s policy is heading. Unfortunately for her, we don't need to rely on Johann Lamont to see where Labour is going. Watching Labour’s conference, I saw Margaret Curran, Shadow Secretary of State for Scotland at Westminster, rush ahead of Johann Lamont, leader of Scottish Labour, to greet Ed Miliband. That action revealed Labour’s true pecking order. It reminded me that, as long ago as January, Margaret Curran gave much the same speech as Johann Lamont gave last week. So, Margaret Curran at Westminster signals policy changes on devolved matters before Johann Lamont gets there. That was of course reinforced by Liam Byrne—he of the note that said “there’s no money left”. Ironically, Mr Byrne is now Labour’s welfare spokesman. At the Labour conference, he said: “There has always been a balance in the welfare state between universal benefits and targeted benefits and I’m afraid as part of Ed’s zero-based review that balance has got to be looked at” So, what was trumpeted as being the leader of Scottish Labour laying out her stall in a grand speech was actually just a badly executed part of a London-led campaign aimed at the 2015 United Kingdom election. The more Johann Lamont struggles to align her actions to Labour’s UK campaign, the clearer it becomes that the term “Scottish Labour” is just an electoral fig leaf. London calls the shots and is more interested in Scotland’s voting strength than it is in allowing Scots to have the power to make decisions that affect their children, their families, their community and their country. Scottish Labour even called in its fourth emergency service—Douglas Alexander—to try to rescue that speech. He invoked Aneurin Bevan, who said: “The language of priorities is the religion of socialism”. The priorities of the people of Scotland, socialist or otherwise, are different from those of United Kingdom Labour. The people of Scotland showed that clearly when they voted in May last year for the SNP—a party that espouses social democratic values and laid out an honest manifesto. Of course Labour’s 2011 manifesto included a pledge that there would be “no upfront or back-end tuition fees for Scottish university students.” Scottish Labour has welcomed the abolition of prescription charges, and as we heard from the Deputy First Minister, Labour’s council candidates pledged council tax freezes and falsely accused the SNP of trying to do away with concessionary bus travel. Yet Labour members wonder why no one takes them seriously when they say that they want an honest and mature debate. Yes, choices have to be made. The SNP Government has made hard choices and has competently and efficiently delivered balanced budgets. The much-loved and much-missed Campbell Christie explained that a supportive and inclusive society is about much more than money. He said: “People say we can’t afford things now but in 1948 we couldn’t afford the NHS and the pension schemes but we did it”. It is about the common good. It is not about people wanting something for nothing. That is not to pretend that there is no crisis—of course there is a crisis. So much for the union dividend. However, if we are to deal properly with the crisis, make choices, decide priorities and maintain the values that Scotland holds dear, we need power over all aspects of tax and welfare. Whatever the outcome of the 2015 election, Labour cannot or will not deliver. The better-together parties want to maintain the status quo—Westminster business as usual—extracting maximum benefit from Scotland for the UK Treasury. If we follow Labour’s line, the price will be wholesale withdrawal of benefits from low-paid Scots and a bloated bureaucracy to enforce means testing. Who would have thought, after all the years of the working people’s struggle, that the best that the Labour Party could offer would be an end to universal benefits and one-nation conservatism? The only way to get the powers that this Parliament needs and to sustain Scotland’s values is by voting a resounding yes to a Scotland with the full powers of independence. I support John Swinney’s amendment.

I am interested in what Willie Rennie is saying. Campbell Christie’s report talked about trying to alter the silo mentality, so does the member agree with me that to pick out random statistics, as members of the Labour group do in these debates, is to do down what they themselves are saying? We should be looking at the whole cost to society and the net cost, rather than picking random figures out of the air.

It is nice after the rambunctious debate that we have just had to know that we are going to speak about something on which there is consensus in the chamber. I thank everyone who signed up to the motion and everyone who is here to take part in the debate, because October is breast cancer awareness month. We have to acknowledge the role that having a breast cancer awareness month plays in promoting the early detection of breast cancer and the work of all the cancer charities in raising that awareness. I thank Breakthrough Breast Cancer in particular for the help that it has given me for the debate and for its very memorable breast awareness message—touch, look, check—which promotes knowledge of the signs and symptoms of breast cancer and the importance of regular checking. I know that many members want to speak, so I will just start by outlining a few facts about breast cancer in Scotland. It is the most common cancer among Scottish women, and nearly 4,500 women are diagnosed every year in Scotland—in 2010, 460 of those women were in the area covered by NHS Lanarkshire, where I live and work. Around 1,000 Scottish women die annually from the disease and Scottish women have a one in nine chance of developing breast cancer in their lifetime. I know that others will develop those particular themes, so I will concentrate on a few points. I want to raise concern about breast awareness in the lower socioeconomic groups. Women in lower socioeconomic groups have poorer levels of breast cancer awareness compared with women in affluent groups. The 2011 survey that was carried out by Breakthrough Breast Cancer found that “79% of women in group DE had knowledge of any sign/symptom of breast cancer compared to 93% of women” in higher socioeconomic groups and “only 47% of DE women checked their breasts once a month or more compared to 60% of women” in socioeconomic group AB. That is an important point because, although breast cancer incidence is higher in affluent groups, women in more deprived groups have poorer outcomes and survival rates. Sometimes that is because they were diagnosed at a later stage; and sometimes it is because there can be an increased likelihood of there being other health problems. That means that it is important to improve levels of breast awareness. I know that Breakthrough Breast Cancer would like to see more focus on increasing breast awareness among those groups, combined with better public health messaging, so that people can improve their general health and improve their chances of a better outcome. Another issue is older women. Over 80 per cent of breast cancers occur in women who are over 50. I know that there is a pilot going on in England on age extension from 47 to 63. I think, too, that the fact that age is the biggest risk factor for breast cancer makes it important that older women remain breast aware. Like Breakthrough Breast Cancer, I would like the national health service in Scotland to do more to focus on educating that age group about breast awareness. That brings me to prevention. Some 80 per cent of breast cancers are not inherited. That figure surprised me very much. Although I had heard the other figures before, I realised, when I saw that one, that I suffered from what I believe to be a common misconception, which is that people are much more at risk if there is breast cancer in their family. Awareness must be raised about that figure of 80 per cent, which links into the breast awareness campaign. Researchers estimate that around 40 per cent of all breast cancer cases could be prevented if women maintained a healthy weight, limited their alcohol intake and increased their level of physical activity. I am not going to say anything about anyone in here except me. I am not going to comment on my alcohol intake, but I certainly could increase my level of physical activity, and I do not think that my weight is particularly healthy. Again, that is a big issue. If we can increase awareness of the fact that 80 per cent of breast cancers are not inherited and that 40 per cent could be prevented, that would be a worthwhile campaign. A 40 per cent reduction would be equivalent to around 1,800 fewer cases of the disease being diagnosed in Scotland each year, so we should try to make a big difference by changing behaviours around the risk factors that are modifiable. That brings me to diagnosis—I am aware that time is short, and I am glad that others will expand on these themes. There is a view that some health professionals are not as breast aware as they should be. The evidence is anecdotal, but we are told that some general practitioners are less breast aware than the women who present to them. There is a case for GPs receiving better education on the signs and symptoms of breast cancer, whether that is part of their medical training or part of engagement, in a continuing professional development capacity, with programmes such as the detect cancer early initiative. I know that many GPs are very involved with breast cancer charities, so I am not putting anyone down; I merely want to make it known that this issue is also important. Some people believe that screening is not the best way to check for breast cancers. However, I believe that we should not allow that debate to put women off going for screening, as it is important. Further, we should ensure that women remain breast aware in between screenings. I welcome the Breakthrough Breast Cancer initiative that has just produced a guide that contains the award-winning touch, look, check breast awareness message, which is available by texting “signs” to 84424. I should say that text users will be charged only their standard network rate and that no premium number charges apply. It is a very useful initiative. When the minister responds to some of my points and to those that others will make, I ask him to ensure that we maintain the detect cancer early campaign. It has been a big success and a great initiative, so we would like it to continue.

If she does not hear what the member says, we will tell her.

What input have the relevant professions had in the formulation of the procurement pre-qualification questionnaire?

7. To ask the Scottish Government how it assists local authorities ensure that childcare places are available for working parents. (S4O-01272)

The minister may be aware that the on-site nursery at Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs in East Kilbride, which currently provides places for 59 children of working parents, has given notice of closure. That, coupled with people’s admirable commitment to early learning and childcare provision, means that there is real concern in East Kilbride that the town does not have enough spare nursery capacity. That is a real worry, particularly for working parents who are concerned about work schedules and starting times. The council is, of course, endeavouring to be helpful to working parents, but can the minister offer any further assistance?

Unlike Ms Eadie, I welcome the Government’s motion. I read it in conjunction with the paper “Supporting Recovery and Delivering Sustainable Growth”, which was produced this month. That framework details the need for, amongst other things, increasing resource efficiency and it characterises a long-term driver of growth as being cohesion in order to “reduce the disparity between the regions of Scotland”. Those two issues underpin what I want to say today, and the programme for government that was outlined last week clearly recognises those needs through the inclusion of the proposed better regulation and procurement reform bills. I declare that I am an honorary fellow of the Royal Incorporation of Architects in Scotland and convener of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on architecture and the built environment, because much of what I want to say comes from working closely with the architectural and related professions. Last year, I was a member of the RIAS president’s commission on building a better Scotland, which was chaired by Roy Martin QC. The commission published its report and submitted it to the Government in December. RIAS put together the commission to reflect increasing levels of concern about public sector procurement in Scotland, not just from the architectural profession but from others in the construction sector and from senior public sector employees. We recognised the need for improvement to ensure the effective use of resources. Among the concerns that were expressed and recorded, and which continue to be discussed, were “the increasing barriers to entry for micro-organisations and for small and medium sized enterprises” and “the pricing, reliability and value for money of services provided through the public sector procurement process.” Those are significant issues and they have implications not only for individual project procurement, delivery and value for money, but for Scotland’s infrastructure more fundamentally. We need to remove the unnecessary and unintended barriers that are put in front of small and medium-sized enterprises, and to ensure that there is proportionality in the procurement process. There are ways of tackling those issues, and I am sure that submissions on the proposed legislation will reflect on that. For example, we could review and amend the use of prequalification questionnaires generally and the Government’s proposed standard PQQ specifically. The UK and Scotland could be much better placed in the European league tables for procurement costs and so on, and much of the work that is required on PQQs reflects that. I know that the system is being revised. I can only relate what I hear through the grapevine, but given what I am hearing, I do not feel much confidence that the situation will get an awful lot better. I would like ministers to be fairly radical in looking at the matter again, and to simplify it as far as possible. To underline all that, we also need to change the focus of attention away from the quality of the procurement process to focus more on the quality of the outcomes. Another thing that we really have to do is to look at ways in which to reduce the number of bidders while still delivering fair competition. I understand that, in the construction industry, there can be 50 to 60 bidders for a project, and in the case of one project that was looked at, there were 300 bidders. That cannot possibly represent value for money in the economy. We understand from research that it can cost the public sector £70,000 to award a contract that is worth £130,000. That cannot be good for business or the economy. Research underlines, too, that it can cost the private sector nearly £250,000 overall to bid for public sector work. What can we do? We need new guidance to public authorities regarding the handling of public procurement for projects that fall below the European and Scottish Futures Trust thresholds. We need to take steps to remove the artificial barriers to entry for smaller businesses in the construction sector, because that will result in benefits for both the local and national economies. We must ensure that the appropriate expertise is in place, because without it people become anxious and risk averse, which results in poor-quality work.

The expertise is here in Scotland. Sometimes we are just not very good at identifying what we need and putting it to appropriate use. We need to be radical in our thinking. I believe that we can do it and that we can make the decision to do so. The current system has been well researched. We know that it is more onerous here than in other major EU economies. We can ensure accountability and transparency without compromising competitiveness and quality. We can address social inequality and environmental issues without stymieing entrepreneurship. I conclude by quoting Willie Watt of Nicoll Russell studios, from his presentation during the week. What he said struck home with me and I hope that it strikes home with the people on this side of the chamber in particular: “Above all, we should be ambitious. Not so much asking where did the steel in the Forth Bridge come from. But rather, where is our next Sir William Arrol, the man who conceived the Forth Rail Bridge and established a huge company which grew around the world?” We have to be ambitious for Scotland.

6. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s response is to the proposed closure of the Rolls-Royce plant in East Kilbride. (S4F-00824)

The First Minister will be aware that, back in 2004, the Labour-Lib Dem Administration agreed funding to upgrade the Rolls-Royce plant in Renfrewshire, to where it is now proposed that the East Kilbride jobs will move. Were any conditions imposed on that funding at that time to protect East Kilbride jobs and workers? I ask the First Minister to ensure that the Scottish Government supports efforts to retain Rolls-Royce in East Kilbride and makes every effort, as he has outlined, to secure the suitable reuse of the important industrial site. East Kilbride has been home to some of Scotland’s most advanced manufacturing, and there is absolute determination in the town to see that continue.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what criteria will be considered in deciding where to target the next roll-out of broadband. (S4O-01202)

The market is certainly not delivering in East Kilbride in my constituency, which is the largest town in Scotland and has a very high number of extremely successful businesses and makes a great contribution to Scotland’s economy. Can the cabinet secretary please take steps to ensure that that thriving hub of business is given decent broadband coverage so that we can all move forward?

The SPCB plans to install external furniture on the paved area in the members’ garden. However, in light of discussions on having a members’ coffee lounge downstairs rather than upstairs and information that has been imparted in that respect, the furniture will take the form of tables and chairs rather than benches.

Annabelle Ewing is absolutely right to suggest that we take advantage of the Parliament’s beautiful garden. Perhaps we should get a bit tougher and, instead of parasols, use big umbrellas. I note that concrete benches have already been built into the landscape in the members’ garden. During those great occasions when we have spells of good weather, the benches are certainly well used by members and staff and they, of course, supplement the tables and chairs that are placed outside the garden level restaurant.

That is obviously a popular question. We actively encourage the use of Scottish products throughout the catering services. Currently, we sell bottled and draught beer from a local Scottish brewery. During previous Scottish food and drink fortnights we have invited the brewer to host tastings with people in the bar area.

I am more than willing to do that as long as it does not compromise the wine, as I am not a beer drinker. I repeat that we do encourage that use. If members know of any company with a strong Scottish identity and product who would be interested in supplying the Scottish Parliament, they should please get in touch with our facilities management team. Our facilities management manager has met MSPs, including my colleague Aileen McLeod, to explain the process. We are happy to continue that practice, and I encourage members to get involved.

There are no costs imposed by the Parliament to organisations to hold an event here as the SPCB does not charge for room hire, plasma screens, laptops, or the in-built public address system and so on. Any costs incurred by organisations are in respect of additional services hired in for their events at their own discretion—catering or audio-visual services, for example.

I cannot give an immediate answer to that, because there is an awful lot behind that question and an awful lot of work there. We also have to consider the relationship that we have with the contractors who provide those services. We try to provide low-cost catering options at the moment. There would be difficulties in offering a two-tier catering tariff, or even something beyond that. In exceptional circumstances, we allow food to be brought in for consumption as part of an event—for example, ethnic food that our catering provider is not equipped to prepare. The question is certainly not an easy one to answer. We can look at it, but the main function of using the Parliament is to get an organisation’s message across. The other things are additional to that.

The cabinet secretary will be aware of my concerns about unintended consequences of the Property Factors (Scotland) Act 2011, which is admirable legislation. For example, East Kilbride and District Housing Association feels that it is obliged to set a factoring cost for a limited number of shared equity owners for whom it had agreed that it was not worth it economically to set up a factoring system. Can he give some comfort to associations such as that?

The cabinet secretary will be aware that there is a highly skilled workforce in Centre 1 at East Kilbride that will be well up to doing the income tax job that is outlined in the Scotland Act 2012 or, indeed, in an independent Scotland. Does the cabinet secretary agree that, following concerns expressed by HMRC that there is no state of readiness to implement the Scotland Act 2012 proposals on income tax, any necessary planning and training should be implemented without delay to tap into the expertise in East Kilbride and to show respect for the decisions of the Scottish Parliament and of the people of Scotland?

It is a privilege to be able to stand up in the chamber and debate the future of Scotland. This is our national Parliament and it is relevant to everyone in our nation. We have the biggest opportunity in 300 years to regain our sovereignty and improve the lives of those we serve. We need and want independence so that Scotland can continue to grow and develop as a nation and society, with decisions being taken in Scotland by those who live here. It is obvious to me that that would be in our own best interests, but it would also be in the interests of the wider world. The choice for Scotland is quite clear. We can choose to remain a bit player through the United Kingdom, being unable to advance our own interests, let alone influence the international agenda, or, as an independent country, we can take responsibility for our own actions at home and abroad. For example, we can say, “Not in our name,” and truly mean it; that is hugely important to me. Members of the yes campaign might have differing views on how Scotland will develop in the years ahead, but what we all have in common is the fact that we trust the people of Scotland to deliver a better outcome than we have at present. We should be clear; the choice that is facing Scotland is the exciting opportunity of independence or the status quo. I hope to hear from those who argue the case for staying in the UK a positive view and justification for entrusting Scotland’s future wellbeing to the Westminster Parliament and maintaining the status quo. We can see that the status quo is hardly positive when we consider the UK’s economic situation and the draconian cuts that are being forced on us nationally, communally and individually. The ability of a people to shape the ethics of their own democratic society is a precious right and responsibility. When Johann Lamont commented on child poverty earlier this year, she said that she wanted it to be tackled elsewhere in the UK as well as in Glasgow. I also want child poverty to be tackled in Liverpool, Manchester and elsewhere in the UK, and I want it to be tackled in Lagos and Mumbai. There is no excuse for a continuing lack of action in Scotland. Scotland should have the power to act on child poverty. Perhaps representatives of the Labour Party in Scotland will tell us why they prefer to see that power being controlled by a Conservative chancellor instead of by the people of Scotland.

In the final three years of the Labour-led Executive, the level of poverty was unchanged, despite the unprecedented growth in the budget. If Labour could not get to grips with poverty during the good times, it must recognise the need to increase the powers of the Scottish Parliament. Perhaps the representatives of the Labour Party in Scotland will also tell us why they prefer to see the most needy in our society being vilified by a Westminster and UK Tory-Liberal coalition than to give the people of Scotland the opportunity to strengthen our economy, utilise our assets, and realise our ambitions for a simpler welfare system that makes work pay and lifts people out of poverty. The article of faith espoused by those who defend the status quo, that a positive future for Scotland’s economy depends on our continuing membership of the United Kingdom, is redundant. Stability, flexibility and investment, as previously demanded by Alistair Darling, are not words that immediately spring to mind when one looks at the UK’s public finances; nor do they spring to mind when one considers the records of current and previous UK Governments. On television recently, Ruth Davidson tried to make political capital out of her claim that Scotland’s welfare spend exceeds our oil revenue. Perhaps one of her team here could follow that up with an apology for the historical Westminster squandering of Scotland’s oil wealth. Perhaps they might also explain why the people of Scotland should expect any more benefit from the next 40 years of oil revenue, or from our renewable resources, if we allow them to remain under Westminster’s control. The myths perpetuated about Scotland’s seemingly unique inability to look after its own affairs are legend. Recent scare stories on defence abound, although there is nothing said about the thousands of defence jobs lost to Scotland under current arrangements, with direct defence expenditure running at about half of what Scottish taxpayers contribute each year. Taking the power to switch expenditure away from costly nuclear weapons is the right thing to do. People cannot say with honesty that they want to stop Trident while campaigning to renew and maintain Scotland’s contribution to that immoral system and harbouring weapons of mass destruction. There is only one way to give Scottish communities access to resources, and that is by bringing control of them here to Scotland. I believe in independence for Scotland. I believe in raising our sights and having ambition for our nation and its people. Most of all, I believe that it is vital for the people of Scotland to take full responsibility for decisions about the future of Scotland. That is why I support the motion in the name of the First Minister of Scotland.

I am pleased to be able to speak today on what I believe is an extremely important subject, and one that has not been given the level of attention that it warrants. Many initiatives have been announced during past decades, and successive generations have been party to numerous pilot projects in schools. Indeed, as a child, I was among a group of primary school children who were the first in the country to receive French lessons by television. It was a long time ago; if I say that the programmes were in black and white, I am sure that members will be amazed. Although that project did not last long, it instilled in me a curiosity about other languages and cultures that led to senior school studies. As I have said, I do not believe that we, as a nation in modern times, have persevered seriously enough with learning of languages. We can call it complacency, arrogance or whatever, but it is a fact. I looked back to 2006 when I last spoke on this issue. My research at that time showed that the number of school pupils who were taking a foreign language at standard grade had dropped by almost 9,000 since 1999. We have not properly addressed that decline during the intervening years. I am glad that we are now going to take a serious look at the issue because it is time we turned things around. We should start by taking seriously the report of the languages working group. More important than that, we need to stick with it as a long-term strategy rather than using it in the short or medium terms. We are way behind and, for the future of Scotland, we will have to compete. It is a fact that English is no longer the international language of businesses and that the old imperiousness does us few favours. The 1.5 billion residents of China, 1 billion people in India and most of the 500 million people in the European Union would not disagree. In much of South America, Spanish is spoken and in Brazil, one of the BRIC countries, Portuguese is spoken. I understand that long ago, it was not possible to get a degree from a Scottish university unless one had spent a year working abroad. Moving to modern times, Maureen Watt talked about low take-up of the Erasmus programme. The number of students coming to Scotland to study for a year far outweighs the number of Scots going abroad. A monoglot is less likely to be enamoured by the prospect of a year abroad than is a student who is confident in his or her command of the native language of the host country. Stuart McMillan spoke very well about that. We should encourage Scotland’s youth to get out and see the world while they are young. An increasing number of employment opportunities—not just the traditional ones such as export sales—require fluency in another language. The increasing mobility of the European population marks the need for further improvement of language skills. Not only will there be business opportunities throughout Europe, but many employment opportunities will require people to up sticks and shift themselves across Europe’s borders. The internet is an area in which Anglophones have had the security of knowing that their language reigns supreme, but that cannot be guaranteed any more, either. English dominance of the worldwide web is declining, as websites in other languages such as Spanish and Mandarin take off.

Absolutely, I do. For three years, I have had the German equivalent of that sitting unused on a computer, so perhaps Kezia Dugdale has spurred me into action. There are masses of information that could be denied people. It is a reversal of the current position, where English is only one of the main languages on the web. That said, Kezia Dugdale made a positive point. There are many issues on which we can be positive. Let us, for example, be positive about our children, who are more than capable of meeting the standard. The on-going success of Gaelic education has shown that learning and ability in other studies can be improved by learning another language and culture. At Mossneuk primary school in East Kilbride, the children learn German. The teachers have told me that that has led to success in other subjects. Willie Neill reminded us in his poem “Scotia est Divisa in Voces Tres” that Scotland has three old languages—Gaelic, Scots and English. Maureen Watt and Hanzala Malik told us about all the international languages that are now here in our country. That is a good basis for learning modern languages. We must follow that path if we want future generations to make an impact on the world. Historically, Scots had, among other things, the reputation of being among the world’s best diplomats, at a time when the international language of diplomacy was court French. The influence of Scots has been felt around the world for centuries. We should remember that, we should be pleased about it and proud of it, and we should take advantage of it. However, in order to do that, we have to be able to communicate with our colleagues and friends around the world. We must get our language skills up there with the best in the world. If Poles can leave school with four or five languages, and increase their business skills and employment mobility in the process, there is no reason why Scots cannot do the same. If the French, with what some would say is a chauvinistic attitude to their language, can achieve a 65 per cent engagement with other languages, surely Scots can do the same. It is not a matter of achieving the impossible; it is a matter of having ambition for our nation. We must ask ourselves how much we can do rather than telling ourselves that we cannot do very much. If Scots see themselves as part of world society as well as being part of Scotland, they will offer the nation a greater chance of stability and prosperity. That is crucial and it is more important for the young now and for future generations than it is for most of us sitting in the chamber. I hope that everyone in Parliament can get behind a serious long-term strategy of engaging with other parts of the world, in other languages.

At his next meeting with Scottish Enterprise, will the minister discuss match-funding and whether something additional can be done to help those who invent extremely useful products for Scotland’s future?

8. To ask the Scottish Government how much support has been given to businesses in East Kilbride by the small business bonus scheme. (S4O-00956)

The scheme has certainly been a bonus for start-up businesses and in maintaining businesses in my constituency of East Kilbride. However, I have noticed that quite a few young people who are leaving school and are keen to start their own business have been attracted to so doing by hearing about the small business bonus scheme. Are there any systems in place to tie in the promotion of the small business bonus scheme with start-up grants, either through councils or through Scottish Enterprise, to allow young people—not necessarily graduates—who want to start their own business in their community to be given the whole picture?

I apologise for being late this morning—particularly to Jackson Carlaw who, I understand, made the speech of his career, and I missed it. Over the years, we have theorised about the issues that we are addressing today. I know about localism at first hand because my previous career in housing was spent in communities who wanted and demanded more say in the decisions on issues that affected their lives every day—issues that defined their past and determined the future for them and their families. That taught me an awful lot. Principally, it taught me that when decision making is grasped by the people whose lives will be directly affected by the decisions, sustainable futures can result. Community-based housing associations and co-operatives proved that point, because their management committees got to grips with slum tenements and post-war housing estates, improved the stock and managed it well. To illustrate that, we should consider the stock in comparable peripheral estate streets in Glasgow in the context of sustainability, capital expenditure and social fabric. We can also consider the wider action that housing organisations took. My experience taught me that all too often people got fed up with initiatives that received ring-fenced funding for a wee while before it suddenly ended. I also learned about the perceived distance of local authorities and elected councils. That is not to say that individual elected members were not committed to their wards and were not working hard in their own ways. However, the municipal machine grinds on, and decisions are taken far from where their effects will be felt. The problem is exacerbated by centralisation of power and decision making at national level. The Scottish National Party has long had a policy of there being a power of general competence for local government. For eight years, when we were in opposition to a majority Government in Parliament—a coalition of Labour and the Lib Dems—we witnessed national-level micromanagement of issues that would clearly have been better dealt with by the people at the coalface. Labour’s councils and councillors recognised the ineffectiveness of that approach. As we know, they were among those who very much welcomed the transformation of relations with local government to successful partnership status—the historic concordat, in fact. There is joint development of policy—most recently in relation to the abolition of council tax benefit. The approach can go further, through recognition that national planning issues necessarily run alongside local issues and initiatives that do not need run at strategic level, although they form part of an overall agreed strategy. Our policy is for true subsidiarity, whereby power and decision making are devolved as far as possible to the people who will be most affected by the decisions. Decision making is devolved from the UK to Scotland—a nation making its own decisions—from Scotland’s Government to local authorities and from local authorities to communities. John Mason was right to say that different parts of a local authority area will have communities that have different needs and aspirations, which should be recognised and encouraged. He was talking about Glasgow; I can talk about South Lanarkshire, which is a vast local authority area. My patch—East Kilbride—has different issues, needs and aspirations from Douglas in south Clydesdale, and therefore needs different policies. Larkhall’s issues, needs and aspirations are very different from those of Thorntonhall, which is on the other side of East Kilbride. We should acknowledge that people can decide what is best for their local areas. I would like local councils and elected members to take much more cognisance of that. I understand that there must be strategic policy across a local authority area, but for the life of me I do not understand why policies must then be rationalised across areas. Our Government in Scotland recognises that, as was demonstrated to some extent in the Public Services Reform (Scotland) Act 2010, in the context of how we can truly empower people—to use the jargon—to make decisions for a sustainable future. I am excited about the proposed community empowerment and renewal bill, which is mentioned in the amendment in the minister’s name, because there are great community initiatives. For example, in East Kilbride a group that is seriously concerned about the prospect of our village theatre closing is working towards perhaps taking over the theatre. We were unfortunate that we lost out in the potential community buy-out of the Hunter House museum in the town, which celebrates the Hunter brothers. I hope that that historical resource will not be lost in the plans that are going forward. There is good potential to let people make their own decisions. We can all work together on that, and we should have the grace to acknowledge that the Government has opened up an awful lot in that regard. We should move forward to true localism. I support the amendment in Derek Mackay’s name.

It is interesting that we have just heard two representatives of the anti-independence parties, but they have not said anything yet about what they would wish to offer to Scotland. I will speak on behalf of my parliamentary group and with personal views but, before I do so, as the convener of the Scotland Bill Committee mark 2 I thank everybody who has been involved in the process—members, support staff, witnesses and participants—for the commitment that they have shown and the generally reasonable manner in which business has been conducted. Despite the fluster and bluster that we are hearing today, the committee worked in a very reasonable manner. There was sensible discussion, which was reflected in the discussions between the two Governments in the efforts to reach agreement. We have agreed measures to resolve concerns about the risks that the bill as originally conceived would have posed to Scotland’s public finances. There is agreement on implementation issues and, of course, the Scottish Government has said that it will seek the Scottish Parliament’s agreement to changes in Scotland’s funding arrangements now and in the future. That is what democracy is about. The main thing is that the financial risks inherent in the block grant adjustment as originally proposed by the Calman commission have been changed, which is extremely welcome. Key changes have been made, and the bill now differs substantially from the one that was introduced in 2010. It is important that things have clearly moved on since 2010—indeed, they have shifted quite a way from the time of the Calman commission recommendations. The country is still having a debate, and it is generally agreed that we will move further. There is a Lib Dem commission and a Labour commission, and even the Prime Minister says that further devolution will come. The question, of course, is when. If the original bill ever was a line in the sand, as one person called it, that line has been well and truly crossed. That is the problem with lines in the sand: the tide of public opinion washes them away. Almost everyone now wants even more powers than there are in the bill. I certainly do. I want independence. I want those who live in Scotland to have the right to make the decisions that affect us; after all, those who live here are surely the best placed to do that. I look forward to the referendum in 2014 and believe that people will recognise then that the current bill was a missed opportunity and that they will not trust the anti-independence parties, which consistently make promises but do not deliver when the opportunity presents itself. The bill was an opportunity to get powers to give Scotland the tools to stimulate the economy and create jobs, to make our control over income tax greater so that, for example, the Scottish Parliament would have flexibility on income tax rates for all bands, and to get welfare benefit powers to balance economic and social policies. Even on that issue, on which a degree of unanimity exists, no quarter was given. I am sure that David Stewart’s members’ business debate tonight will reinforce the consensus in Scotland on the devolution of the management and revenues of the Crown estate. Indeed, it is incongruous that, in 1998, the Lib Dems wished to amend the Scotland Bill to devolve the Crown estate but that the proposal is now opposed by a Lib Dem Secretary of State for Scotland. Perhaps we should not be surprised that, in 1998, the Lib Dems also proposed amending the Scotland Bill to allow Scottish Executive ministers to have the right of statutory representation in the Council of Ministers. Of course, in his submission to the Calman commission on behalf of the Scottish Lib Dems, Tavish Scott, who was then their leader, called for corporation tax to be devolved, with “all revenues accruing directly to the Scottish Parliament”. Then there is broadcasting.

Can I presume that it is the same with broadcasting—the Lib Dem Steel commission wanted greater accountability for that—and excise duty? In the Lib Dem submission to the Calman commission, Tavish Scott called for tobacco and alcohol duties—along with fuel duty and vehicle excise duty—to be devolved, with “all revenues accruing directly to the Scottish Parliament”. The real issue of financial harm to Scotland, which was inherent in the original proposals, has been lifted. The Scottish Government has done a sound job in looking after Scotland’s interests in that regard. We should not underestimate the shift that has taken place. We should have the goodness, across the chamber, to recognise that. I think that the bill can be supported because of that change—there is no harm to Scotland as a result of the proposals—and that the legislative consent motion can be agreed. However, Scotland deserves more and, indeed, should have more. It is the responsibility of every representative in this Parliament to lay out their case for what, in their opinion, Scotland can and should be. The SNP is clear about that: it wants independence and it wants decisions to be made in Scotland. I believe that that is what will happen.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I wonder whether Neil Findlay realises that negotiations have taken place that have changed the very things on which he accuses us of backtracking, and that the bill has changed fundamentally from the bill that was introduced in 2010. For the record, I never said that I would oppose the bill full stop.

I said that I would oppose the bill if the harm to Scotland was not altered. It has been altered, and that is the position now.

5. To ask the Scottish Government what good practice guidelines are given to national health service boards for handling medical negligence complaints. (S4O-00863)

Will the cabinet secretary acknowledge the sometimes difficult distinction between medical negligence and negligence in care? I receive many complaints from elderly people and their families about care beyond the medical. Dignity and care for the elderly at Hairmyres hospital were discussed yesterday by the board of NHS Lanarkshire. Unfortunately, the report was verbal; I am not able to access it and am waiting for information. By giving an assurance that she is keeping a watching eye on care for the elderly, can the cabinet secretary offer any comfort to people who may have formed a perception about hospital care for the elderly beyond their medical treatment?

6. To ask the Scottish Government what procedures are followed in relation to police officers under investigation. (S4O-00844)

I am dealing with a constituency case in this regard. It seems to me that a serving police officer who is under investigation can be left in an intolerable situation with nowhere to turn outwith their own institution. Will the cabinet secretary clarify a point for me? Should a serving police officer who is under investigation wish to make a complaint of a criminal nature, or a misconduct complaint about how he was treated, against those who are carrying out the investigation, what rights and recourse does the officer have beyond internal procedures?

6. To ask the Scottish Government what input companies can have in the operation of apprenticeship schemes in their areas. (S4O-00774)

Following representations from employers in East Kilbride, can the minister assure me that, in the interests of potential apprentices and employers, the views and experiences of companies that employ apprentices will be taken into account in the operation of the Government’s apprenticeship schemes?

Does the minister acknowledge that there are facilities for recycling old tyres in all sorts of civil works but that it is sometimes felt that the regulations that SEPA and other agencies enforce are overly difficult? Perhaps, if the regulations could be simplified, it might make some of the issues easier to deal with and enable better recycling of old tyres.

It would be a novelty for me to speak in a debate on fair trade and not to mention that Strathaven was the first Fairtrade town. That is it said, even though I no longer represent Strathaven. I now represent East Kilbride, which also has Fairtrade town status. I thank George Adam and James Kelly for their work on the cross-party group on fair trade and I thank George Adam for his motion on taking a step in 2012 for fair trade. Getting to where we want to end up—where fair trade is the norm at home and overseas—is all about baby steps, moving forward and lots of hard work, so the motion has a good title. The work of the Scottish Fair Trade Forum has been commended: it should be, because it has done great things. It has been supported across the chamber and by all the Governments that Scotland has had. I picked up the forum’s annual review the other night. Of course, everyone is talking now about Fairtrade nation status. Through the Fairtrade Foundation, the targets for that status reflect the targets that the forum is considering. I must say that I have some concerns, but I do not want that to be taken badly. Sometimes, setting such targets creates a rush to achieve them, so they are achieved by going de minimis, thinking that the box has been ticked and moving on. I do not think for a minute that that is what the Scottish Fair Trade Forum or anybody in the field is about, but we must guard against it and we must ensure that once we achieve a target we constantly monitor it, to ensure that it does not slip. I will make a couple of comments in that regard. We are looking at local authorities having active groups that work towards Fairtrade zone status—that is a target. That is great and lots of groups have worked towards it over many years. We should not forget that some folk have been doing this stuff for decades, before it became something that many more of us talked about. We are looking for local authorities to achieve Fairtrade zone status. Local authorities in Scotland almost all declare themselves to be Fairtrade local authorities—I think that 30 out of 32 do so now. That is fine, but I would like us to dig a bit deeper into what that means. For example, it is all very well for a local authority to say, “We serve fair trade food in all our establishments.” However, if part of a local authority’s operation has been hived off to a private enterprise such as a leisure trust, does the local authority always ensure that those companies also serve fair trade food? No, they do not. That is another issue that we must continue to look at. Procurement is very important; George Adam mentioned procurement of cotton. There is also procurement of many kinds of equipment, including leisure equipment and instruments that are used in the national health service. There is an organisation that looks at how that can be done. I do not believe that we are pushing hard enough on procurement; I do not believe that the United Kingdom Government is doing enough to make the case in Europe. Other countries have done more. For example, in Madrid’s bid for the Olympic games, it stated in its tender documentation that some stuff should be fair trade. It was not just about the coffee and the tea; it was about—I was going to say outfits, but I do not think that sporting guys talk about outfits—kits or strips. Let us not get carried away too quickly with saying, “Oh, isn’t it wonderful that Scotland is a Fairtrade nation?” Until we really tackle some of the big issues, we will not be a Fairtrade nation. We must tackle those issues so that when we get Fairtrade nation status, we can hold it up to inspection and be proud of it.

In straight terms, we will monitor progress by measuring the quantity of waste and recycling that is produced. The member will be interested to know that approximately 70 per cent of the building’s waste is recycled or composted and that we have agreed to be a pilot organisation in Zero Waste Scotland’s zero waste zone initiative.

I hope that agreeing to be a pilot organisation in Zero Waste Scotland’s initiative means that such issues will come forward, because we all have individual and collective responsibility on zero waste. I hope that I can offer some comfort on that. A really important point has been raised about procurement policies. I undertake to investigate that further.

In the past couple of days, I have learned more about apples than I thought I would ever know in my entire life. Rob Gibson is right to raise the matter, because it seems that the apple trees in the garden are Malus Bramley’s seedling, which are not self-pollinating, so there may well be an issue. We will review the situation in the early autumn. I am told that there was an apple—singular—once, which caused great excitement for a certain Robin Harper, whom we all miss. However, it was a rogue apple. We should certainly look at the issue further and we will do so in the autumn.

We are at the core of the issue now. We have looked at the question, and I understand that there are two compatible varieties—the Scottish James Grieve and the Scotch Bridget apple trees—which will be considered. Some corporate body members have also suggested having a beehive in the garden to assist in pollination. We might consider that.

The catering services contract is due for renewal on 1 August 2015, but there are options involving three times one-year extensions, which would be considered at that time, subject to the demonstration of acceptable performance. That could take the contract renewal date up to 1 August 2018.

I understand that there is general concern across the chamber about the living wage, and I know that my colleague on the corporate body, Dave Stewart MSP, and my colleague in the Scottish National Party, John Wilson MSP, have often raised the issue. For information, more than half the catering staff are already paid above the living wage of £7.20 an hour, and the staff who are currently paid below it are within 4 per cent of the £7.20 rate. I will request that, in the future, the SPCB will cost the living-wage option prior to the award of any new catering contract. As I said, there is a review for the years at the end of the contract, but there is currently a yearly review of the cost of the wages. There will be a good opportunity to ask for the issue to be raised at the next review, which I undertake to do.

Mr Harvie has form on that matter, of course—if members will excuse the expression. He has expressed such concerns over many years, and there is general concern in the chamber about that and about how successive Westminster Governments have allowed such things to happen. I hope that we will continue to make our concerns in that regard known to the Westminster Government.

When one speaks in a member’s business debate, one usually thanks whoever lodged the motion. Tonight, I am introducing the debate, so I begin by thanking Mr Chris Sinclair from East Kilbride and his guide dog Hugo, who initially brought the issue to my attention—or perhaps I should say “Hugo and his man Chris Sinclair”, as there have been a couple of occasions over the past wee while when assistance dogs have, indeed, made the Parliament their own. In particular, I thank Guide Dogs Scotland for the help and information that it has given me and, more than anything else, I want to reassure our very own Parliament additional member, Mr Q, who has recently taken a bit of a huff with me because I have had other guide dog friends coming to the Parliament. I am delighted to open the debate and to pay tribute to the assistance dog organisations that do such sterling work: Guide Dogs Scotland, Canine Partners, Therapet and the Search and Rescue Dog Association. I know that there are guide dog owners and volunteer puppy walkers in the public gallery. I thank them for attending the debate and for bringing the issue to my attention and to that of a number of my colleagues across parties and Parliaments and, of course, that of the many people throughout the country who have now signed the petition that asks for the United Kingdom Government to change the VAT legislation in respect of assistance dogs. I hope that members who are unable to be here for the debate will take the opportunity to sign that petition when they get a reminder to do so. I have found that most people naturally assume, as I did, that guide dogs, hearing dogs and other assistance dogs are classed as working dogs, given the nature of the tasks that they perform for their owners. They are loved, but they are very different from the average family pet. When Chris Sinclair first told me that there is a VAT issue, my natural instinct was to say, “This can’t possibly be right.” We do, after all, have legislation that ensures equality of treatment. I was sure that there must have been a mistake somewhere, but after some investigation, I found that it was true that guide dogs and other assistance dogs are not defined as working dogs under the Equality Act 2010, so their food is not VAT exempt. Let me turn to the definition of a working dog. A working dog is a “canine working animal”—a type of dog “that is not merely a pet, but learns and performs tasks to assist and/or entertain its human companions, or a breed of such origin.” Assistance dogs would certainly meet that criterion, especially as their duties mean that they are physically active for the majority of the day, but the current HM Revenue and Customs definition of a working dog appears to be based on the type of food that it consumes rather than the role that it performs. Working dogs are broadly defined by HMRC as sheepdogs, gun dogs and racing greyhounds. The food that is formulated for those types of working dogs is high in protein in order to provide them with enough energy to be active for long periods of time and thus to work effectively. That type of food is not suitable for assistance dogs, which require a specific diet to ensure low faecal output. That allows a guide dog to work out in public and provides the guide dog’s owner with greater control over their dog’s habits. It seems to me that that is not a sufficient reason to deny such dogs working-dog status. Their food is selected to best support the person with a disability whom they are assisting, and HMRC should take that into account. Assistance dogs have a right of access, which allows them to accompany their owners everywhere and offers their owners confidence and independence. Assistance dogs greatly enhance the lives of an often-disadvantaged minority of people in Scotland and throughout the UK. They help their owners to perform everyday tasks, which increases their owners’ physical, emotional and mental wellbeing, and they contribute to improving their owners’ self-esteem. They are trained to assist with everyday tasks around the home and out and about, including unloading the washing machine, opening and closing doors and drawers, helping people with undressing and bedtime routines, retrieving items, assisting with shopping, and fetching help in an emergency. They do wide-ranging and fascinating work, and they are working dogs. Assistance dog charities do remarkable work in training the dogs to perform those jobs, in raising funds and in ensuring that dogs are given to people who need them and not just to those who can afford them. To take guide dogs as an example, it costs about £50,000 to breed, birth, wean, train and support a guide dog through its working life. Guide Dogs Scotland pays for the majority of the food that is given to its dogs. In 2011, the charity was responsible for 1,000 dogs. It incurs a yearly VAT spend of £40,000 on dog food. If we made that food VAT exempt, we could provide a much-valued guide dog to another person with a disability in Scotland. In the UK context, in 2010, the Guide Dogs for the Blind Association supported 8,000 dogs, incurring a VAT spend of £300,000. That would provide a lot of help to more people if the charity could use that money in another way. Folk donate to assistance dog charities not to see part of their donation ending up in the UK Treasury, but to support the services that those charities provide to people with disabilities. At a time when we are all too aware of the financial difficulties that many disabled people face in Scotland and the UK, I hope that the Westminster Government will take this opportunity to do the right thing. I accept that that might be difficult in terms of VAT exemptions for some individual owners who rely on their assistance dog and buy the dog food themselves, and that that would need further discussion; I get that. However, I believe that the situation with regard to VAT exemption for food for working dogs for registered charities could easily be sorted and very quickly implemented. I ask that the UK Government consider the matter without delay—I have done that in the form of the petition to Westminster—and, once again, I urge members to sign it. Legislation could be amended, if necessary, to make the food for assistance dogs that are funded by these charities VAT exempt. I ask that the Scottish Government note the debate, take on board the issues and perhaps write to Westminster on behalf of people in Scotland who rely on assistance dogs.

I note that, under the 12-region framework, the excellent South Lanarkshire College in East Kilbride will be part of the Lanarkshire region, along with three other colleges. Much negotiation over senior management positions will take place across Scotland, so does the cabinet secretary have a remit in, or view on, how management structures should be modelled in the interests of best value?

I absolutely agree with what the member has said on that point. Does she agree that the trad trails collaboration between the Traditional Music and Song Association of Scotland and Fèis Rois, which was launched at Celtic Connections earlier this month, represents an ideal opportunity to enhance both of those important Scottish cultures?

15. To ask the Scottish Government whether national guidelines are issued in relation to testing for dyslexia. (S4O-00623)

What consideration is given to the use of colour screening for Meares-Irlen syndrome? I know from the charity Sight Aid International, in East Kilbride, that the 15-minute test is extremely effective. Does the minister see a case for piloting such testing locally, beyond the work that is currently carried out at Glasgow Caledonian University? I note that part of the funding is for making the toolkit accessible to teachers and local authorities. I am sure that South Lanarkshire Council would consider such a pilot, particularly for school children.

I feel that this debate is a logical extension of the recent debate that we had on the future of Scotland, which focused on legalities. I am pleased that today we can further address the issue of legitimacy. Surveys have demonstrated that it is, in fact, the belief of Scotland that the Scottish Parliament and not Westminster should speak for Scotland. I feel that we are doing that by taking forward debate on the extension of the Parliament’s powers towards independence. We have heard Opposition members talk here today and in the media about the need to consult civic Scotland. As the Scottish Government’s consultation paper shows, we all agree about that. However, we acknowledge today, as we did in 1989, that parties that are represented in the chamber consulted civic Scotland and the Scottish people. They attracted sufficient support to press successfully for the re-establishment of a Scottish Parliament. They did that not just by pressing a political case but by pressing the constitutional principle that sovereignty rests with the Scottish people. It seems, in that case, that we are all agreed on where sovereignty does, in fact, rest: “The ultimate sovereignty of the Scottish and Welsh peoples is a fact. Whatever the niceties of international law, Scotland and Wales can claim the right of self-determination if that is what they want”.—[Official Report, House of Commons, 22 May 1997; Vol 294, c 872.] That was said by a Conservative, Bernard Jenkin. Then there is this: “I believe that sovereignty lies with the people of Scotland rather than with any Parliament. That is a view established in the claim of right 1989.”—[Official Report, House of Lords, 3 July 1996; Vol 573, c 1514.] That was said by the Lib Dem peer, the Earl of Mar and Kellie, in a House of Lords debate. Indeed, our late First Minister, Donald Dewar, said in 1997: “If they want to go for independence, I see no reason why they should not do so. In fact, if they want to, they should. I should be the first to accept that.”—[Official Report, House of Commons, 21 May 1997; Vol 294, c 725.] That seems to me to be unequivocal. So, why then do the UK anti-independence parties, even in this Parliament in Scotland’s capital city of Edinburgh, continue to deny the Scots the right to that self-determination and to determine the form that it should take? In the 1970s, there was the wheeling and dealing that stymied the 1979 devolution referendum, which was of course a response to the SNP’s 1974 election result. The process leading to the 1989 claim of right and constitutional convention is well known and documented; it was of course supported by Labour and it followed the SNP by-election win in Govan in 1988. Since the establishment of our Parliament here in 1999, the constitutional question has been raised many times by the anti-independence parties. We have had the Calman commission in response to an SNP minority Government that was elected in 2007. We have had a Scotland Bill that was introduced by the Labour UK Government and a Scotland Bill that was introduced by the current coalition Government. Incidentally, as convener of the Scotland Bill Committee, I am concerned that we have not had a substantive response to our report on the bill, given that it goes into the Lords this week for potential amendment. All those things were introduced against a backdrop of certainty that Scotland’s legitimately and democratically elected SNP Government has always been clear in its belief in independence for Scotland, and that it stood on a manifesto commitment to hold an independence referendum. One could almost suspect that all the anti-independence machinations are about no more than spiking the SNP. After all, despite the Calman commission, two Westminster-instigated Scotland Bills and discussion that was supposedly about additional powers for Scotland, Labour and the Lib Dems seem to be intent on denying civic Scotland and the people of Scotland the right to discuss and determine the future of the nation. I understand the Conservatives because they are at least consistent in their unionist viewpoint. As I said earlier, Labour and the Lib Dems pressed the constitutional principle that sovereignty rests with the Scottish people. Now, however, it seems that Westminster says different. My view is that it is time for all to choose what side of the constitutional question they are on. The Advocate General for Scotland, who is a Lib Dem, now tells us that the Scottish Parliament has no power to question the devolution settlement. He tells us that the union in its entirety is a reserved matter and beyond the powers of this Parliament to consider. That man was a leading member of the Calman commission—the Commission on Scottish Devolution—which was funded by this Parliament. It seems to me that there is a bit of a contradiction there.

I am terribly sorry to have upset Mr Rennie by speaking ill of his friend, but looking at the machinations of the Lib Dems over the piece, I suggest that, given that their party is supposedly a party of federalism and home rule and is, supposedly, on the side of people in civic Scotland who want to have their voices heard, they look to themselves rather than to stopping the SNP. I suggest, too, that Mr Rennie get on to his colleagues in the Scotland Office to ask why they wasted money on the Calman commission, which was set up to look at more powers for Scotland, and why they have wasted money on a Scotland Bill, on which they do not even have the courtesy to respond to a committee of this Parliament, before he tries to do down Scotland and the SNP.

Will the member give way?

It is interesting how the anti-independence parties are generally keen to accuse SNP members of always wanting to discuss the constitutional question—we have heard that again this morning—yet, this week, those parties have shared platforms, radio microphones and television studio couches and have tied themselves in knots over the very question of the legality or illegality of a referendum to decide Scotland’s future. The question of legality is no more than a smokescreen. The section 30 possibility was, after all, recognised by the Scottish Government some time ago. It is a smokescreen to hide the fact that the UK Government—Conservatives and Liberal Democrats, assisted by the Labour Party—is intent on determining the terms of Scotland’s referendum. It is determined to pull the strings and thus deny the rights of Scotland’s people, through their elected Government, to make decisions on the future of their nation. I had hoped that the Labour Party in Scotland, after joining with the Tories and Lib Dems to stop the referendum in the previous session, would renege on that joint crusade this time round and recognise that, as stated in the 1989 claim of right, while the union may be a reserved matter, the sovereignty of the Scottish people certainly is not.

I was not a member of Parliament all that time ago; I do not know whether Mr Rennie was. I read the consultation document issued by the Secretary of State for Scotland and noted that one possibility mooted is an amendment to the Scotland Bill that is wending its way through Westminster. That prompted me to reread the exchanges that I had with Mr Moore in November last year. I asked a very straight question: “I am asking you to ensure that there is nothing in the Scotland Bill that interferes with the right of the Scottish Government, representing the Scottish people, to set the timing and wording of the questions for the referendum.” His answer seemed straight, too: “Those issues are not part of my bill, nor do I intend to bring them forward.”—[Official Report, 17 November 2011; c 628-9.] What a difference two months makes—or perhaps it is the difference that a Tory Prime Minister makes when the secretary of state’s party has tied itself to his apron strings. It is not just the timescale or the question that the secretary of state’s party is backsliding on—it is voter eligibility too. The Lib Dems, who have long campaigned for votes for 16 and 17-year-olds, now do not believe that 16 and 17-year-olds on the electoral register should be entitled to vote in the referendum. As well as referring to the Liberal Democrats’ 2010 manifesto pledge, I am sure that many of my colleagues taking part today will be able to cite many examples of Lib Dem MPs and MSPs going on record to support this cause—that is, the cause of votes for 16 and 17-year-olds, as opposed to the abolition of tuition fees. Some Labour members also signed up to the votes at 16 campaign. In addition, as we heard from Mark McDonald and the First Minister, more than 180 Labour MPs supported an amendment to allow votes at 16 on the AV referendum, including Margaret Curran, who is currently on side with Messrs Moore and Mundell. Not many members who are here today have not at some time or other stated, or at least agreed with the statement, that our young people are our future, so why on earth are they trying to deny Scotland’s 16 and 17-year-olds the right to vote on that future? There is no logic in that position, and nor is there logic in Scottish Labour’s motion, which calls for discussion with all quarters of civic Scotland to ensure a single question. Civic Scotland has called for greater powers for our Parliament over and over again, and that call is due respect from members of the Parliament. Therefore, let us continue the discussion, not dictate the answer. I believe in independence for my country and believe that Scotland’s future will be best served if we rejoin the family of nations, as so many have done over the past decades. I believe that independence can bring us prosperity and a fairer society, which is why I will always campaign for it. I respect the views of others, sincerely held and stated, but I find it difficult to thole the denial that Scotland has the right to make its own decisions through the mandate of its democratically elected Government. The Government in Scotland has been democratically elected by Scots, but let us not pretend that the current UK Government has been, despite what David Mundell, Scotland’s only Conservative MP, insists on repeating. Scotland has been told for long enough what it cannot do. Sadly, that has too often been by those whom we have elected to represent us. I ask those who have been elected to the Scottish Parliament to think long and hard about why they came to it. We should ask and talk about what Scotland can do and what we can achieve. That starts with Scotland making it clear to the Westminster Government that the referendum is ours and that it is our right to decide its timing and terms. On that basis, the SNP amendment should be supported.

3. To ask the Scottish Government whether consideration is being given to producing national guidance on dermatology services. (S4O-00551)

I thank the minister for that answer and I also thank the organisations and individuals who share their expertise on the cross-party group on psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis. The consensus of those experts is that there should be either national guidance on dermatology services or, perhaps, the creation of a national framework for skin disease and the development of a national managed clinical network for skin disease, to complement the regional managed clinical networks for skin cancer. Often, it is felt that the service is not given the attention that it requires to benefit those who suffer great distress as a result of psoriatic arthritis and other dermatological conditions. Will the minister please give the matter further consideration?

On the point about learning from best practice, some years ago I was fortunate enough to go from the Parliament on a study trip to Finland with colleagues from all parties. We learned about the high educational attainment of looked-after children in Finland. Is our Government looking elsewhere in Europe for good models for achieving our desired outcomes?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what initiatives there are to raise awareness of the symptoms of ovarian cancer to allow early diagnosis and treatment. (S4O-00479)

I welcome that action plan. As with other cancers, the key to dealing with ovarian cancer is awareness and early detection. The awareness level is low among women and sometimes even among health professionals. Could consideration be given to a specific campaign to raise awareness of ovarian cancer?

I am aware of X and I am glad that Siobhan McMahon has raised her case. Does the member agree that sometimes the intention to help people does not work out? For example, respite care for the elderly person is often offered at a different time from the respite care for the young person, because respite care comes through different parts of social work and the health service. If there were a bit more co-ordination, the respite care for both people could be offered at the same time and would offer true respite for the carer.

While Siobhan McMahon was speaking, I intervened on the issue of flexibility. Short breaks and respite are fine, but if someone is caring for two different people—if someone looks after one of those people for a couple of days a week, and then looks after the other person for a couple of days—there is no respite for the carer. They have no time for themselves and perhaps for the rest of their family. Can the minister give Siobhan and me some comfort by saying that flexibility will be considered?

17. To ask the Scottish Government how the level of non-domestic rates impacts on post offices in light of their role in local communities. (S4O-00354)

I certainly welcome that. Is the cabinet secretary aware that, under the judgment in the case of Assessor for Central Scotland Valuation Joint Board v Bank of Ireland, automated teller machines in post offices are now entered separately in the valuation roll and that sub-postmasters are liable for the rates on the ATMs? It seems to be at the discretion of local authorities whether that ruling is applied. Will the cabinet secretary enlighten me on whether that is at local authorities’ discretion? Can anything be done to alleviate that extra burden on small urban post offices?

I first declare an interest as an honorary fellow of the Royal Incorporation of Architects in Scotland. The importance of architecture and place making to the economy of Scotland goes without saying, but it does not stand in isolation. That is why I am so pleased that the Government’s motion talks about cultural identity and that the cabinet secretary put so much emphasis on the social, environmental and economic success of cities, towns and rural communities and how architecture contributes to that. In that regard, she also mentioned the Doolan award, which is in memory of the late Andrew Doolan, who will be celebrated in this Parliament on 17 November. I am delighted to be hosting that event. The Scottish Parliament building won the award in 2005, so it is fitting that it is being presented again in what is arguably its natural home. Of course, the Government supports that award, which indicates that it regards architecture as a major contributor to Scotland’s economy and the quality of life of Scotland’s citizens. Over the centuries, Scotland has excelled in many disciplines, such as engineering, medicine and education, and of course in many art forms. Among those, I would say that architecture and literature have profoundly shaped our perception of the world, our international profile and, of course, our national identity. The impact of the enlightenment on the physical form of Edinburgh is well known. The contrast between the rationally planned, bright, wide streets and formal gardens of the new town and the dark, narrow passageways of the old town is illustrative of changing ways of thinking—architecture is embedded. We cannot talk about Edinburgh without talking about Glasgow. Charles Rennie Mackintosh is celebrated worldwide for his unique contribution to architecture. His buildings and his style continue to influence architects from New York to Tokyo, and his finest achievement—the Glasgow School of Art building—still operates, not as a museum but as a fascinating and vibrant art school. The development of new, distinctive places is something about which I feel very strongly. We need to look ever more closely at the questions of identity and our built environment, and the creation of places of real character. How do we work towards achieving that? I would like to see a public that has greater expertise and skill in contributing to the shaping of its built environment. An interest in the built environment and a concern for architecture are not solely the preserve of a privileged few. My colleague Kevin Stewart mentioned the charrettes in that regard, and although that may well be a start and an idea to consider, I am not convinced that it is the answer to getting the public to make a real contribution. Everyone in Scotland has a legitimate interest in the quality of our built environments and how they are formed. Everyone is entitled to live and work in a built environment that they can enjoy. From my own experience in the housing association sector, I know how vital the input of informed users can be in creating places that work technically and in which communities can thrive. I have seen it in action; it can be done, with some forethought. If we wish to drive up the quality of architecture, we need to provide a favourable climate in which it can flourish. A favourable climate is one in which the quality of architecture is widely valued. In order to get that climate, we must promote, through education and encouraging informed discussion, a greater understanding of the value and benefits of good architecture. We should be innovative when given the opportunity to create new places and innovative in protecting the rich architectural legacy that we have inherited. That is, we should be innovative in terms of the architectural product and in enabling that to flourish. In that regard, I am glad that our Government has the policy of promoting community asset transfer of precious old buildings. In that context, I refer to Hunter house in East Kilbride. A community asset transfer of such a building could stimulate community involvement in a sense of place, history and culture. That is particularly important in new town communities such as East Kilbride, where we have a couple of bits of really good modern architecture, such as the Dollan baths and St Bride’s church, which was a Gillespie, Kidd and Coia design. However, we also have historic architecture that should be cherished. Reducing VAT for renovation, repairs and home improvements would be an innovative support for such initiatives and many others. It is innovative to promote good environmental practice. It is also innovative to ensure that procurement in Scotland is as efficient as possible and that costs are reduced as far as possible so that small and medium-sized businesses in Scotland are not disadvantaged, whether they are architectural practices or businesses in the construction sector. The cultural strength of our nation is fundamental to our sense of national identity. The place that is in our minds, our ideals, our history, our aspirations and our vision of the country is implicitly linked with the physical place. Few people have conveyed that better in the Scottish context than our own Alasdair Gray did. In his novel “Lanark”, the stunning visual artist and great writer has a character describe Glasgow as a magnificent city that we hardly ever notice, because nobody imagines living there. He contrasts Glasgow with Florence, Paris, London and New York—cities where, according to Gray, “Nobody visiting them for the first time is a stranger because he’s already visited them in paintings, novels, history books and films.” We should have such a confident sense of place here in Scotland and show it to the rest of the world. We have artists, designers, engineers, conservationists and people with other skills—working here at home and internationally—who are capable of doing that. We should support them and move forward with a recognition of the importance of place making to the wellbeing of Scotland.

Will the member take an intervention?

That is very nice of the member, because I just wanted to say that, in all the years I have been here, this is probably the first time that I have agreed 100 per cent with everything that Michael McMahon said.

I welcome this debate, as I welcome all the veterans initiatives that the Scottish Government has taken since 2007. In 2007, I was honoured to be asked to unveil a memorial to the Scots who fell in Flanders in world war one. Although I knew that it would be emotional, I was truly unprepared for the depth of emotion that I would feel at the needless carnage and the continuing effect that the severe loss of young life has had on the future of our communities, our towns and cities and our nation. Regardless of our personal views on the rights and wrongs of any war, as a nation we respect those who fall in the line of duty in conflict, and on remembrance Sunday this month we will publicly show that respect, lest we forget. Those who continue to serve should not be forgotten and those who have served and retired to civilian life should not be forgotten or neglected either. Many men and women who leave the services slot back into civilian life with seeming ease, but some do not. The reasons are many and varied and can be physical or non-physical. It is not for us to judge them, but we should deal with them because we have ignored them for too long. It is right that there is a degree of unanimity in the Parliament on supporting the initiatives that the minister outlined today. The Scottish veterans fund was designed to run as a complementary programme to the veterans challenge fund, which is administered by the UK Ministry of Defence. The introduction of the Scottish veterans fund, which was launched in May 2008, marked the first time that services for ex-servicemen and women had been provided directly through Scottish Government funding. The fund covers healthcare, transport, education, justice and housing, among other things. As a former housing professional, I particularly welcome the housing strand of the veterans policy. In my job in housing, I often felt helpless and frustrated at being unable to assist or, indeed, prioritise applicants and families who were leaving forces’ accommodation and trying to settle in social housing, although I am sure that I did not feel as helpless and frustrated as the families. The housing situation for single men and women trying to fit into civilian life was really difficult, so it is right that that difficulty is being addressed somewhat. We have heard much this morning about the physical and mental health of veterans. Sadly, among affected veterans, as in our society in general, there is a particular stigma attached to the breakdown of mental health. As members have noted, that is evidenced by post-traumatic stress being masked by drugs and alcohol. Although I do not remember the figures, I remember an interesting members’ business debate that Angela Constance secured some time ago on the subject of veterans who end up in prison and the mental health issues that are involved. All in all, there is much more to be done and I await the minister’s review. I wonder whether it will consider further how veterans’ experience can be put to good use by being passed on to others. I do not mean that it should merely be passed on to fellow veterans; it could be used more generally. I am sure that many young people would benefit from the experience of those who have served in the armed forces. Veterans’ experiences—not just the traumatic ones, but those that taught them skills in sport and fitness and in conflict resolution—are very precious. This is just a thought, but perhaps some of the cashback for communities fund could be well used in that regard. I mentioned earlier that we must mind the rights of serving personnel and of those who die while in the armed forces but not in conflict. The armed forces in general are a reserved matter, but I hope that the UK Government and Scottish Government discuss jointly concerns about our army, navy and air force personnel, as they do concerns about veterans, and act jointly to improve services and treat the issues. I raise that point today as I am dealing with the family of a young deceased serviceman and I am extremely perturbed at the experience the family has had and is having of not just military services but civilian services. I shall say no more today, because the issue is very personal to them, but will the minister agree to meet to discuss those issues further? With remembrance week in mind, I conclude with a tribute to Mr Andrew Nicoll of Annan, Dumfriesshire. I know that Elaine Murray will know him well. Andrew and his colleagues are the veterans of the jungle conflicts that followed world war two in Malaysia and Borneo. Following a six-year campaign that they brought to the Public Petitions Committee of this Parliament, which many members of the Scottish Parliament dealt with by writing to Westminster, Mr Nicoll has told me that at last the Pingat Jasa Malaysia medal can be worn with pride, with royal authority and without restriction. That will happen for the first time on remembrance Sunday 2011. We should all respect the work of Mr Nicoll and his colleagues. Respect for veterans goes right across society.

I mentioned that I unveiled the memorial to the Scots fallen in Flanders. It was the Flanders people who campaigned and fundraised for the memorial.

The Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body does not directly offer loans to MSP staff who wish to purchase bicycles, but it will assist members to provide interest-free salary advances to their staff for such a purchase. A member can authorise a salary advance to a member of their staff, which is paid from the expenses scheme in one month and reclaimed from the salary over the next 11 months.

Helen Eadie alludes to the very useful United Kingdom Government cycle-to-work salary sacrifice scheme. The SPCB does not currently operate that scheme, but it offers interest-free salary advances for its own staff and will assist MSPs to do the same for their staff. The SPCB is exploring whether it should consider implementing the salary sacrifice scheme. I do not know whether MSPs would be able to avail themselves of that as employers, but I will ask the SPCB staff who are considering the issue to ask that question.

Although I welcome all the initiatives that are under way, I have a particular concern based on queries from people in my constituency. It concerns people from the age of 20 or 21 right up to the early 30s who feel that they have no paths at all into the labour market. What consideration has been given to that age group to ensure that good working careers can be supplied for them?

5. To ask the Scottish Government what it considers the impact of the United Kingdom Government’s proposed housing benefit reforms will be on access to social rented housing in Scotland. (S4O-00126)

Does the minister share my concerns, as informed by the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations, that although we are trying to protect people in the social rented sector, the housing benefit cap, as discussed, will have adverse effects on those who live alone and the stopping of the payment of housing benefit directly to registered social landlords will have an impact on the income of those landlords?

8. To ask the Scottish Government what sanctions are available to local authorities in cases of antisocial behaviour by tenants of private landlords. (S4O-00089)

Does the minister agree that, too often, victims are evacuated instead of perpetrators being evicted, and that home owners can feel well and truly stuck? Might it be worth while to have a joint information campaign involving Government and local authorities so that this menace in too many of our communities can be dealt with?

Does the minister recognise that in certain urban communities the concept of the balanced community is also very fragile? In East Kilbride, for example, that manifests itself in a critical lack of social rented housing. Will the minister commit to meeting me and appropriate representatives from East Kilbride soon to discuss this increasingly concerning situation with a view to considering the kind of viable solutions that he has just outlined in some measure in his response to Mr MacKenzie?

It is worth stating that the motion by the Scottish Government comes against the background of sound financial management over the past four years by the Scottish National Party. It is a history of maximising our capital spending, which we have also done this year, to support infrastructure investment and, of course, jobs. In spite of the Westminster cuts, we have accelerated capital projects and front loaded the European social fund projects. However, we are now at the point where Scotland needs substantive capital borrowing powers to truly support economic recovery and enhance our infrastructure. To paraphrase what the First Minister said some time ago, Scotland needs borrowing powers that are appropriate to its size, ambition and potential. That has been recognised across the board, and I am pleased at the consensual nature of the debate. The Scotland Bill Committee was clear that there was no principled basis for the particular capital borrowing limits that are proposed in the Scotland Bill. If I remember rightly, it recommended a cumulative limit of £5 billion as opposed to £2.2 billion. Even the Westminster Scottish Affairs Committee asked that the Government reconsider the proposed limits. Borrowing is important to finance the capital investment that we all require. However, sources of borrowing are also extremely important, and that is reflected in the motion. How Scotland should borrow is important. Should we borrow only from the UK Government? I do not think so. Because it has control, it would share none of the risks. Should borrowing only take place under the conditions in the Scotland Bill as introduced? Probably not. It seems to me plain that any privately or publicly funded organisation that borrows should have in place a Treasury strategy and an asset and portfolio management policy. Therefore, it is sensible and right for John Swinney to call for “joint work to agree a clear, long-term and principles-based approach”. One of the first principles of that must be that Scotland should be able to decide what capital projects it wants to do. We cannot rely on Westminster to decide that for us, because Scotland’s economy is different from that of the rest of the UK and we have differing priorities. We cannot allow our nation to rely on Westminster to decide what capital investment funding and what type of funding to propose when it suits Westminster. We need that degree of borrowing autonomy to increase the range of options and policy levers that are available to us to stimulate the economy during times of economic necessity. The Scotland Bill still has to go through many stages and there is still time to make changes. On bonds, the command paper that came with the Scotland Bill explicitly states that the Scottish Government will not be allowed to issue bonds. That seems strange to me when Transport for London is using what are, in effect, bonds for its crossrail project, and Birmingham City Council is similar. States in the United States, Canadian provinces and regional and local governments can issue bonds to raise money for capital projects, so it is bizarre that we cannot. The Scottish Government is one of the few national or federal Governments in the world that cannot borrow. Indeed, in these islands, local authorities, the Northern Ireland Executive, and even English parish councils can borrow. As we have just heard from Colin Beattie, the Northern Ireland Executive can borrow at a much higher rate than that which is proposed for Scotland. Today, it was interesting to hear from the cabinet secretary that Nick Clegg had already said that he thinks that we can start to borrow more quickly than had previously been envisaged. I was reading back over some of the comments that Michael Moore made when he came to give evidence to the Scotland Bill Committee. He said that he hoped to make “positive noises” about bringing forward unrestrained borrowing powers earlier than 2015. It would seem that Nick Clegg stole Michael Moore’s thunder when he arrived today. Michael Moore also said that the £2 billion was not set in stone. Nick Clegg did not say anything to suggest that he was talking about increasing that capital borrowing limit as well as conceding that we should have borrowing powers more quickly than was previously suggested. I hope that that figure is not set in stone and I hope that the Westminster side is prepared to offer the same level of co-operation that the cabinet secretary and the Scottish Government have advanced. Everyone in the chamber wants the best for Scotland and will support moving forward towards what is best for Scotland in relation to borrowing powers to enhance our economy.

I am pleased to kick off the debate this afternoon. It is fitting that our first debate in the new session of the Parliament is about taking Scotland forward, because that is something to which we should all aspire. The First Minister’s statement outlined the Government’s aspirations to build on the record of the past four years and the SNP’s vision for our nation’s future. It is crucial that a nation and a people have a vision and something to aim for, as should our cities, towns, villages and communities—geographic and thematic. I am delighted to represent the community of East Kilbride, which is Scotland’s first, largest and most successful new town. I wish my predecessor in that honoured role, Andy Kerr, well and hope that he has a good future in front of him. East Kilbride is full of aspirational people with a great pride in their town. Although it is a new town, it was built round East Kilbride village, which has a fine history. For example, it was the home of renowned medical pioneers the Hunter brothers. Sadly, South Lanarkshire Council has decided to close the Hunter house museum and I hope that the Government’s proposed community empowerment bill will enable active East Kilbriders, such as those in the East Kilbride Development Trust, to maintain that asset for the town. The voluntary sector in East Kilbride is strong. Across the public services and the arts, people of all ages contribute to the wellbeing of the town’s residents. That is why the Government’s commitment to public services and the voluntary sector is welcome. I look forward to further information from the Government about social impact bonds, for example. I also look forward to the results of the Christie commission on public services and to an expansion of social and charity banking. I hope that credit unions and the co-operative movement will be very much involved in that. I also look forward to procurement policy that will assist the third sector as well as local businesses. East Kilbride has a successful business community too, from large firms such as Rolls-Royce and Robert Wiseman Dairies to international award-winning companies such as Controlled Therapeutics (Scotland) Ltd and Glencairn Crystal Studio. It also has many small companies that have benefited from the SNP’s small business bonus scheme over the past four years and will continue to benefit from it. The export growth fund is also ripe for companies such as those in East Kilbride to benefit from. The town has many innovative companies and new industries based in the technology park. They are backed up by world-renowned scientists in facilities such as the Scottish Universities Environmental Research Centre and, in South Lanarkshire College, a further education facility that is second to none. East Kilbride has aspirational people who moved to Scotland’s first new town from 1947 onwards. The East Kilbride Development Corporation was wound up in the early 1990s and local government was restructured so that East Kilbride District Council disappeared and the town became subsumed within South Lanarkshire Council. Although the aspiration still exists, there is a sense in the town of lost identity and a perception that East Kilbride has been disadvantaged by being part of the larger South Lanarkshire Council. There is a view that the town has deteriorated and that its fine assets have been stripped in order to fund initiatives in other parts of the bailiwick of South Lanarkshire Council. Perhaps East Kilbride has been the victim of its own success. At the moment, that is particularly clear in the huge issue with social housing in the town. Under the right-to-buy scheme, there was an aggressive sales policy, as a result of which social housing is now suffering—or, perhaps I should say, the residents who wish to maintain their families and communities within the town are suffering.

I would advise any local authority to consider the best towns in its area and bring the others up to that level. Levelling down is not a mark of success. As I say, there is a huge issue with social housing in East Kilbride. Families who are proud to live there have sons and daughters who cannot get houses. Under the Government’s housing proposals, opportunities will arise. The proposals are hugely aspirational and innovative. I have written to the Minister for Housing and Transport to ask for an early meeting on how we can address some of the problems. I also hope to discuss with South Lanarkshire Council its allocations policy and whether it acts in the best interests of communities across South Lanarkshire. East Kilbride should move forward, along with Scotland. Many residents believe that. They have a sense of civic pride and want to work to achieve the best. Last week in the local paper, a letter from a Mr Bill McGowan called on people to get in touch in order to start something for the town. The town needs its own identity again. For example, the most successful business hub in South Lanarkshire does not have its own business forum. I will take the opportunity to write to the appropriate minister to ask for assistance on that issue. The Government will help Scotland to move forward; I hope that I can rise to the task of helping East Kilbride to move forward as part of that.

Will the minister reiterate on her Government’s behalf the commitment to the hands-off principle in the arts, as included in the Creative Scotland Bill by this Government? Does she agree that when we start talking about the potential for Government censorship of the arts, that is a bad prospect for Scotland?

10. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with the National Union of Students. (S3O-13267)

Did those who attended the most recent meeting with the cabinet secretary express pleasure at the recent budget and its commitment to further education funding? Did they welcome the certainty in that funding, which is in marked contrast to the contradictory statements that were mentioned earlier and Labour’s failure adequately to cost and fund its fees pledge, which looks like leading to another betrayal of students as in 1997 and 2001, when it promised no fees, prior to their introduction?

Will the member give way?

It has been interesting listening to all the different points of view. As Brian Adam said, there are some good aspects of the Scotland Bill Committee’s consideration of the bill. There are also some worrying and some contentious aspects. We have heard talk today, and we heard a lot of talk previously, about what went on when the academics appeared at the committee. I will talk about an issue that has not been given much consideration. I have concerns about the way in which the committee was put together and the way in which it worked. While I do not wish to personalise the issue, the Parliament should ponder it. The first thing that gave me concern was the fact that the committee appointed as its independent advisers those who were directly concerned in creating the bill. Asking those whose work underpins the bill to serve as independent advisers was not just bad practice—it inhibited the committee from carrying out its function. Those people should have been giving evidence, so that the MSPs on the committee could openly probe the thinking behind the bill, test its limits, feel its scope and use that evidence and the evidence presented by other witnesses to frame their thoughts on the legislation. I have heard others say today that Wendy Alexander did very well as convener of the committee. I am sure that she did, but I feel quite strongly that instead of being convener, Wendy Alexander should have been able to make herself available to give evidence to the committee. We hear over and over that Wendy was one of the architects of the Calman commission. In fact, Pauline McNeill said today that it was Wendy who brought it about. It would have been useful for the committee to have heard evidence from Wendy Alexander. Then, of course, there were Jim Gallagher, the former civil servant who was secretary to the Calman commission and probably the principal author of the report, and Professor Ulph, who was a member of the Calman commission panel of economists. They were both employed by the committee to provide advice and criticism of their own work. That is problematic. Knowing the genesis of proposed legislation is as important as testing its parameters. The committee lost that opportunity when it decided to appoint people whom it should have called as witnesses. No minister, in the Scottish Parliament or the UK Parliament, sits on a committee scrutinising a bill that that minister has originated. The Scottish Parliament’s standing orders explicitly prohibit a minister in charge of a bill from sitting on the committee that scrutinises it. They also prohibit the sponsor of a member’s bill from being a member of a committee while it scrutinises the bill. The principle underpinning those restrictions is to ensure that the scrutiny of legislation is impartial, that committee members are as free of bias as possible and that the committee feels free to call as witnesses everyone and anyone who seems to it to be appropriate, to give informed evidence on a bill’s provisions. Committees have to serve the Parliament and help it to be better informed. We should never be in a position in which we can be subject to the criticism that a committee is being used as a vehicle for one faction to run legislation through it unchallenged. In a single-chamber Parliament, that is a particularly vital responsibility. It is one that the Scotland Bill Committee failed to discharge. In common with many others, in my party and beyond, I have great concerns about what I believe to be the damaging effects that the Scotland Bill could have on Scotland if it is passed in its present form. There would be a deflationary impact on Scotland’s public spending—that is a major issue. Another major issue, and one that is just as important for the long-term health of Scotland, is that legislation that is passed in such circumstances cannot serve anyone any good, no matter which side of the debate they are on. I ask the Parliament to reflect on those points so that they can be further considered in the next parliamentary session, after 5 May.

As a member of the Finance Committee, I, too, was very pleased to take evidence in the inquiry into preventative spend and to help to compile the report. There were two additional aspects of the inquiry that were extremely important. One was the involvement of Scotland’s Futures Forum. The committee’s clerks and its convener and deputy convener are to be commended for taking such a forward-thinking approach and for adopting such an innovative way of looking at things. The other important factor was our report on the reform of public services, because I do not believe that it is possible to look truly at a preventative spend model without looking at how we reform public services. That is a big issue in this country. Much of the report focused on the early years. That is as it should be, because there is nothing more important to any society than its children. However, achieving a significant turnaround of society as far as our children are concerned involves taking a long-term view and I am concerned that, because of that, it is far too easy not to even start. People think, “That’s away off in the future. We’ll get round to doing that.” When it comes to prevention, there is a mindset in our society that has to change. It needs to be realised in the health service that it is better to prevent than it is to treat and in the criminal justice system that it is better to prevent than it is to punish, for example. Among the six points that emerged from the committee’s event on Friday, which was excellent, was that the debate on preventative spending needs to go much wider than just the early years and health and social care, and I think that that is very true. It is often the case that we deal with issues in crisis situations. That came out in some of the evidence that we took during the inquiry. Alan Sinclair, who helped us a great deal with his evidence, said: “The overwhelming mindset that lurks behind how our public services are delivered is that we should invest at point of impact when things have gone wrong ... instead of going back and putting something in systemically.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 21 September 2010; c 2496.] NESTA took a similar view when it wrote that “The prevalent approach to tackling these challenges is to deal with the symptoms rather than striving to prevent their development.” Sometimes simple and effective solutions can be put into place when we look at the short and medium term. Members will have their own examples, but one that comes immediately to my mind is the service gap facing those people in our prisons, hospitals and communities who have chronic mental health problems. This morning, I heard about the gap facing people who have to move from child to adult psychiatric services. Surely, if we intervene early enough and use prevention, that will be better than what we will end up with in the future. This morning, I also visited the Up-2-Us project, which is an early intervention to help young people to avoid ending up as pawns in the criminal justice system. These are fairly simple and straightforward potential solutions, so what stops us from putting such ideas into practice? When taking evidence, the committee was frustrated to pick up on bureaucratic barriers, budget defensiveness, issues of ring-fencing and people saying, “That’s our budget.” A lot of work has to be done to change that mindset, which appears in all sectors. We do it in this Parliament. Local authorities, health boards and the voluntary sector do it. Everyone is looking after their own budget and closing their minds to the idea of being a bit more innovative in looking for solutions that can prevent social problems and save a lot more money down the line. It does not always have to be about extra money. I was struck by a tiny bit of evidence that we heard. Somewhere in the south of England—I cannot remember where—a local health board paid to have roads gritted in an area in which there are a lot of elderly people. The result was that the health board had to treat fewer casualties and fractures over the winter, which meant a net saving to the public purse. We do not see much evidence of that sort of thing happening in our country because everyone is looking after their own budget. Perhaps Mr Swinney’s change fund will help to alleviate some of the pressures that mean that people think that they have to protect their own professions, services and organisations. Such an idea must start from the top. We must all show a commitment to working together. There must be a recognition that we can do things differently and better. There is a responsibility on us all to stop making some of the populist sound bites that we are all guilty of and to work together. The committee convener has already commended the report to the Finance Committee’s successor committee, with a view to it taking the recommendations on board. The committee’s legacy paper will also reflect that view. I can end only with the committee’s words about “the need for a consensual approach in moving towards a more preventative approach to public spending”. That will require leadership across all political parties and locally in communities. As the parliamentary session comes to an end and a new one approaches, I hope that we can commend that approach and make a difference to Scotland.

Not that many.

13. To ask the Scottish Government when the next report of the audiology services advisory group will be published. (S3O-12931)

The minister is aware that I have a constituent who is concerned about the lack of provision of bone-anchored hearing aids in Lanarkshire NHS Board’s area. Will she assure me that that was discussed at the audiology services advisory group’s meeting?

I welcome the cabinet secretary’s clarification of the Opposition’s false assumption about a £400 million budget cut. Of course, the backdrop against which that has to be seen is the Scottish Government’s commitment to protecting health spending over the next four years. Despite the rhetoric from Labour, its party leader was unequivocal in saying on “Newsnight Scotland” on 7 September last year that Labour would not ring fence the health budget. What effect would Labour’s failure to protect health spending have on the Government’s ambition to eradicate delayed discharge?

There are not many occasions when it is so important for members to take their time and consider carefully the issue that is before them. A particular set of circumstances has led us here—the formation of a minority Government, the collapse of the UK economy, a change of Government at Westminster, and the ensuing large and rapid cuts—so we must, as a result, take today’s voting decision with extra care, thought and some humility. My colleagues on the SNP group and the cabinet secretary, John Swinney, have come here today will all that in mind. It was quite clear to me that Mr Swinney had listened and, against the background of the cuts, had balanced as far as possible a reasonable and good budget for Scotland that, as he said, will give people certainty. It has also happened despite the opposition to the supermarket levy. I have to say that I still cannot understand why the Lib Dems and Labour oppose that move but, as I think Bob Doris also said, we are where we are. The Tories, the Lib Dems and, of course, Margo MacDonald have been very reasonable in thinking about the way forward. Derek Brownlee is always fairly reasonable and Jeremy Purvis was as reasonable as it gets, which is always a bonus. What did we get from Labour? It was all so predictable. We got the usual negativity, a lot of bluster, no real substance and certainly no ideas. Andy Kerr might well get up and talk about the “full measures” that Labour want, but his glass is half empty. I hope that when David Whitton speaks he will be a bit more reasonable, considered and thoughtful and, indeed, show some humility in what he puts forward. We also keep hearing an awful lot from Labour about what it would not do, but what would it do? What is its policy? Perhaps its policy is to shut accident and emergency units to pay for GARL. I do not know, but I certainly think that people should be told. We have heard all that despite the fact that John Swinney has come to the chamber with some really important initiatives and compromises. He has listened. I am delighted, for example, to hear about the voluntary sector initiative, which will be really important. There is also money for the freight facilities grant and urban regeneration companies. All of those measures have been taken against the background of the maintaining of the council tax freeze and pledges on prescription charges. Such moves constitute a crucial social contract with the people of Scotland. After all, it is important that people have confidence in the way that their Government acts in moving forward: I certainly think that people have confidence in this Government. The other big issues include apprenticeships. The increase in the number of apprenticeships from 20,000 this year to 25,000 next year is really good news. That is against the background of having exceeded last year’s target of 18,500 modern apprenticeships: more than 20,000 were delivered. Many members have said that we have had a lot of lobbying from students who have been concerned about bursary cuts. We are all in the same boat. Again, the cabinet secretary has listened, and I am pleased about that. There will be an additional 1,200 college places at a cost of £8 million and, of course, the bursary bill has been raised to give confidence to young people who are pursuing further education in our colleges.

No, thank you. The Scottish Government has also chosen to continue the education maintenance allowance. In East Kilbride, where I live, that fund increased by 6.3 per cent in 2009-10; the number of people who received the allowance went up from 585 to 620. That is all good news. The budget also contains small business bonus funding, which has been important over the past few years and is one of the reasons why business start-up figures in Scotland have been maintained. There is much in the budget that will benefit Scotland, and advances that we have seen in the past few years that should be protected are being protected. A balancing act has had to be performed by responsible politicians putting aside partisanship for the sake of the country and how we will move forward. Scotland expects that every MSP will do their duty, so I ask that they do so.

Will the minister give way?

I apologise to the minister for interrupting her in mid-sentence, but she drew breath. Does the minister agree that, in addition to the science centres’ great work, small units throughout the country should be recognised and commended for their great work? I am thinking in particular of a unique facility in East Kilbride—the Scottish universities environmental research centre—and I am sure that with a bit of joint thought, discussion and effort the educational outreach work that the likes of that organisation carry out could be enhanced for the benefit of all. Such an approach might also answer Jamie Stone’s point about ensuring that we reach every part of the country.

10. To ask the Scottish Government whether it is aware of the French approach to training for trades as represented by the organisation, les Compagnons du Devoir. (S3O-12834)

Does the minister agree that, as in parts of mainland Europe, sectoral craft skills should be held in as high esteem as those of the professions? Does she agree that colleges such as South Lanarkshire College in East Kilbride are to be commended for their interest in alternative ways of addressing perceived skills shortages and that the French concept of apprenticeship and training is worthy of consideration?

As everyone knows, Scotland is working towards becoming a fair trade nation. I am sure that the minister agrees with me and many in the grass-roots fair trade movement that that will not be truly meaningful until we get beyond consumables and into issues such as procurement. Public bodies are the first part of that, after which we can encourage the private sector. Given that the United Kingdom is the member state in Europe, will the minister make further representations to the UK Government to look seriously at how we can best influence European procurement rules to allow real fair trade in our dealings in Scotland, the UK and across Europe?

Like other members, I am pleased to speak in the debate, not only because of the subject, which is so very worth while, but because—as others have said—this is Andrew Welsh’s last stand. Tonight marks his final members’ business debate in what has been a long career. It has all been said already, so it is difficult to add anything other than to say on a personal note that I will miss him very much. In case you feel put out, Deputy Presiding Officer, I will miss you, too. What really jumped out of the motion for me was what it said about the success of Angus College—and other colleges, of course— “in providing high-quality training and resources” and in making an “exceptional contribution to building Scotland’s skills base for the future.” I will speak about South Lanarkshire College in East Kilbride. As members may be aware, the college has been mentioned many times in the chamber. The building of the Aurora house, an eco-house that is a model for the future and a great training ground, has been highlighted, as has the college’s success in the skillbuild competition in 2009, in which its students were very successful in obtaining medals. Those successes are a great tribute to the innovative thinking of the college’s board, staff and students, who are always willing to look at new ways forward and at what is best for the students. That is reflected in the report by Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Education that the college received this week. I am not seeking any one-upmanship—or one-upwomanship—today; however, for the second time in four years, South Lanarkshire College has been deemed to be the best college in Scotland. The inspectorate said that it had “full confidence” in all aspects of the college. The report is super and provides great building blocks for the future. It refers to “excellent” practice and “sector leading and innovative practice”, and contains not one main point for action. That shows the level of excellence that can be reached with the full commitment of everyone who is involved. I note some of strengths on which HMIE reported. The report states: “Attainment rates for FE level programmes ... are consistently very high ... and well above sector average values.” It makes the extremely important point that “Sustainability is embedded in much of the college’s provision.” It also notes: “The college prepares learners very well for employment and further study.” Both Elizabeth Smith and Margaret Smith picked up that issue in their speeches. These days it is extremely important that we prepare people for the workplace. Colleges all over Scotland have taken that on board and are doing it very well. Time runs out quickly when there is so much to say. Andrew Welsh spoke about the community aspects of our colleges. HMIE said that, in South Lanarkshire College, “learners enhance their employability and citizenship skills by participating in a range of relevant activities within the college and the local community.” I mention in that regard the college’s involvement in the East Kilbride cross out child poverty campaign, which is extremely important. I leave the last word to Katie McCall, the president of South Lanarkshire College’s student association, who said what HMIE already recognises—that “our college is a fantastic place to study!” That is a great tribute to everyone who is involved.

10. To ask the Scottish Government whether the Minister for Culture and External Affairs has been involved in discussions about disputed Barnett consequentials at joint ministerial committee meetings. (S3O-12728)

In light of her experience of the Westminster Government’s propensity to rewrite the rules on Barnett consequentials to Scotland’s disadvantage, does the minister believe that Parliament should put its trust in the loosely worded no-detriment clause that is proposed for inclusion in the Scotland Bill?

In November, in his statement to the chamber following the publication of the draft budget, John Swinney said: “The budget addresses a financial challenge without precedent since devolution and reflects the biggest reduction in public spending imposed on Scotland by any United Kingdom Government ... The scale of those cuts poses a significant challenge to the delivery of public services in Scotland and our economic recovery.”—[Official Report, 17 November 2010; c 30460.] That is the context within which everyone in the chamber must consider and take responsibility for Scotland’s budget. Of course, we now have to take into account the tax rises that the UK Government had announced but had not implemented at the time. Some of those tax rises are already with us: VAT is now at 20 per cent; tax on home insurance is at 6 per cent; and—even more bizarre—anyone sensible enough to buy insurance for their gas central heating will have found that that particular tax has increased to 20 per cent. The Scottish Government—and, to be fair, the Executive that preceded it—has installed thousands of new central heating systems in the houses of vulnerable people and the UK Government has simply decided to increase the tax on any who have been sensible enough to take out insurance to cover them. Those are but a few examples, but they demonstrate that the reliance on indirect taxation by Labour and Conservative and Liberal Democrat Governments at UK level is hitting the least well-off the hardest.

That is typical. When they do not like what they are hearing, they start being nasty to other nations. The abandonment by the Labour Party when it was in Government of any pretence that it believed in progressive taxation has allowed the right-wing coalition to drive further down that road, making things harder for the people whom politicians should be endeavouring to protect. I mention that because it seems to be quite a faultline between the Scottish Government and the Opposition. The SNP is intent on ensuring some measure of fairness in our society and, to anyone who wants to see where the parties stand on social justice and on having a system that is inherently fair, I point out that the Scottish Government has not only implemented but maintained and fully funded a freeze on the indirect council tax. It is one small measure that the Government can take within the very limited range of powers that it has to help those in need. We have all heard Iain Gray and his troops call for the freeze to be lifted. Folk have not forgotten how quickly council tax rose under Labour Administrations at national and local level. Indeed, my colleague Tricia Marwick has just reminded me that the increase was 60 per cent over 10 years. We have no desire to see that return. It is interesting that, although Labour and the other Opposition parties want to see lower-paid people take on an increasingly unfair burden in the shape of rising council tax, they also want to protect the profits of the big supermarkets. They think that Tesco, with a turnover of more than £42 billion, is less able to afford to take some of the strain than someone who receives the minimum wage for their work.

No, thank you.

No, thank you. We have had enough laughter today. It seems that Sainsbury’s and Asda, with turnovers approaching £20 billion a year, and Morrisons, with more than £15 billion a year, cannot spare the pennies, but Scots pensioners can. That is the world according to the Labour Party, the Conservative party and the Liberal Democrat party. Compared with the mega-retailers of the world, small and medium-sized businesses face a disproportionate burden—there is no argument about that—so why are the Lib Dems and Labour so strident in their opposition? I understand why the Tories are, but not why the Lib Dems and Labour are. On his website, Mr Purvis recognises and supports the struggle of local retailers against the big supermarkets, as does his leader, Tavish Scott. Perhaps later Lib Dem speakers will, rather than try to slag off other countries, enlighten us about which stance truly reflects the Lib Dem position. John Swinney’s previous budgets have ensured that thousands of small businesses have seen their rates cut or abolished altogether. I welcome what he said today in that regard. I thought that all members wanted to protect our town centres and had concerns about the effects of out-of-town retail parks, but that is clearly not the case. We approach the budget with a very important choice to make, which is pertinent in this season of Burns. Is Scotland to be a progressive nation that considers fairness for all, or are we to say, “Deil tak the hindmost”? I know what I and the Scottish National Party want. We should all work together and support the general principles of John Swinney’s budget.

You caught me unawares, Presiding Officer, I am terribly sorry. I am pleased to speak in the debate. I have a lot of sympathy with bits of the Green party motion. For example, land value taxation is worth exploring and I agree that the wealthier should pay more, which is why I am surprised that Opposition members do not agree with the supermarket levy. Considering that Sainsbury’s makes £2.5 million per hour in the UK, I do not understand why that levy is such an issue for it. I also agree that the cuts that the UK Government has imposed have a disproportionate impact on poorer people. I am afraid, however, that there we start to differ. For example, ending the council tax freeze now, which has been funded in each of the past three years, would cost Scotland’s hard-pressed local taxpayers an extra £70 million in 2011-12 for a 3 per cent increase. I believe absolutely that the council tax freeze is good for Scotland. Talking about taxation, I also have issues with what the Green party’s motion says on the Scottish variable rate, because if it were used, the power to vary the rate of income tax would create a regressive tax that would hit lower-paid workers the hardest. The tax bill of someone on the minimum wage, for example, would increase by 15 per cent. That is why I am surprised, as I have said previously, to see the Green party calling for that tax to be imposed. It is all very well for Patrick Harvie to say that the Greens just want the power to be there—the power is there in legislation—but they have proposed using it, despite the fact that Patrick Harvie said only in September of last year that “a form of tax-varying power was designed that makes it very difficult, although perhaps not impossible, to justify using it.”—[Official Report, 9 September 2010; c 28401.] In the context of taxation, the Labour amendment asks for “the introduction of tax-raising powers recommended by the Calman Commission and contained in the Scotland Bill currently before the UK Parliament”. I was under the impression that the purpose of the Scotland Bill Committee was to consider how the best benefit for Scotland could be achieved. It seems to me that Labour members are predetermining the outcome of that process. We face issues. It cannot be denied that times are hard, and I believe that it is incumbent on all of us in the Parliament and in the public services to think innovatively about how the best services can be delivered and who is best placed to meet the needs of their constituencies, whether geographic or thematic. We should strive to break down the institutional barriers that stymie progress on joint working, and we should consider disposal of community assets to viable community groups that are best placed to tap their potential. I cite the campaign in East Kilbride to save the Hunter House Museum and the sterling local work of the voluntary East Kilbride Development Trust. Across Scotland, people are working together for local benefit. I believe that every member of the Scottish Parliament should be working for national benefit in the difficult times that we are going through. I would like to see recognition across the chamber that there are some big issues that are sacrosanct and precious, and on which we should all be working together. Good work has been done in the Parliament through its committees and on its behalf by Scotland’s Futures Forum. That is the kind of work that we should be looking at and pledging that we want to achieve. That is why, for me, John Swinney’s amendment is the only one that we should be considering and working towards. It says that “all parties in the Parliament should work to deliver a balanced budget that will safeguard services and strengthen economic growth for Scotland.”

I am sorry—there has been a mistake, Presiding Officer.

Oh—I think it is the second time today that I have had to apologise to you, Presiding Officer. I must be coming down with something.

No—I do have the question.

I will start all over again. To ask the Scottish Government how it supports small and medium-sized enterprises. (S3O-12674)

I thank the minister for that very detailed answer. I acknowledge that the latest official statistics show that the number of businesses in Scotland has risen during the first three years of a Scottish National Party Government. Does the minister agree with the Scottish Trades Union Congress and the Federation of Small Businesses that the proposed supermarket levy is an appropriate measure—especially given supermarket profits—to help rebalance the relationship between out-of-town shopping centres and town-centre locations?

To ask the Scottish Government how it promotes green energy technology. (S3O-12411)

Is the minister aware of the latest U-turn by the Liberal Democrats at Westminster, who are now backing public  subsidies for the nuclear power industry? Does he have any concerns that that will threaten Scotland's renewables potential?

Name them.

Will Jeremy Purvis give way?

Does Mr Purvis accept that the independent and cross-party committee that has been set up should independently consider the legislative consent motion that is to be lodged and the options for Scotland, come up with what it decides independently would be a good deal for Scotland, and then let the Parliament consider that?

Does Nicol Stephen understand that the SNP believes in independence from its head and from its heart? It will not compromise on that belief. Considering that the Calman commission refused to consider independence as part of its discussions, should not the SNP be commended for standing by its principles?

I welcome the publication of the Scotland Bill, not because I agree with it all but because, if it is passed in a suitably improved form, the bill could mark the beginning of a new phase in the devolution process. In devolution’s first 12 years, our Parliament’s economic and fiscal powers have been constrained either by statute or by the refusal of the UK Government to co-operate on their use. Under the new proposal from the Conservative-Lib Dem Government at Westminster, Scotland has an opportunity to use its Parliament to advance its interests. That means having full discussions and debate, and refining proposals under which Scotland’s interests are not always sidelined for the sake of taking a standard UK approach. As the motion in Iain Gray’s name says, the bill has its basis in the Calman commission. Calman was conceived in a very different world, however. At the end of 2007, the economic crisis was still in its infancy and the full effect of Gordon Brown’s failure as Chancellor of the Exchequer was yet to engulf his successors. The election of May 2010, which resulted in Westminster’s first coalition Government in 65 years, was more than two years away. As we look at the proposals in the bill, we should remember how quickly things can change.  We should recognise that, under its proposals, the most significant changes—the tax-raising and financial powers—are at least five years away. The impact of decisions that will be taken over the next few weeks will be felt not in this or even the next session of Parliament, but many years ahead. We need to use our time wisely to ensure that the changes that emerge from the debate live up to Scotland’s ambition. At the Finance Committee a couple of weeks ago, Danny Alexander spoke, as we would expect, of his aim “to give the Scottish Parliament significantly increased financial responsibility”.—[ Official Report, Finance Committee , 25 November 2010; c 2818.] He also used neutral jargon, such as “policy spill-over” and “no detriment” to reassure the Scottish people about the risks that are associated with the proposals. However, his promise of “no detriment”, even if it is real, extends only to further actions by Westminster. If the powers of this Parliament are inadequate or badly designed, as they were under the Scotland Act 1998, the Scottish economy and our public services could face detriment indeed. We have been there before. Given the incomplete powers at our disposal and the straitjacket of the funding agreement with the Treasury, the abolition of the council tax became unviable. Before that, on free personal care, Westminster took a windfall benefit when this Parliament acted within its powers, and continues to do so. Unless we are to operate on the premise that the last Labour Government was uniquely truculent regarding devolved matters, we should work together to ensure that the Scotland Bill mark 2 delivers a better relationship between the Governments and Parliaments in terms of responsibilities, risks and powers.

No, thank you. Never again should Westminster trumpet its granting of devolved powers when, in reality, it has built in roadblocks to their use. I ask all members to keep in their sights what is best for Scotland. We might, and do, have different goals for the destination of this devolution journey, but we should be able to unite to protect Scotland’s interests in the short, medium and longer terms. Elected and civic voices have already united to defend Scotland’s right to regulate charities, which has led to the rejection of the Calman proposal in that area. We should take further opportunities to allow Scotland’s voices to prevail, to Scotland’s advantage. If Scotland is to get the best out of devolution, Parliament must allow the full range of Scottish  opinion to be heard and not muffled by party politics. There are many issues on which people feel strongly, including income tax proposals, the scope of borrowing powers, the inability to vary corporation tax and the interaction between the tax and benefits systems. Surely the most important decisions over taxes and the welfare system should be controlled in Scotland; we hear that over and over again.

Robert Brown and others should consider countries such as Slovenia and Norway, which are suffering no detriment at all from being independent nations.

Scotland, as an independent nation, would make those most important decisions on taxes and the welfare system. We would control the destiny of Scotland to the benefit of the Scottish people.

I heard Jeremy Purvis muttering about Ireland, as people do. People should really think about how they talk about one of our nearest neighbours. Even in the settlement that Ireland has agreed, it still has power over corporation tax. There is something that an independent nation can do as it considers what is best for its future. I ask members to consider the anomaly whereby Governments in Westminster have considered corporation tax reductions for the north of Ireland that they will not countenance for Scotland. Members of other parties in Westminster, including Baroness Jay, are pushing for Northern Ireland to have that ability. Why cannot we get together and push for Scotland to have that ability? That would be worth talking about at the committee that has been set up. The Parliament must listen to all Scottish society. It must listen to all people who have an interest in improving Scotland. Scottish parliamentarians have an opportunity to make the bill better and to ensure that the Parliament has the power that it needs to advance the interests of Scotland’s people. That is why the legislative consent motion should be properly and independently scrutinised, and that is why the amendment in the name of Scotland’s First Minister should be supported.

Like other members, I have read Jeremy Purvis's paper, "Making Scotland the Most Innovative and Entrepreneurial Economy in the World". I have some sympathy with its aspirations and the aspirations that Mr Purvis has espoused today. I am grateful for the historical aspect to the paper, which discusses the enterprise networks over the years. It reminded me about the previous, cluttered landscape that was difficult to work one's way around. One thing that the SNP Government should be commended for is that it has hugely simplified that landscape. I was particularly interested in certain parts of the paper. Mr Purvis wants us to consider an innovation-driven economy, in which "new ideas and skills ... emphasise the high end of the value chain, rather than replication." We could all get behind that idea and there are examples of how we can move forward on that, such as renewables, which Stuart McMillan mentioned. I would cite biotechnology as a cutting-edge industry in Scotland, for example Controlled Therapeutics in East Kilbride, which makes medical products. The company has been a great success story, having won export awards and a Queen's award for enterprise. We have to celebrate our achievements rather than talking ourselves down all the time. I recently chaired an event about exporting architectural skills. Scotland's architects and engineers are working all over the world. Some have done so with the help of SDI but many have gone out there and done it on their own. We have the entrepreneurs and the innovation-driven trailblazers. I was interested in the section in the paper about science. That ties in with the Government's science strategy. There are issues in the paper with which we are all in accord and that we can take forward. Debates such as this are good because we get to bang on about things that really matter to us. I have managed to find a reference in Mr Purvis's paper to something that I care hugely about, which is languages. Jeremy Purvis is right when he says:  "Language skills are crucial to the competitiveness of Scotland." I am glad that we have strategies in place to improve Scotland's language skills—strategies that can be backed by everyone. Ross Finnie talked about small and medium-sized enterprises, which comprise 95 per cent of businesses in this country, and about business start-ups. It is true that Scotland's record on business start-ups has not been great, pre and post-recession and, indeed, pre-SNP. The SNP is improving things. The small business bonus scheme has helped businesses to survive the desperate times that mismanagement of the UK economy has brought upon them and will help them to thrive when they have a chance to get out from under the cloud. Leaving some disposable income in the pockets of Scotland's council tax payers has helped, as have social benefits. The policy of freezing the council tax has meant that more money circulates in Scotland's economy, giving it a boost. I contend that those and other policies of the Scottish Government have helped the economic recovery programme. They have helped the Scottish economy to survive and have been innovative in themselves. We can use Government to improve the economy but we could do a lot more with full economic powers. Imagine how much more we could do if the Secretary of State for Scotland had decided to put the findings of the Steel commission rather than of Calman up for consideration as the basis for the Scotland Bill. A debate on that is taking place next week so today I will only repeat what I have said before, which is that it is my firm, unshakeable belief that the Scottish Government should have substantial authority over the levers of power that most affect the Scottish economy: infrastructure; education and skills; business regulation; and taxation. Of course, only the first two are under Scottish control. As the Steel commission said, "there is a need for Scotland to have its hands more effectively on these four key levers and be able to pull all of them together."

I am surprised at the backtracking of the Lib Dems, who are willing to compromise the further powers recommended by the Steel commission to go with a Liberal Democrat Secretary of State for Scotland who is tying in with the Tories for something much less.  Jeremy Purvis's paper talked about privatising Scottish Water. Like Murdo Fraser, Mr Purvis calls it mutualisation, although I have concerns that the end result is the same. The latest version of the statement of funding policy published alongside the UK budget talks about how "Government may take into account proceeds from the sales of ... assets in setting its grant to the devolved administrations when capital receipts are realised as a result of privatisation of a public sector trading body or a major change in the role of the public sector". In such circumstances, it says, "Treasury Ministers reserve the right to reduce the grant to the devolved administration to reflect receipts." I wonder whether Mr Purvis, in his closing remarks, could reassure us that he has considered that fully and discussed it with his UK counterparts.

The Scottish Government is constantly in discussion with the Treasury over such issues. Mr Purvis put in his paper—reflected in the motion—that he believes that that is the way forward, so I would ask him whether he has had such discussions and whether he can give us some comfort that he is not merely signing away one of Scotland's assets. I have some other issues with the proposal from Jeremy Purvis. Where would the boundaries of the regional development banks lie? I have concerns about expecting one body to control grant funding, lending, skills and training and destination management for all businesses in an area. I worry about bureaucracy. Although I do not agree with everything that Jeremy Purvis has said on the issue, he has put ideas forward and I hope that they will be taken into account by Campbell Christie's commission. The debate is worth while.

I am glad to be able to speak in this debate. Of particular relevance to my theme is the last clause in the motion, which is about welcoming "widespread support for St Andrew's Day throughout Central Scotland in 2010." I will talk briefly about an initiative that was launched last St Andrew's day with the support of the minister and the First Minister, Alex Salmond, which I believe deserves widespread support throughout Scotland. The cross out child poverty in Scotland campaign was run by Glasgow the Caring City. It was launched on St Andrew's day last year with a declaration about child poverty in Scotland. I give credit where it was due—the declaration was authored not only by the Rev Neil Galbraith, the chief executive of Glasgow the Caring City, but by Tom Harris MP, the local MP for Cathcart old parish church, who works closely with the Rev Galbraith on the initiative. We were asked to sign a declaration. Some people who regularly come to this chamber—although they are perhaps not here now—and who regularly go to council chambers in central Scotland and Lanarkshire signed that declaration, which said: "We ... believe that Scotland's children deserve better. We believe that no society can be truly at ease with itself while significant numbers of children live in poverty. We believe that the elimination of child poverty must be a priority for us all ... every member of society"— especially those who are privileged to represent people, such as politicians and community leaders. It continued: "We believe that poverty should be defined more widely than lack of money, that it encompasses a lack of education, of health, of welfare, of self-esteem and of love. We believe that poverty corrodes children's health, their happiness, their safety and their aspirations. We recognise that children whose lives are blighted by poverty are at higher risk of educational failure ... We recognise that a life lived in poverty can lead to a life of drug abuse and exploitation." We see that far too often. It concluded: "We believe that only through the elimination of child poverty can we expect the children of Scotland to live their lives to the full, and to be able to enjoy the opportunities that the rest of society take for granted. We ... believe the time for change is here." The initiative was well worth launching on Scotland's national day, but it should not end there—we should not just launch something, sign the declaration and then feel that the job is done. I  am glad that the minister and the First Minister have kept in touch with the Rev Galbraith to see how we can encourage that work, which I am sure all of us in Scotland care for very much. I am also delighted to be able to say again—I have said it already today—that the initiative is spreading wider. In fact, we are launching the cross out child poverty in East Kilbride campaign on Sunday, in East Kilbride. The campaign is spearheaded by the ministers from two local churches—Claremont parish church and East Kilbride old parish church—and South Lanarkshire College East Kilbride. There is a great interest among the staff and students at the college in looking after their own community and trying, as far as possible, to drive out child poverty. I congratulate Glasgow the Caring City on launching the initiative last year and welcome the fact that it is spreading out from Glasgow. I know that East Kilbride is not the only place that has taken it on board for this year. I hope that members here will consider speaking to community leaders and others in their area to try, as time moves on, to use St Andrew's day, Scotland's national day, as a catalyst for driving out poverty—that blight on our society that affects children all too badly. This St Andrew's day—this national day—help us cross out child poverty in Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Government what events are planned to celebrate St Andrew's day. (S3O-12075)

I know that the minister is aware that last year—St Andrew's day 2009—Glasgow the Caring City, a charity based in Glasgow, launched the cross out child poverty in Scotland campaign, supported by the minister and, indeed, by the First Minister. What support is being given to that initiative this year? Is she aware that we are launching the initiative in East Kilbride this Sunday, representing St Andrew's day 2010, in an effort to cross out child poverty in East Kilbride?

Another day and yet another Labour debate focusing on process rather than policy. In its motion, Labour says that it wants four years of spending plans. Labour says that "uncertainty is corrosive" and impacts adversely. It has changed its view since its own Alistair Darling did the same in 2006 and 2010—yet another example of Labour's selective memory. In July 2009, Alistair Darling said: "As I said in the Budget statement, the current economic uncertainty means that it would not make any sense to try to set departmental budgets now for every year to 2014."—[ Official Report , House of Commons , 14 July 2009; Vol 496, c 145.]

No, thank you. Let us look at the facts of where we are today. We have already taken the most difficult decisions, as Governments do. The largest cut to our budget comes in 2011-12, so it is nonsense to say that John Swinney is trying to conceal the most difficult decisions until after an election. George Osborne has said that he will make changes to the Scottish departmental expenditure limits and annually managed expenditure in his budget in March, so why should we announce spending plans that would then have to be changed? Then we have the Christie commission, which is due to report next summer and whose work will probably lead to major reform of public service delivery. There is  little point allocating money to public bodies that in theory may not exist. On bodies that may no longer exist and Labour's concern about organisations' potential inability to plan, let us consider Labour's position. Its leader told his conference that he would create a single police force, reduce the number of health boards and scrap quangos. There was no mention of discussion; just a unilateral decision. Labour therefore wants to set plans for four years, have organisations make commitments for a four-year period and then abolish them forthwith. I suggest that that is corrosive. Then we have Labour's spending pledges—£1.7 billion in their policy documents, and another £1 billion-plus in random ideas. Johann Lamont said that there are challenging times ahead, and then Labour makes promises that it cannot keep. I suggest that that is corrosive. How does Labour intend to pay for the retirement and winding-down arrangements for teachers, for replacing the Government fleet with low-carbon vehicles, for free newspapers for all 18-year-olds and for alcohol treatment and testing orders—even though Labour members voted against the most comprehensive measures to tackle our alcohol problem? Perhaps Labour believes that the Calman commission came up with the answers and that things will all be grand when it passes the Scotland bill in conjunction with its unionist partners. Has Labour ever addressed the Calman conundrum? Within four years of the current UK spending review, the full force of the Scottish Parliament signing up to Calman will begin to hit home. Up to now, despite the occasional duplicity of the Treasury—for example, on Olympic regeneration money—the funds available to the Scottish Parliament have increased in line with public expenditure in England. After Calman, that will no longer be guaranteed. Instead, for more than 10 per cent of its budget, the Parliament will be able to rely only on the funds that can be raised from the basic rate of income tax. However, as announced in its 2010 budget, the UK coalition Government is making changes to income tax allowances that are designed to lift lower-income earners out of taxation and to increase the number of higher-income taxpayers—both of which changes will reduce income from the basic rate of tax. The number of people paying the higher rate of income tax will increase by up to 700,000 throughout the UK and perhaps by 60,000 to 70,000 in Scotland, and any income that is earned above the basic rate of tax is exempt from the Calman tax.

Until the Scotland bill is published, we will not know what will happen, because those parties that have come together to talk about their proposals have never come clean about what they really intend. They have never come clean on the cost of the proposals to Scotland.

No, thank you. I am answering your intervention—that is how it works, Ms Alexander. The changes that have been announced by the coalition Government are a perfect example of how changes in the pattern of taxes could reduce the funding for the Parliament post Calman. If we genuinely had power over taxes in this country and could make compensatory adjustments, we could make real differences. Perhaps Labour can explain today how it is going to account for the Calman squeeze and how it can project a budget over the next four years. I will certainly ask Mr Danny Alexander that question at the Finance Committee meeting later today. Everyone who is involved in trying to foist these proposals on Scotland should give us answers.

I would like to consider two points of clarification. First, the reason that we are having this debate is that the Opposition parties have no real  response to John Swinney's excellent budget statement last week. It was particularly clear that the Labour group had no real response to it. Labour members' contributions showed a lack of real understanding or acceptance of the need for unity for the benefit of Scotland. The second point that requires to be clarified yet again is that tax powers have not been removed from the Parliament, as some have suggested. They are in the Scotland Act 1998, which only the Westminster Parliament can amend. I suspect that suggesting that they have been lost would be close to misleading Parliament. That is why I have real issues with Labour's amendment. It says that the Scottish Government has abandoned the Scottish variable rate of tax, but it has not. It goes on to express outrage that "a power given to the Parliament by the people of Scotland in a referendum should be taken away". It has not been taken away. Why, all of a sudden, are the Labour Party and those who support the amendment, their friends the Lib Dems, so concerned about referenda? Why is that suddenly so important when they are willing to shove through the proposals of the Calman commission, which are a major constitutional change, with no referendum? It seems that Labour and the Lib Dems have selective principles on display. There is a concentration on process and a fuss about the cabinet secretary not reporting a change to Parliament. Why then did Labour not tell us that HMRC had mothballed the project? Why did the finance ministers Mr McConnell, Mr McCabe and Mr Kerr not tell us that? In fact, given all the manufactured outrage of Tavish Scott and the collective responsibility that the Lib Dems had for eight years, why did they not tell us that there was a non-functional IT system, which was inherited by John Swinney? Why did they pay £50,000, year in and year out? It seems to me that they had no understanding whatever. The first mention to Parliament of the costs of the system was when Andrew Wilson of the SNP asked in 1999 about administration costs. Jack McConnell's answer—

Is he not? That is a shame. His answer included the phrase "reductions will be made in forward years to reflect the Executive's decision to scale back planned work by the Inland Revenue and the Department of Social Security on preparing for implementation of the Scottish Variable Rate."— [ Official Report, Written Answers , 10 November 1999; S1W-2195.]  So Labour and the Lib Dems were scaling back implementation work then and actively colluding in  the mothballing. I presume that that was because they had no intention of ever using the power. The SNP Government stated in its manifesto that it had no intention of using the power, and rightly so, because it is a regressive tax. Lower-paid workers would be hit hardest. The tax bill of someone on the minimum wage would increase by 15 per cent, while the tax bill of someone earning around £50,000 a year would go up by only 8 per cent.

No, thank you. That is why I was surprised to see my friend Patrick Harvie calling for the tax to be imposed, especially as he said in a debate in September that he regretted "that a form of tax-varying power was designed that makes it very difficult, although perhaps not impossible, to justify using it."— [ Official Report , 9 September 2010; c 28401.]  For the life of me, I cannot see how it is easier to justify using it two months later. Patrick Harvie is not alone. The Calman commission's independent expert group said that "arrangements for implementing the SVR are not in place" and that "the operational detail required to implement the SVR ... remains unresolved". The group also pointed out how using the system would create revenue risks for the Scottish Government because of its inherent instability. The system is expensive, too. The fees that have already been paid and the £7 million that is demanded are only for maintaining the system in a state of readiness. So the question is not why John Swinney refused to pay £7 million to update a system that will not be used, but why Labour and the Liberal Democrats frittered away so much on it. What was bought for Scotland with the £12.4 million? The Inland Revenue gave estimates on the start-up costs for Scottish employers. There would be massive costs to the Scottish budget and to Scottish businesses, all to impose additional taxes on Scottish workers with those on the minimum wage being among the hardest hit. We have been paying fees for the maintenance of something that no one would use because its effects are unpredictable and probably damaging. That seems a bit daft to me. It is the fiscal equivalent of Trident—massively expensive and utterly useless. Let us have a look at reality. The SNP does not wish to raise the basic rate of income tax to the disadvantage of the poorest in our society. However, the Green Party and some members on  the Labour benches want to do that. There are those who support the Calman proposal, but that would not help anyone either, and the worry is that it would make things worse. The only thing that would work is full fiscal responsibility for Scotland. I ask members to reject the Labour amendment and support the SNP motion.

Oh, Patrick!

I am sorry, Presiding Officer. I thought that Patrick Harvie was to speak next, hence my confusion.

It is only in the past few years that I have started to become aware of the "multiple benefits for biodiversity, water and climate"  that the motion notes are inherent in Scotland's peatlands. This evening, I have learned a lot more in addition to what I found out from the excellent IUCN and RSPB briefings. As a bit of an urbanite and someone who was raised in the city, I always thought of peatlands as being in the Highlands, the north or on the islands. I learned otherwise and my awareness rose. My interest was stimulated when I first visited Langlands moss, courtesy of the friends of Langlands moss voluntary group, which was formally constituted in 2006. Under the convenership of Richard Naismith, the group has worked extremely hard, along with South Lanarkshire Council and others, to improve and conserve Langlands moss local nature reserve for the benefit of all. Langlands moss is a lowland raised peat bog that is situated on the southern fringe of the new town of East Kilbride. In 1994, the importance of Langlands moss was recognised and it was decided to restore the bog. The aim was to improve public access and to safeguard the site's long-term future. As part of the restoration, dams were installed to block drains and raise the water level. I think that it was Elaine Murray who spoke about the problem of conifer plantations being located on peat bogs. That was the case with Langlands moss, but the conifer plantation was felled and a boardwalk was built across the bog to allow public access. I suggest to my colleague Bill Wilson that if he comes to Langlands moss near East Kilbride, he will not be knee-deep in water and sphagnum moss Langlands moss was designated as a nature reserve and formally established in 1996, but much has gone on since then. To date, the friends of Langlands moss have been successful in raising a substantial sum of grant aid through the Big Lottery Fund, which has been match funded by a generous contribution from SNH. Other partnerships have been formed with the South Lanarkshire Rural Communities Trust, which financed the provision of materials for path improvements, and the South Lanarkshire criminal justice scheme, which supplied the labour for those path improvements. Kenny MacAskill visited Langlands moss fairly recently to see the work that had been carried out and the work that remains to be done. What has happened at Langlands moss is an example of a community coming together, recognising that it has an extremely precious asset and using a variety of methods to restore that asset for the benefit of the community. There is still a way to go. In the few years since I first visited the reserve, I have already seen a difference in the plant life and the insect life. I say to Bill Wilson that I have not seen otters cavorting  yet, but perhaps that will come. I would love to sit at Langlands moss, with the wind farm in the distance, the high rises down the road and the otters cavorting. That is a lovely picture. On a more serious note, I have recently learned just how urgent it is that Scotland's peatlands are dealt with appropriately. I know that the Government has already done work on that—a variety of peatland restoration policies and funding measures are in place, which the minister will no doubt tell us more about. Aside from all the technicalities and the science of what we must do for future generations, we should recognise the potential value of our peatlands for the current generation. I have seen parties of schoolchildren at Langlands moss learning about nature and the wonderful resource that they have in their midst, which will open their imaginations and their minds to the bigger issues around our peatlands and the central part that Scotland has to play in the world and the way that it wants to be. The process of restoring and looking after our peatlands is of benefit to society now and will be of benefit in the future. Our peatlands are precious and we should hold them very dear.

I read Andy Kerr's motion with a sense of, "Oh, no. Here we go again." We have heard the rant before—as always, against the background of Labour's cynical and uncosted promises, which were this time outlined at the Labour Party conference. We had already heard of Labour's plans to increase council tax; now, Labour has announced its spending plans. In these times of cuts that are being imposed by Whitehall, they would mean an additional tax burden on Scotland of some £3,000 per family over the four years of the next Parliament. Can Andy Kerr tell us what those income tax rises—pre and post-Calman—would mean for families in Scotland? They would not be progressive tax rises, because they would hit only those who pay the basic rate. I note, too, the warning in the motion that "the mistakes of the Thatcher years are being repeated" by the UK Government. I cannot help but think back to the spring when Alistair Darling, the then Labour Chancellor of the Exchequer, admitted that under a future Labour Government there would be cuts deeper and tougher than Margaret Thatcher's  cuts of the 1980s. Furthermore, he planned to keep cutting for a full seven years. I condemn the savagery of the Conservative-Liberal Democrat Government, but we should never forget that the Labour way is to take credit in the boom years and to run for cover when an admission of responsibility is required. The mistakes of the Thatcher years are indeed being repeated—by Labour, by the Conservatives and by the Liberal Democrats. Denis Healey once promised to "squeeze the rich until the pips squeak." Labour's intention and the Conservatives' action is to squeeze our services until the public squeak, and to keep on squeezing.

Labour has always insisted on a non-progressive council tax and we have had to ameliorate the effects of that on families. If Labour members had truly cared about families in Scotland, they would have backed the proposal for a local income tax, which would be fair and progressive. The cuts started under Labour and have been continued by the current coalition Government. It is interesting that when the benefits system changes were announced, Labour's big concern was for the higher earners who would lose out in child benefit. If it is also concerned about the loss of universality, how come that does not extend to the universality that was introduced by the SNP Government? In Scotland, Labour has abandoned the ethos of collectivism and the common weal: for the Labour group in this chamber, universality is conditional. That is a measure of how far the Labour Party has shifted from the labour movement, which once espoused aspirational core values. How times change. On "The Politics Show Scotland", Andy Kerr said that "we've got areas of Scotland which are deprived, which will never come back up again." What a lack of ambition, and what an admission by the party that controlled urban Scotland locally for decades and which controlled Scotland nationally for 13 years in its most recent stretch of government. Scotland trusted Labour for far too long. Thankfully, with an SNP Government, Scotland now sees alternatives. I hear Labour politicians—members of the party that walked us blindfolded into this economic mess—mocking other nations for having to make  cuts. We have heard them talk disparagingly and, sadly, somewhat gleefully about an "arc of insolvency" that includes Ireland, Iceland and Norway. That is not only crass; it is a faulty analysis. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development expects those countries to recover from recession more quickly than the UK. The figures already show that they are moving in the right direction, and each of them has a better economic future than the UK, to which Scotland is currently tied. The UK is the only one of these nations that has a balance-of-trade deficit. Moreover, its growth rate is exceeded by that of Ireland, and Norway has exports that are worth almost three times as much as those of the UK. The arc of prosperity is now the arc of recovery, and Scotland should join that arc. Scotland should take control of its own finances so that it can join those independent countries, which best serve their populations. The Calman proposals, which have been discussed many times here already, will not serve Scotland well or give us any powers to address the country's real and deep-seated problems. We know about the gap that will appear because of the effect of Calman on Barnett and that there will be no short-term borrowing powers to help us to manage Scotland's finances for the duration of that gap. Those are disincentives to implementation of the Calman recommendations. We need to be in a position to take responsibility for our economy and taxation system and we need to have the freedom to alter the system to Scotland's benefit. Last night, I heard businessmen talk of the benefit to Scotland of our country's being able to deal with corporation tax in order to give investors incentives to be here. No matter where they hail from or how well intentioned, a UK Chancellor of the Exchequer can never set a course that is uniquely to Scotland's benefit. Scotland needs more than that. We need the economic freedom to move in a different direction and to provide a different set of economic and fiscal alternatives and incentives. Scotland needs the measures that John Swinney has set out in his amendment. I commend it to the chamber.

I want to talk about a specific element of caring that Jackie Baillie touched on in her contribution: the thousands of older people who continue to care in their own homes for adult sons and daughters with a learning disability. The figures suggest that approximately 20 per cent of people with learning disabilities live in the family home and are cared for by family members over the age of 65. In the document that we are debating today, the profile of carers section notes that "For those undertaking a caring role within the household, over 70% of carers have been providing care for over 5 years". The reality is that, within that 70 per cent, some will have been caring for those they love with learning difficulties for between 30 and 50 years—indeed, in some cases, towards 60 years. That is a lifetime of devotion, commitment and hard work. In my area, the Murray Owen Carers Group includes such carers with a lifetime's experience of all these issues. Two of the members are, of course, Madge Clark and Jeanette Kelly, who many members know for their work with Enable Scotland and their awareness-raising petition to the Parliament's Public Petitions Committee in 2004. That work has made it clear that this group of parent carers has specific and unique needs that are being neither recognised nor supported properly at present. As Enable Scotland noted: "This is a generation of older carers who have a lifelong responsibility for looking after sons and daughters." Great physical and mental pressure is involved in doing that. Enable Scotland goes on to say that  "This is the first generation of parents of people who have learning disabilities whose sons and daughters will outlive them." Those words describe the fear and anxiety about what will happen in future. Older family carers have little peace of mind as they continue to care for their adult relatives. I draw members' attention to motion S3M-7086, which I drew up a couple of months ago. Although it is in my name, it was jointly developed by me, Johann Lamont and Hugh O'Donnell. The motion "welcomes the Older Families Charter launched by Enable Scotland, Quarriers, Edinburgh Development Group and the Learning Disability Alliance Scotland". The charter for change "outlines 5 simple steps that can be taken to make life easier for this group of people and to plan for the long term needs of older carers and the needs of those that they care for." First, the charter states: "Local government should collect accurate information on the numbers, needs and location of older carers and adults with learning disabilities living in the family home". That is the way to get good planning. Secondly, "Every adult with a learning disability living with an older carer should be able to have a person-centred plan that supports them in leading full lives, making and keeping friends and keeping in touch with their families if they leave home." Thirdly, "In each local authority area there should be a dedicated officer for older families to provide local information, support access to services, identify their needs and plan for how they will change over time." Fourthly, "Every adult with a learning disability living with an older carer should be able to have an Individual Emergency Plan which identifies what could be done in specific crisis situations." Fifthly, on the subject of advocacy services, which Mary Scanlon mentioned earlier, the charter states: "Every family with older carers across Scotland should have the opportunity to access independent advocacy services." Some local authorities are already taking some of those steps. In fact, thanks to the work of the Murray Owen centre and groups such as that across South Lanarkshire, and of course the commitment of many officers in South Lanarkshire Council, it is already meeting the charter in theory, but it is continuously striving to improve its practice. I mention the difference between theory and practice deliberately. Often, the theories are good and we can tick the boxes and say, "Yes, we are doing fine," but it is the practice that matters. It is the quality underneath the theory that is  important, so it should be continually monitored and assessed, and people should be listened to. The strategy states that carers should be "equal partners in the planning ... of ... support." That is essential, as is carers being supported "in a personalised way". It seems to me that the charter for change is little to ask. I hope that all local authorities will sign up to it and that our Government will endorse it as part of its own carers charter.

To ask the Scottish Government how it supports the Scots language. (S3O-11683)

I thank the minister for that. Is she aware that in the early 16th century Gavin Douglas translated Virgil's "The Aeneid" into Scots and that that was the first translation of such a major Latin work into any of the languages of these isles? Will she join me in welcoming the further edition of that great work, launched by Scottish Language Dictionaries and now online, which was started by John Law and finished by Caroline Macafee following John's untimely passing earlier this year? Will she encourage as far as possible recognition of the value of our historical and current Scots tongue?

The skills strategy refresh is welcome and necessary in the current economic climate. On my initial reading of the document, the part that I found most welcome was the intended further simplification of the skills system, to which other members have referred. As with so much within our society's constructs, I hear time and again about duplication of function and regulation and about the bureaucratic brick wall that well-intentioned employers and potential employees often slam into. I take on board the minister's point that one reason for that is the difficulty of working across agencies and indeed across borders. The strategy mentions promoting leadership development in Scottish businesses. Of course, we should all be doing whatever we can to help and promote Scottish businesses, thus allowing further training and employment and a contribution to Scotland's economic future. Again, however, there are issues. The public sector procurement portal was a welcome development. It was planned that the portal would lead to simplification of systems and ease of use and access. I understand that it is being monitored, as any new system should be, but I ask the Government to do all that it can within the constraints of Scots law and European procurement legislation to ensure that opportunities for employment in Scotland are  maximised and that recognition is given to the value of local procurement and its ability to help to regenerate communities. That is surely a sensible way in which to support efforts to retain and grow the skills base. Some sectors also face the burden of professional indemnity fees in relation to public sector contracting. I am told that that is a growing problem throughout the country. Again, in such times, I stress the necessity for all who are involved in public procurement to make sure that no disadvantage is inadvertently created for small and medium-sized enterprises. As well as supporting our businesses to allow them to support potential employees, the Government has given much to support Scotland's colleges, and they, in turn, pass on that support. For example, South Lanarkshire College in East Kilbride hosted skillbuild last year and its students won medals in that competition. This year, again, students at the college won construction medals when the competition was held in Wales. Students in our colleges are trained to a high standard and both South Lanarkshire College and the students should be applauded for their efforts and congratulated. South Lanarkshire College recently retrained 400 former Freescale Semiconductor employees in East Kilbride through the partnership action for continuing employment programme, renewing a current workforce with new skills to take advantage of new opportunities. When we talk about skills and training, we sometimes focus on young people and fall into the trap of forgetting about retraining. Lifelong learning is important. It is only a few months ago, too, that I held a members' business debate about the Aurora house, which has been developed by Dawn Homes and South Lanarkshire College. The need for homes and skills for the future is recognised by the Government's refreshed skills strategy. The briefing paper from Scotland's Colleges states that colleges are at the heart of their local communities and play a major role in social inclusion. That is true. Folks from all walks of life attend our colleges, which have an innate understanding of the needs and requirements of their local areas. The building of community builds towards economic and social success, and the colleges in Lanarkshire collectively work towards that. We should encourage our colleges, but we should never be complacent when it comes to good practice. We should always look at what others do, contrasting and comparing, and we should never be shy of investigating what works elsewhere. I have a particular interest in our built heritage and therefore design and construction skills. One element of that is our traditional building trades.  There has been a fairly recent resurgence of interest in such trades because of the recognition, for example, that sensitive rehabilitation of older housing stock is both cost effective and sustainable. Research demonstrates that older buildings can perform well in energy terms—for example, because they have natural insulation—and rehabilitation can be a natural way of recycling building materials. Whether it is our castles, our tenement housing or our dry-stane dykes, specialised traditional skills are required to preserve our heritage, so we must preserve those skills. Some other European nations hold their traditional skills, and therefore their traditional skills practitioners, in great esteem. That does not apply only to construction trades, of course. I am grateful to Mr James Simpson, heritage architect, for pointing out to me the compagnons du devoir system in France, under which young apprentices and journeyfolk train in French traditional skills. It is a rigorous system that takes a minimum of seven years. It involves a lot of off-the-job training, mentoring, the systematic use of older and retired workers, and the management of movement and change through a network of colleges. Perhaps we can learn something from that. Scotland still has lots of active trades guilds, for example, with a massive reservoir of skills and experience in those workers who are slightly more developed in years. Those skills and that experience are ready to be tapped for the benefit of young apprentices and trainees and the on-going benefit of Scotland. Can we look towards making that link and using that talent and experience? We have opportunities in the short, medium and long term to tool up our country for the coming years. We should take full advantage of those opportunities and, as so many others have said today, ensure that Scotland is indeed ready to face the future.

Does the cabinet secretary recognise the value of the voluntary sector in dealing with dementia cases? For example, East Kilbride dementia carers group has come to an arrangement with South Lanarkshire Council on the use of direct payments so that care is personalised on the choice of the dementia sufferers and their family on what is best for their wellbeing. Is that something that she would encourage other local authorities to investigate?

I welcome Richard Demarco to the public gallery of Scotland's Parliament. [ Applause .] I thank all members in the chamber this evening who signed the motion, which celebrates the fact that Richard Demarco became 80 years young in July. The number of signatures is a mark of the respect that members of the Scottish Parliament have for Richard Demarco and his work. I proffer apologies from Patricia Ferguson, who was upset when she found out that it would be impossible for her to be here for the debate. I found it difficult to write the motion. How does one condense achievements such as Richard Demarco's into a paragraph? Similarly, how can I do justice to Richard Demarco and his career in just a few minutes in this debate? I am sure that all members feel the same as I do.  One could list just a few milestones in Richard Demarco's career. He launched the Traverse theatre and gallery in 1963, and he opened the Richard Demarco gallery in 1966. One can mention his long tenure as director of contemporary visual arts exhibitions for the Edinburgh international festival, his directorship of Sean Connery's Scottish International Education Trust, and the establishment of the Demarco European Art Foundation and the incredible Demarco archives. During his long career, which continues, Richard Demarco has been at the forefront of Scotland in Europe. He has promoted cross-cultural links, taking Scottish art abroad and bringing other European artists here. He has not done so in a timid or safe manner. This is a man who has always taken what others would perceive to be risks—he would perceive his actions to be the right and necessary things to do. His contribution to the understanding of European art between 1968 and 1989, through his journeys behind the iron curtain and his related lecture work, is immense. His drawings, paintings and prints are held in more than 1,200 collections. One could also list the honours that have been bestowed on Richard Demarco, aside from his honorary fellowships: chevalier de l'ordre des arts et des lettres de France, commander of the British Empire, Polish gold order of merit and the freedom of Łódź, and professor emeritus of European cultural studies at Kingston University. Of course, I am particularly pleased that he is a fellow cavaliere della Repubblica Italiana. Richard Demarco is a Scot, a Scots-Italian, a European and an internationalist whose worth is recognised the world over. His current work with the foundation and archive has been recognised by the University of Zürich and Washington State University, as well as by educational institutions from Blackhall primary school in Edinburgh to the Rose Bruford College of Theatre and Performance in Kent. That brings me neatly to the educational resource that is the archive, most of which is currently housed in Craigcrook castle in Edinburgh. The castle might be said to be an ideal location. It has had a great history, not least during the 19th century, when it was used for literary soirées attended by Scott, Dickens, Eliot and Hans Christian Andersen. It was the home of Francis Jeffrey, editor of the Edinburgh Review . I used the word "currently", because Craigcrook is just one of the locations that has been used for the archive over the years. I am in awe of the tenacity and dedication of Richard Demarco and his team in keeping this national resource together. The archive has not benefited from local or national funding but has been maintained by  people who have a love of art and who recognise its importance to Scotland and to the family of nations to which Scotland belongs. Richard says that art is a language that links everything. The archive is a unique resource that links Scotland and Europe through many artists: Abakanowicz, Mach, Beuys, Maclennan, Yule and countless others. What a gift to the Scottish nation. What an opportunity for a national institution to cherish and maintain. It is sad that if we are to keep the archive housed it might be necessary to sell some of its assets—unless something is done. I am glad that the Minister for Culture and External Affairs acknowledged the archive's importance and worth when she visited Craigcrook recently, by assigning officers to look into the funding of archivists. I am sure that she recognises the importance of keeping the Demarco archive in Scotland and I look forward to hearing her response to the debate. Richard Demarco might be only 80 years young, but he should be able to devote himself to promoting and enjoying the archive, rather than having to spend so much time raising money to maintain it. When Richard Demarco is honoured later this year by the opening of the Royal Scottish Academy exhibition that will mark his 80th birthday, the collection at Craigcrook will be complementary to the exhibition at the national gallery. I hope that some security for the archive can be achieved now that it has received long-overdue recognition. I urge everyone here and beyond to attend the RSA exhibition, which opens at the end of November and runs through to January. I also urge everyone to visit Craigcrook castle and the imminent exhibition of artists associated with the history of the Traverse gallery, the Demarco gallery and the Demarco European Art Foundation from the 1960s to 2010. I had to take a deep breath to say that long title, which reflects Richard Demarco's long career. It was difficult to begin this speech, and it is difficult to end it. I have already made it clear how highly I regard Richard Demarco in a professional sense, but my motivation for requesting this debate to honour his birthday was personal as much as professional. He is quite simply one of the most inspiring and delightful human beings I have ever had the pleasure of knowing and spending time with. My respect for him is immense. He has travelled many roads. May he travel many more in his search for Meikle Seggie.

I declare an interest as an honorary fellow of the Royal Incorporation of Architects in Scotland. To ask the Scottish Government how it supports architecture. (S3O-11330)

I thank the minister for that detailed answer. Does she accept that the value of architecture to our economy and culture is often understated? Does she agree that we should, wherever possible, ensure fair representation of Scottish architectural practices in contributing to our built environment and in genuine place making?

I know that the minister is aware of the new jobs that have been created in the Dalzell steel works in Motherwell, which is in my area, and at Clydebridge in Cambuslang, which is represented  by my colleague Sandra White. There are high hopes for growth in the renewables sector and a projected increase in the demand for strengthened tempered steel for wind turbines. Will the minister work with both companies, and with Skills Development Scotland, to ensure that appropriate support, including apprenticeships, is provided to assist future expansion in our steel industry?

Does the minister recall that when the Labour Party in this Parliament extended the right to buy, many co-operatives that were not fully mutual felt obliged to change their rules so that they could become charitable? Now we have Labour's Calman proposals, which will disadvantage fully mutual co-operatives. Does the minister agree that the mutual sector in Scotland has suffered a double whammy from the Labour Party?

Will the member take an intervention?

rose—

I will focus mainly on an issue that has been overlooked for far too long by UK Governments and previous Administrations in Scotland: housing co-operatives. However, first I will briefly talk about land. Some time ago, it was part of my work to identify sites for new housing in Argyll and Bute. It never ceased to amaze me how difficult it was to get approval for housing developments in communities that had high housing need, even when land was apparently in abundance. The Government has taken action to speed up the planning process,  which will help, but we should go further and review the fiscal and legal penalties for landowners who hold developable land off the market, disregarding the wider interests of the community. I was pleased to read the discussion pieces that the Chartered Institute of Housing published. I declare an interest: I am a fellow of the institute. In its discussion pieces, the CIH explored difficulties to do with housing finance in the United Kingdom, which Ross Finnie mentioned. Its points about resource availability are important in the context of the massive cuts in budget that the Scottish Parliament faces, which will reduce our ability to deliver for our communities, including on the provision of much-needed new housing. The cuts flow directly from UK Government action to reduce the public sector deficit, and the CIH discussion pieces remind us that, despite Labour's 13 years in power, the UK still uses a definition of public expenditure that counts more housing expenditure in public sector net borrowing than is the case in most of the European countries with whose deficits the UK's is being compared. The CIH has campaigned on the issue for years. The previous UK Government understood the issue at an intellectual level but chose to do nothing about it, which has a bearing on the impending cuts. Perhaps the minister will raise the issue with the current UK Government, to ascertain whether there can be movement on it. I move on to the role of co-operative and mutual models in delivering good-quality housing. After a discussion in the Scottish Parliament cross-party group on co-operatives, the minister and I visited a housing co-op in Easterhouse to meet representatives of the sector. It is clear that a great deal can be done in Scotland and in Westminster to strengthen the role of housing co-ops. It is worth recalling that the Monks co-operative commission, which Tony Blair established and which reported in 2001, said: "There is currently no legal framework in UK housing law in which rights of occupancy of residential property can arise from membership of a democratic mutual provider." The absence of a legal framework for co-operative housing is part of a wider neglect of the mutual sector in the UK. Since the Monks commission reported, some of the most significant developments in the legal framework have been taken through Westminster through private members' bills. How can we expect wider society to take co-operative and mutual models seriously, when Governments seem so uninterested in their operation? Mary Mulligan had a go at the minister about housing associations; I find puzzling and shameful Labour Governments' neglect of the mutual sector and, in particular, co-operative housing.  The sector has suffered from a serious lack of backing from Government and it has faced a number of obstacles—intended or unintended—to its growth. There is the unhelpful division between fully mutual and so-called non-mutual co-operatives, which appears to be driven by the tax regime but feeds through to all aspects of regulation. Government-supported mechanisms for rented housing and owner occupation have historically inhibited the development of mixed-tenure co-operatives, and differing treatment of housing providers has disadvantaged co-operatives that deal with people in housing need compared with providers that are registered as charities. As the minister knows, an advance since devolution has been the Office of the Scottish Charity Regulator's decision to allow housing co-operatives to register as charities. He will also be aware, as many members are, that the approach is threatened by the Calman proposals. I would welcome his comments on the matter. A recurring theme in the many debates that there have been on housing policy has been the need for communities to be empowered to make choices about how they want their housing to be provided and run. People who have wanted to choose the co-operative model have found that the obstacles are far too difficult to overcome, so their choice has been limited. In my experience, few communities are more empowered than communities that have a well-functioning housing co-operative. It is a pity that, after so many years of Labour administration in Scotland and in Westminster, we do not have more housing co-operatives in Scotland. The minister has acknowledged the need. For the first time in the Scottish Parliament, housing co-operatives have been mentioned as a viable proposition in discussion papers on housing. I remember a time far back when I was a member of a parliamentary committee with responsibility for housing and I tried to get co-operatives recognised in legislation, only to be voted down by Labour members.

And Liberals, of course. I almost forgot about them. I thank Mrs Marwick. I ask the minister to consider what can be done to include a real co-operative option in Scotland's housing future.

To ask the Scottish Government what progress has been made with its science strategy. (S3O-11256)

Does the cabinet secretary recognise the value of organisations such as the Scottish Universities Environmental Research Centre in East Kilbride, which undertakes groundbreaking scientific research and work in its field of operation? Does he agree that such organisations should be well supported and encouraged to disseminate their knowledge and experience as part of the Government's science strategy?

Thank you very much, Presiding Officer.

Yes—could I have some order, please, Mr Gibson? As we have heard, we face a difficult time ahead. That is one thing on which we have achieved consensus across the parties.

Lord Foulkes seems to think that we are not facing difficult times, but there will be £83 billion of spending cuts over the next four years, two thirds of which, of course, were planned by the previous Labour Administration. Scotland needs to take its share of those cuts because of the constitutional settlement under which we live.

No, I will not. We also need to take our share because we have suffered from mismanagement by previous Governments in the UK. However, we have the "Independent Budget Review". I am a member of the Finance Committee, and we were privileged to have a long discussion about the review the other day with Crawford Beveridge and Neil McIntosh. It was an interesting discussion. We have, in the report, a weighty tome that contains a lot of good ideas. I am glad that the review was commissioned and I had hoped that it would have created much more space to talk about some of the issues that are discussed in it, rather than some of the yah-boo stuff that we have heard.

I am used to that kind of vacuous nonsense from Lord Foulkes. It does not warrant a response. All we have heard from the Labour members is the cry of, "Why no budget? Why no budget?" The cabinet secretary laid out the reasons well in his opening speech. In the current situation, it would have been irresponsible and nigh on impossible to come up with a budget before we have the firm plans that are due in October.

No, I will not. The situation is far too uncertain and it would not be fair to lay in front of the Scottish people a budget that would have to be changed later on. Let us consider the way in which budgets are brought together in the approved annually managed expenditure and the departmental expenditure limits that John Swinney, as Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth, has to deal with. Those are variable at the moment because of the country's current financial situation.

No, I will not. A succession of Opposition members are whining away on television and in the chamber about the fact that they cannot do anything until John Swinney comes up with his budget for their discussion. I suggest that they cannot do anything because they do not have a clue what they are doing and do not have an original thought or idea among them.

I suggest that Mr Purvis speak to his colleagues south of the border and ask them why they are delaying. It would be much better for Scotland if we could get some firm proposals from them.

I suggest that the only reasonable man in the chamber at the moment is Mr Swinney, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth. [ Interruption .]

Despite Lewis Macdonald saying on "Newsnight" last night that the Labour Party cannot do a thing until it hears from the SNP, Iain Gray saying "I know nothing," on "Newsnight" and Andy Kerr making up policy on the hoof—all of a sudden, we know what Labour will do with the Barnett consequentials on health—there are a lot of commitments from the Labour team.

No. I have come up with a list of Labour commitments. The party has made plans for what it wants to spend money on. Unfortunately I do not have time to read out all the commitments that it has made in parliamentary motions that have been debated in the chamber, but the figure amounts to £1.2495 billion extra.

We are not talking about manifestos; we are talking about the things that Labour members have said they want money to be spent on now while we are in the worst financial crisis that this country has seen for a long time. I will say the figure again: £1.2495 billion. I know that I am running out of time, but I would like to talk a wee bit more about what the debate is about: the independent budget review. The other day, Mr Crawford Beveridge said that he had hoped that, as a result of the discussions about the reform of public services, we would get the space for conversations to take place about the future of public services. He also talked about the opportunity for a new kind of politics and said that now is the time to do that. In our cabinet secretary, we have someone who is willing to consider a new kind of politics and to look for consensus. Sadly, the tired old parties are hooked on Calman and are unwilling to move forward. It really is time for a new politics. I urge the other parties to join the SNP in creating it.

What measures were brought forward on that issue during the eight years of the Labour-Lib Dem Administration? I remember many people campaigning quite hard on the time bar issue.

I will, in the short time that we have today, look ahead—while recognising the current financial situation that faces Scotland—to an extremely important issue for the future: how we truly reform the delivery of our public services to the benefit of all, particularly those who receive them. I found much of the committee's deliberations and the evidence that it received interesting and stimulating. I was pleased that those deliberations were, and continue to be, underpinned by joint working with Scotland's Futures Forum to set the framework for honest discussion and—if I may paraphrase—to recognise that there are no sacred cows. The evidence that the committee took was mixed, but some witnesses recognised that out of current adversity comes opportunity. I particularly commend those who spoke about the personalisation of services and long-term thinking coupled with preventative resourcing and systems thinking, thereby challenging the status quo, centrally imposed targets and so-called received wisdom. There are good examples out there. I am pleased that South Lanarkshire Council—which is local to me—has agreed with East Kilbride dementia group that it is in the best interests of the group's clients to use a direct payments system to allow the necessary services to be provided by its agency of choice. That is innovative thinking. I was also pleased to learn today from Long Term Conditions Alliance Scotland that the self-management fund, which the Scottish Government funds, already supports 56 projects throughout Scotland, giving individuals ownership of the management of their lives and conditions. That, too, is innovative thinking, and we could do with more of it from the Parliament right through all our public services. As I said at the start of my speech, I wish to look ahead and deal with the realities that face us in a very difficult financial situation. I had hoped that all speakers would do the same, then I read Labour's amendment. Mr Whitton wants a draft budget by September. That is impossible. Danny Alexander made a categoric statement at the Finance Committee the other day that if John Swinney asked for figures from Westminster at the beginning of September, they would not be provided. Mr Whitton heard that, because he asked the question.  In the light of that response, Mr Whitton expanded his amendment to say "or budget scenarios". All of a sudden, he is into scenario planning, so let us consider the best and worst-case scenarios. The best case is that there will be no cuts, money due to Scotland will be delivered, the VAT rise will be rescinded, fiscal autonomy will be introduced and independence will be recognised as good for Scotland.

No thank you. Let us consider the worst case, which is, "I'm afraid to tell you there's no money left," confirming the words in Liam Byrne's letter. Labour seems content to budget on the basis of no figures or information. No wonder we now have the biggest ever peacetime deficit and Scotland suffered financial mismanagement until May 2007. I trust that the Parliament will reject Labour's ridiculous amendment, look to the future, read the report that the Finance Committee compiled, follow closely the committee's future work in this regard and agree the motion in Andrew Welsh's name.

Labour cut Scotland's funding and the Lib Dems and Conservatives are cutting it even further. Scottish growth is seriously threatened by all the UK parties. Meanwhile, as the cabinet secretary said, the latest "Government Expenditure and Revenue Scotland" report shows that Scotland's public finances generate far more income than we spend—a Scottish surplus, as opposed to a UK deficit. Does the cabinet secretary agree that now, more than ever, the case is made for Scottish independence?

To ask the Scottish Government whether it will support the provision of resources in the Scots language as part of the curriculum for excellence. (S3O-11005)

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the good work that the cross-party group on the Scots language has carried out over the years. It has an education sub-committee, which includes education professionals. Will the group's views be taken into account on what parts of the curriculum would be of best use for the Scots language and which organisations would be best placed to help in that provision?

I thank Margaret Mitchell for bringing the issue to the chamber tonight. It is a worthwhile topic. I am sorry that, unlike her, I was unable to attend the launch of the there for them campaign, which I understand was very successful. The award that was given by the East Kilbride News was well deserved. That was the first time that I had come across SAVI and Annmarie Campbell, its founder. I have since visited the office in East Kilbride and, like Margaret Mitchell, I have been impressed by the work that is being done there and the absolute commitment of the volunteers. I do not have much to add to what Margaret Mitchell said—she has covered all the bases—but I will raise some specific issues. It must be borne in mind that it is only comparatively recently that society has started to discuss openly the fact that child abuse happens within and outwith families and the huge psychological effect that it has on the victims and those who are close to them. It is quite daunting for families to have to deal with such an issue on their own or with help from social work departments, health boards and institutions. Therefore, it is very important that there is now an organisation in Lanarkshire that is staffed by people who have had direct experience of dealing with such sensitive issues. I was hugely impressed by the informality that is apparent at SAVI and the knowledge and commitment of the volunteers. I understand that there are now 23 volunteers on a waiting list for training, which shows the recognition of the issues among people who want to help and do the best that they possibly can. I was impressed by the manner in which SAVI deals with clients and those who come along for a chat. The service is described as non-directive but holistic, and it aims to create an atmosphere in which people almost feel at home and have  confidence in those who are counselling them and offering support. I was interested to learn about the effect that such abuse can have on people, and the way in which it manifests itself, whether that is through eating disorders, substance or alcohol abuse or self-harm. I learned about the importance of practical things such as housing: where people stay and the type of support that they get. The befriending element is important, because everyone who has been through a traumatic experience needs friends, and it can take quite a while for someone to build up those relationships again when they have a natural distrust of those around them. SAVI has noted some key issues that require to be addressed. One major issue, to which Margaret Mitchell referred, is the time that elapses between an incident being reported and the start of the trial process. I understand that the Crown Office has been trying to address the matter, but the reality is that those cases are simply not being fast-tracked. Court processes need to be managed to ensure that people feel confident in working their way through the system. The buddying element of what SAVI does is extremely important in that regard. I learned about schools, and how difficult it is for someone who has been abused in that way to try to fit back into the school system when their whole way of thinking about life has changed. I see that time has moved on quickly—there is so much to say on this subject. I will finish by saying that although we talk a great deal about the voluntary sector—the third sector, as it is sometimes called—being very precious in dealing with various issues, the experience of groups such as SAVI is very important in dealing with this particular issue. SAVI is the only service in South Lanarkshire that offers this type of support. I would like the health board and the local authority to recognise the value of such a service, and to have detailed discussions with the volunteers at SAVI on how we can all move forward in the best interests of those who need this type of service.

It is now generally recognised that the Calman proposals as published are not in Scotland's interest. To what extent has the intergovernmental debate moved on? Is it clear which of the original Calman recommendations the UK Government supports?

We have talked much about the chaos of the recent upheaval and the fall-out that we will have to face for some time to come, so I thought that we should take a moment or two to acknowledge some of the people and organisations in Scotland's financial sector who have done well. Less than three months ago, my colleague Jamie Hepburn led a members' business debate on and praised the work of the Airdrie Savings Bank. I echoed that praise in my speech that day, and I will add to it now. Jim Lindsay, the chief executive of the Airdrie Savings Bank, has done an excellent job of keeping that bank on the straight and narrow. He and his staff have stuck to their guns over the years, and they maintain the proud traditions of Scottish banking—prudence, care and good relationships with customers. Credit unions, too, have forged fine paths of fiscal rectitude, and their work should be encouraged, while we seek to maintain proper regulation, so that they do not head off the same cliff as the American savings and loan institutions. The success of credit unions should encourage us to examine other models of mutuality. What about the return of the Trustee Savings Bank, or truly mutual building societies? It was those proud traditions of banking that served us well in the past. Surely, as Iain Smith said, that is the purpose of banking, rather than the pursuit of profit purely for shareholder gain. I contend that things might have been markedly different had those guiding principles been carried through in the regulation of the UK's financial services industry. Our banking system was  severely damaged by the decision in 1997 to establish the reactive FSA. It was and is an organisation unsuited to the task that it was handed, lacking in-depth knowledge of the bodies that it was to regulate and lacking the respect of the client institutions. The collapse of England's Northern Rock bank was precipitated by the first major run on a bank in the UK for more than a century. Those who were running banks such as Northern Rock—including the chief executives and non-executive boards of RBS and HBOS, global banks based in Scotland—were swimming with the tide, viewing banking as the pursuit of profit and the delivery of results for shareholders. They did it remarkably well. However, that lack of responsibility should have been countered by the regulators, so that swimming with the tide did not have to mean drowning at the end. They failed. The lack of regulatory skill did much damage to our banks. It is noticeable, however, that the Clydesdale Bank, for example, chuntered along quite well throughout the storm—it is part of the National Australia Bank group, and Australian and Canadian banks remained fairly well regulated throughout, avoiding the worst of the damage that banks in other nations suffered. Japanese banks also did better than might have been expected, because their regulation had been tightened up in the wake of the collapse of the 1990s. We might have thought that lessons had been learned. When the committee began its inquiry, it noted that it wanted to consider how to ensure that such a crisis could not be allowed to happen again. There will always be banking crises of one sort or another, but we should take steps to ensure that such a crisis cannot be precipitated by such irresponsibility. We must make it perfectly clear to the banks that consider themselves to be too globally interconnected and too big to be allowed to fail that their current subsidy-junkie status is a temporary one-off. We should take some financial services under our control. Discussions are going on around the world, among nations, between continents and internally within states. It is important that we make the sector work for the greater good of society at home as well as internationally. SNP members have long favoured the introduction of a currency exchange tax and I am pleased that the move towards a Tobin tax continues. Some 350 economists, including Joseph Stiglitz and Jeffrey Sachs, recently wrote to leaders of the G20 nations to suggest that such a mechanism be given recognition. We need a better model for Scotland's banking industry and financial sector in general. We also need to consider the worth of the banks, insurance companies and other financial services in the  sector. With help from the Scottish Government, the sector has begun to grow again. There are 1,500 new jobs in Glasgow and Edinburgh with Tesco Personal Finance and the insurance company, esure. More than half of Scotland's financial services companies will recruit this year and three quarters of them are optimistic about the future. There is a lot to change and improve in Scotland. There is a lot to put right. Of course there is; no one denies that. However, Scotland has the strength to rebuild and to become stronger. There is a lot of good stuff going on in Scotland and we should praise the people who are doing the good stuff and help them to build on that success. We should hold on to the fact that Scotland can come out of this UK mess stronger than she was when she went in. The committee's report is valuable and worth while. It is a great resource and I commend the hard work of everyone who contributed to it.

Earlier, I talked about the tax proposals in the final Calman report, so could the Labour members point to where the independent group of experts and eminent economists that Wendy Alexander referred to on television actually recommended such a proposal? I cannot find it anywhere on public record.

The motions and amendments that are before us today are a mark of how the political landscape of the United Kingdom has altered and the change that has taken place within the UK and its constituent nations. It is worth discussing the relationships between the UK Government and the Scottish Government, so the debate is welcome. The political landscape here at home certainly changed in May 2007, when the Scottish National  Party formed the Government. However, it should be noted that change also took place in Wales, where a governing coalition was formed between Plaid Cymru and the Labour Party, and in Northern Ireland, where the Democratic Unionist Party and Sinn Fein share power. Those arrangements were a big shift in democratic political representation because, for the first time, not all parts of the UK were ruled by the same political party. Since 1999, it was often said that the true mark of devolution in Scotland would be when a different party from the London party was in control, and no doubt the same was said about the Welsh Assembly. I believe that the shift in UK politics started then, and that that change continues, with the coalition Government in Westminster and the proposed changes in the electoral system. After all, to paraphrase, this is a process, not an event. I welcome the respect agenda that is being talked about in relation to relationships between our Government and the UK Government, and I trust that the joint ministerial committee system will now work with an ethos of mutual respect for ministers of all Administrations. Unfortunately, the concordat agreements for JMCs had been allowed to collect dust in the first years of devolution, with only the Europe JMC being active—and I use that term loosely—when the SNP formed the Government in 2007. I was pleased to see that, after much work by this and the other devolved Administrations, a revised memorandum of understanding was agreed in March 2010, with dispute resolution aspects extending to financial issues. That is extremely important, particularly now, when we are considering the implementation of recommendations from the Commission on Scottish Devolution.

That is a good point. I hope that the new Administration will take on board the views of practically everyone in this chamber and discuss the matter with respect and dignity, in the spirit of co-operation that I have been discussing. On the financial aspects of the Calman plan, I have serious concerns about the taxation proposals, which many people have also expressed in this chamber and elsewhere.  I note that Wendy Alexander commented on television on Tuesday evening that the taxation proposal in the Calman report was made by "the most eminent economists in Scotland". That intrigued me because nowhere in either of the reports that were made to Calman by the independent expert group can I find the proposal to devolve income tax and adjust the block grant along the lines that Calman finally came up with. Certainly, the general principle of assigned taxes was discussed and reported on by the group, but the proposition of the 10p variable rate and the block grant adjustment was not dealt with. I hope that the Labour group can clear that matter up for us today and point us to the publication in which "the most eminent economists in Scotland" made that particular proposal, or where we might find it in the public record. Indeed, in his paper, which was jointly produced with Professor Scott, Professor Hughes-Hallett, who actually sat on the expert panel for Calman, stated that the then UK Government's proposals were "defective in economic terms" and were likely to create "key instabilities in the budgetary arrangements of Scotland's government with significant ramifications for the delivery of public goods and services". Surely there is no one here today who wishes to implement proposals, in a carte-blanche manner, that are likely to create "key instabilities" at this time and which could adversely affect the delivery of public services, beyond the cuts in budgets that we are all facing. Scotland's Government is committed to the protection of the vulnerable and to creating a fairer society. A more buoyant economy is crucial to all of that, and the deficiencies within the current Calman proposals would hamstring the Scottish Government's ability to advance economic growth and truly address the needs of our citizens. Fiscal independence, fiscal autonomy, fiscal responsibility, additional financial powers—whatever the terminology, the actuality requires much deeper discussion. There is no time to go into all of the examples of matters that should be discussed further, but among them are the potential effect of raising the income tax threshold, as mentioned in the Liberal Democrat amendment, and the inability to use short-term borrowing to fund unanticipated shortfalls in income tax—I point out that those income tax revenues would, after all, be subject to prediction. There are many more potential pitfalls and concerns. That is why the amendment in Fiona Hyslop's name should be supported and the amendment in Pauline McNeill's name should be rejected. That is why mutual respect between the  Westminster and the Scottish Parliaments and Governments is crucial. If in this Parliament we start to work together for Scotland's benefit and have mutual respect among ourselves, today's debate will surely have been worthwhile indeed.

At the Finance Committee, it was noted by local authority witnesses that, although there has been willingness on the part of local authorities and the voluntary sector to work in partnership, there are issues of differing governance and regulation systems to overcome. Are the cabinet secretary and ministers taking any action to assist smoother working operations, to allow the voluntary sector to maximise its extremely valuable role in the provision of public services?

I, too, congratulate Stewart Maxwell on securing the debate. We should never forget the horrors of world war two. Folk in my generation—and Stewart Maxwell's and Murdo Fraser's—cannot possibly imagine the horror of being directly involved in a war of that magnitude, or indeed the joy and relief that came at the end, on VE day. Stewart Maxwell has referred to the memories of people in Clydebank and elsewhere. The services that are required in the aftermath of war are intense. We cannot imagine the horror and what it does to people. Psychological support is obviously needed. That is as valid today, with our armed forces still at war, as it was on VE day. Angela Constance recently secured a members' business debate that is relevant to this debate, on veterans in the criminal justice system. Stewart Maxwell mentioned some figures, which more than suggest that issues remain in that regard. Reference has been made to the campaign in the Parliament this week for signatures to a petition—I understand that the members of the Equality for Veterans Association will be in the Parliament  again tomorrow, fighting for pensions equality for all veterans, regardless of when they served in HM forces. I had heard about the campaign before, but I was shocked to discover the extent of the problem. All that those people are doing is seeking justice for people who left the forces before 1975 with less than 22 years' service, who, I was amazed to learn, do not qualify for any military pension. Like Stewart Maxwell, I urge people to sign the EFVA petition. Many people served with great honour during world war two, and their efforts culminated in our ability to celebrate VE day. I pay tribute to one of the groups involved: the Territorial Army. The TA fights alongside the regular military in all conflicts. Having looked into the history a wee bit, I note that the TA was formed way back in 1908, when the voluntary army was combined with parts of the yeomanry and militia, which date back to the Napoleonic wars. The TA was first mobilised to fight in the first world war, serving alongside the regulars. We should never forget that the lives of those in the TA are also on the line. In 1939, as war approached, the size of the TA was doubled, and it was mobilised when hostilities broke out. It was reconstituted, in the form that we know now, in 1947, as a part-time reservist force. The TA currently provides about 1,200 troops each year to support the regular Army in Iraq, Afghanistan and the Balkans. The TA does extremely important work—and none more so than the signal squadrons. I am pleased that 51 signal squadron (V) troop is based in the constituency where I live—I must find out whether that V stands for 5. I have visited the troop many times. The TA in East Kilbride is very much part of the community, with open days and other forms of support for the cadets. Among the components of the TA's success have always been the good will, support and encouragement that it gives to young people in the communities where it is present. Tribute must also be paid to the employers who support their employees who do TA service. It is the willingness of employers to champion the men and women of the volunteer reserve force that makes the TA's role possible. The TA's role is huge and does not just involve front-line fighting alongside the regular troops. The signal regiment, for example, provides vital communications support for emergency services during times of crisis. The regiment responds to terrorist threats and attacks, flooding, industrial action and outbreaks of disease. The TA uses some of the most up-to-date communications and information technology equipment. There is no time in this speech—or even in the entire debate—to begin to pay tribute to all those who contributed to our ability to celebrate VE day  in the manner that Stewart Maxwell discussed, or to repay the debt that we still owe them all. Let us not forget that there are still people heading out from this country to the front line—to war—who are putting their lives on the line for the rest of us. We owe them such gratitude.

To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to ensure best practice in deer management. (S3O-10413)

Can the minister assure me that recognition is given to stalkers in the central belt who deal with peri-urban deer, and that their views and requirements will be fully heard and taken into account in any future policies and training programmes?

Did the minister hear the Prime Minister's interview with Jeremy Paxman on Friday night last, in which he said: "Housing is essentially a private sector activity ... I don't see the need for us to continue with such big renovation programmes"? Will he assure us that the Government in Scotland recognises that, in any decent society, the public sector bears much responsibility for ensuring decent housing standards?

When I first read Andy Kerr's motion, I decided to have a closer look at the Scottish Chambers of Commerce report that it refers to: "The Scottish Economy in 2010—A Time of Opportunity". In reading that report, it struck me that Mr Kerr appears to have a blind spot for good news for Scotland. Before it comments on construction, the report mentions "The emerging positive outlook evident in Scottish business in the second half of 2009" and the "cautious optimism in the early months of this year." The Scottish Chambers of Commerce indicated some of the things that have been causing problems, such as the severe winter weather and VAT going back up to 17.5 per cent. Neither of those things happened as a result of a Scottish Government policy. The report makes it clear that one of the biggest cost pressures on Scottish businesses and one of their heaviest burdens is transport costs. Labour's fuel tax hikes have hit Scottish businesses hard and are becoming a major problem in Scotland. Jobs will be lost in our economy unless those rises are reversed. Another SCC publication, "Down to Business in 2010", says:  "The Government must avoid tax increases that could penalise wealth creation or complicate the overall tax system. The planned increases in National Insurance Contributions will make it more expensive to take on new employees at a time of rising unemployment. We urge politicians of all parties to reverse this as soon as possible." Mr Kerr's motion refers to the construction industry. The detail in the section on the construction industry in the report that is mentioned shows that the sector is less pessimistic about the future than it was a year ago, and that 20 per cent of construction companies are recruiting new staff. Andy Kerr claims that nearly 30,000 Scottish construction jobs have gone. The latest Office for National Statistics labour market statistics show that 7,000 construction jobs were lost in Scotland during the final year of the Labour-Lib Dem coalition, which was, I understand, a time of boom. Some 16,000 construction jobs have been lost in the past three years, at a time when Labour's recession has hit us all hard. Becoming unemployed is hard for anyone, and the struggle to get back into work is an individual challenge that should never be underestimated, but it is clear to me that Scottish Government policies and actions have worked to reduce the number of Scottish construction workers who are losing their jobs, and that the continuing actions of the Government should help them to get back into work. Those efforts have not been helped and nor will they be by Labour talking down Scotland, its economy and construction industry. Not only are Andy Kerr's figures wrong, his dismissal of Scottish workers is wrong too. The Scottish Building Federation writes a lot about Scottish construction, which is its business and its blood. It blames the recession for the job losses. The recent SBF press release states clearly: "But the fact remains that the recession has forced a majority of Scottish building firms to lay people off since the beginning of this year." People also fear what will happen in the future. This is the recession brought into being by Brown and Darling, among others, as outlined by the minister earlier. We have had this Government's support for capital investment—the extra £350 million for the Scottish Government to spend on new house building. Every effort is being made. Andy Kerr spoke about the Scottish Futures Trust and he is fond of quoting the chambers of commerce. Ron Hewitt, the chief executive of the Edinburgh Chamber of Commerce said: "The SFT has now got a good team of experienced people. It (the SFT) is absolutely the right thing to do. It will save public money." Andy Kerr's problem seems to be that he and his colleagues, both here and in Westminster, are  unable to recognise that we are trying to make public investment in this country without using that discredited system of public finance initiatives and public-private finance on which they are so hung up.

No, thank you. The payment figure for PFI will approach £1 billion each year by the middle of the next decade and will peak at £1.168 billion in 2024-25. For goodness' sake, we all know about the scandal that was Hairmyres hospital under the previous Administration—it had a capital value of £68 million compared to a total unitary charge of £725 million, which is over 10 times as much.

No, thank you. I think that we have heard enough from Mr Kerr on PFI. Equity of just £100 invested in rebuilding Hairmyres hospital is projected to earn £89 million in dividends over 30 years. That project happened when Gordon Brown was talking about the lack of boom and bust—that is what he wanted. I tell members that he created the boom for himself and a bust for future generations. It absolutely does not stop. Down south, they are still carrying on with PFI schemes. Even Unison, which supports the Labour Party, has described Labour's continued support of PFI as "irrational". PFI shifts the risk of project failure back to the public sector when it goes wrong. We have all seen that; such projects have to be bailed out constantly. We should work together in Scotland, stop talking it down and start helping this Scottish Government to create better conditions for all in Scotland.

As the budget seems to have been designed primarily to get the UK Government through the next six weeks, will the cabinet secretary confirm that he will, following the UK general election, continue to stand up for Scotland by lobbying whoever is in Downing Street to rethink the capital acceleration question? Will he expect the leader of the Labour group in this Parliament to assist him in that endeavour?

Today's passing of the Public Services Reform (Scotland) Bill will be a welcome step towards achieving the Government's commitment to deliver improvements in a public sector landscape that has, over decades, become cluttered and complicated. An overlapping and duplicating network of public sector bodies causes unnecessary difficulties for members of the public and for the voluntary and private sector groups that have to work with those bodies. The Finance Committee had interesting discussions on the bill, with contributions from throughout the relevant sectors. There was agreement that it is time for public sector reform. I hope that we can now streamline decision making and improve transparency in the network of Scottish public bodies, as well as reduce bureaucratic complexity for the private and voluntary sectors and individual citizens. It is interesting that the Finance Committee is moving on to consider public sector reform more widely. I am pleased that we are doing so in conjunction with Scotland's Futures Forum, because it is time for radical thinking about the future of the public sector and the services that it provides. I urge all members to watch what happens as that inquiry unfolds under the convenership of Andrew Welsh. I will close by quoting again something that I quoted in the stage 1 debate, which is a letter from the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth to the Finance Committee. It states: "Parliament must be able to respond more quickly to changing circumstances and take advantage of opportunities to further streamline the public bodies landscape and improve the delivery of public services". Today, we have established a foundation for that on which we can build.

I am delighted to open this debate, especially after the heated debate on education and skills that we have just had, because this debate will be consensual. The opening of the Aurora house will be welcomed by members of all parties. Just before the Copenhagen conference on climate change, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth came to South Lanarkshire College in East Kilbride for the second time—he had been there to cut the first turf for the great initiative that I am talking about. On that day, Mr Swinney officially opened Scotland's first affordable low-energy, low-carbon house. The Aurora house has an A-rated energy certificate, a heat recovery system, thermal energy pumps and the capacity to create more electricity than it uses. Great congratulations are due to the college and all the partners who have been involved in the fantastic initiative. The Aurora house was a great conception, in particular when we consider that it will be used as a training facility for students and apprentices who aim to work in the construction industry. South Lanarkshire College has a good record in everything that it teaches and is involved in, particularly construction. Not long ago the college successfully hosted the skillbuild 2009 competition, in which two of its students, Douglas Robertson and Stephen Butler, won medals for carpentry and roof slating and tiling respectively.  The college deserves much praise for its achievements, particularly since it moved into its new campus in the centre of East Kilbride. I praise in particular Ian Macpherson, the chairman, who oversaw the project; Stewart McKillop, the principal; Angus Allan, the depute principal; and their team of staff. Special commendation goes to the construction skills team at the college. I will get back to the Aurora house. It is a flagship project that gives Scotland the potential to become a world leader in building a new generation of affordable low-carbon homes, thereby helping to combat climate change and addressing fuel poverty, which is hugely important in this day and age. Scotland is leading the way not only in climate change legislation, but in methods of delivering what is in that legislation. The Aurora house is the result of a successful and unique partnership between South Lanarkshire College, Dawn Homes—part of the Dawn Group, which is made up of Dawn Construction, Dawn Homes and Dawn Development—and more than 50 private sector partners. The design of the house is also very important because that design has not been compromised by the building's functionality, so I will mention the architects: Jewitt Arschavir and Wilkie Architects. The house showcases low-energy technologies and high insulation levels, is capable of reducing energy use and energy bills to zero, while contributing to the challenging Government targets to reduce greenhouse gases and carbon emissions. The house exceeds the building standards requirements that it is recommended should come into force in 2013 and then in 2016-17, so it is a blueprint for eco-friendly house construction, with the added bonus of being a training facility, that is unique in the United Kingdom, for teaching students the principles behind low-energy buildings. It is one of the few houses to be built that easily achieves an A rating, which is the highest possible energy performance rating. When we consider that most older housing achieves only a D rating, and that most new build housing achieves only a C rating, we can see that the house is very special and something to which others can aspire. It is a great initiative. A sensible design approach was adopted in the design of the timber frame, the placement of the windows and the inclusion of the heat recovery units and rainwater harvesting system. The house has photovoltaic panels, solar hot-water panels, an air-heat recovery system, ground-source heat exchanger, and one third of the air leakage of a typical new house. There are energy-saving light tunnels on the upper floor and water-saving sinks and baths.  When it is operational, the house will be net zero carbon. We are talking about a four-bedroom detached house, but it is fully scalable and will allow smaller and larger properties in semi-detached or terraced styles to be produced as the market demands. I have limited time to speak, but I have many fact sheets with me. It would take a whole afternoon to fully extol the benefits of the project for learning and the economy, so if anyone wants to learn more about it, I have all the information available. I would like to mention Dawn Construction here—of course, I mean Dawn Homes, but I have always known it as Dawn Construction—which has gained a proud record over many years of housing rehabilitation and now new-build housing. The company looked at and adapted the house because it realised that future discerning home buyers will prefer energy-efficient properties to those that are less energy efficient. The Aurora project has allowed Dawn Homes and its operatives to learn the complexities of what is required in the design of such a house, so that it can make an affordable and replicable product that will exceed Government targets. Dawn Homes has had the learning experience, and its workforce is learning new and different skills, which, through South Lanarkshire College, will allow the workforce of the future to learn new skills. It also means that a company has done some very innovative thinking and has now placed itself in the right place to accelerate out of the current recession and to be successful at the other end of it. That ethos of innovation must be congratulated. Yesterday afternoon we had a debate about community regeneration; the Aurora house is a great example of that. It involved the college and learning, skills development and employment, along with all the agencies that worked together, including South Lanarkshire Council, which helped with building regulations and so on. It involved good design, but most important for regeneration of the community, it gave pride in achievement. Everyone who was involved in the Aurora house project can be proud of their achievement. I commend them to the Parliament.

I thank Bill Butler for ensuring that we have our annual debate on fair trade during Fairtrade fortnight. I was happy to sign the motion and think that this will be a good debate, but first I would like to make a couple of points. I do not want to sound negative or be a downer, but we must remember that even though the fair trade movement is based on traditional co-operative principles of community ownership, which we should all be pleased about, the fact that a label is stuck on something does not mean that it is automatically good. For example, some of the co-operatives on certain fruit plantations in South America do not allow trade union membership and that there are concerns about the rights of some workers in those places. We must always monitor and evaluate the situation with fair trade practices. Although I am delighted that we are moving towards Scotland becoming a fair trade nation—I offer congratulations to everyone who has been involved in that—we have to ensure that that designation is meaningful. When Patricia Ferguson spoke about it in January or February 2007, she spoke about the status being serious and enduring. The current Government has also spoken about seriousness and said that the designation must be meaningful. We should hold on to that. Being a fair trade nation is about more than just the products that are bought in shops and having Fairtrade towns, councils and schools; it is about carrying on lobbying Westminster and Europe—and the Scottish Government, to an extent—to ensure that work that can be done through procurement and other big things continues to be embraced. After an event that Bill Wilson and I attended a couple of months ago, he lodged a motion about ethical procurement in the national health service. It was inspired by work that was done following the British Medical Association's fair and ethical trade group's visit to Pakistan. I know that the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing is aware of that movement and believe that a member of her team is considering the issue closely.  I think that the things that happen in communities across the country are wonderful. In my area, East Kilbride and Hamilton are Fairtrade towns. I visited a school in Wishaw with Jack McConnell; it brought us joy to see how children have embraced the fair trade idea.

I will not make my answer into a speech. I have sympathy for the point that Jack McConnell makes; youngsters have approached me on the same matter. I believe that the issue has to be considered. I want to promote healthy eating, but not having Fairtrade chocolate poses a bit of a problem. The issue represents an anomaly that must be examined. I congratulate Strathaven academy, which is in Scotland's first Fairtrade town—I acknowledge that it shares that honour with Aberfeldy—on the Madinafest that it held last week. At that event the youngsters pointed out, rightly, that fair trade is not about giving people handouts but involves a mutually beneficial exchange in the marketplace and represents a way of giving people a helping hand. They tied the fair trade movement in with Strathaven's weaving history and the story of the radical uprising of 1820, which led to James "Perlie" Wilson's being executed for calling for workers rights. That thread of history is important in relation to some of the things that Bill Butler said about fair working. The concept of fair trade and working together has been around for a long time. The pupils of Strathaven academy recognise that. One of the big benefits of the fair trade movement is that people throughout the country recognise that it is both historical and for the future—and about giving a fair deal to workers in communities the world over.

Despite decades of talking about regeneration, we continue to discuss it without ever quite getting there. I would go as far as to say that some communities need generation, let alone regeneration. Regeneration is an economic and social issue. We cannot say, "We have failed, so we will do no more." We must keep going and we must measure progress appropriately, as Ross Finnie said. Johann Lamont talked about community planning partnerships. Partnership—between national Government, local government, Scottish Enterprise and other Government agencies, for example—is important in the context of generating and regenerating communities. The education system is important. Colleges and schools are a vital part of communities. The voluntary sector is also important. When I talk about the voluntary sector, I do not mean only the people who provide services professionally; we must take nothing away from the value of the work that unpaid volunteers do in all our communities throughout the country. Unpaid volunteers work in small ways to keep their communities ticking over, although they are not often recognised. The Parliament is a bit hard on business sometimes. Many small and medium-sized enterprises and even some larger businesses have a degree of social responsibility and contribute quite a lot more than general employment to the communities in which they are based.

There is an enabling role for Government, but we must fight against the setting up of organisations or quasi-organisations that become no more than talking shops, which has happened so often. That has been a concern of  mine over the decades. We must empower communities, which brings me back to the volunteers that I mentioned—the people who know what is best for their area. Mistakes were made in the past in the planning of communities. The peripheral estates that started to appear in the middle of the previous century tore the heart out of communities. Lots of houses were created, but there was no infrastructure that would enable people to feel that they were part of something. It is certain that the architectural and planning communities have learned from those mistakes and are now talking about place making. That is not just another term that is loosely thrown about. We missed the importance of place over the decades and we must get our heads round what it means. Communities that feel that they are part of something have a sense of security, of belonging, of history and of continuity. We have started to rectify the mistakes of the past in our approach to inner-city regeneration. For example, we are rehabilitating existing tenements. Members talked about housing associations and community ownership. Housing co-operatives are a model that offers tenants truly democratic empowerment—another word that we like to use a lot—and control of the housing stock that they occupy. That gives people an incentive to make their area thrive. Co-ops, whether they are fully mutual or not, are not just experts in housing; they are involved in community facilities, training and employment and public art, whose value to communities is often ignored but is extremely important. There are great models of co-ops around, whether the South Lanarkshire Council one in West Whitlawburn, Easthall Park Housing Co-operative in Glasgow or Tenants First Housing Co-operative in Aberdeen. Those organisations, which are volunteer led, are truly working within their communities towards what we keep calling regeneration. I am delighted that the Government and the minister recognise the value of the housing co-operative as a social and economic model around which communities can be built. As the minister said, we have had so many initiatives: the GEAR, the cities growth fund and then the town centre regeneration fund. Some successful work was done under the latter fund. The North Lanarkshire town centres received more than £2 million for a worthwhile cause and East Kilbride & District Shopmobility received £100,000 for soft play and the sustainability of the organisation. The sustainability of communities is at the heart of this debate. It is not just about pumping in money through some new initiative then cutting the initiative off because it has been successful  and looking for something else. It is about sustainability and continued growth. In my last minute, I will consider the new towns as an example of what has been carried out. I am fortunate to represent two new towns: Cumbernauld and East Kilbride. East Kilbride is held up as Scotland's most successful new town—it is certainly the oldest one, having been established in 1947. It works in the place making sense that I talked about. Part of the reason why it works is that the new town was built round an existing community, albeit a small village community—East Kilbride village—with a recognition of the rural community that was round about the area. Its wonderful history—I commend Mr Bill Niven, our East Kilbride local historian, who documents it all well—gave the town the important sense of place, the security of belonging and the sense of continuity that define a sustainable place that people feel proud of and want to make and keep successful. My plea for today is that we recognise that people need places where they feel comfortable and happy. They need not only a roof and a job but somewhere where they feel at home.

To ask the Scottish Government what support it gives to the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland. (S3O-9415)

Does the minister acknowledge the value and importance to Scotland of the work that has been done by RCAHMS over the past 100 years of collecting? Does she join me in congratulating the commissioners, staff and volunteers on the successful celebration of their centenary through the treasured places exhibition, and welcome the commission's future plans as the first port of call for anyone wanting to find out about Scotland's places?

A fortnight ago, we passed stage 1 of the budget. Since that time, I had hoped to see a mature and responsible attitude develop on the part of members—a realisation that finances are not unlimited. Making savings is not popular and the imposition of cuts is even less so. I acknowledge and welcome the sense of realism from some members in the chamber. Despite the political posturing that ever applies, there is recognition that the Chancellor of the Exchequer at Westminster is cutting funding to the public services and that there is a resultant effect on Scotland owing to the inherent lack of powers in the current settlement. Andy Kerr should listen to his colleague Hugh Henry, who told the Public Audit Committee in November: "we are trying to outbid one another in promising what we will do, although we know privately that much of it is not possible."—[ Official Report , Public Audit Committee , 18 November 2009; c 1307.] It seems that the convener of the Public Audit Committee has grasped the uncomfortable truth about the money that is available to Scotland. I am sure that he would recognise the need to work constructively with the Scottish Government to distribute the resources that we have in the most equitable manner possible. That is a responsible and mature attitude—looking at what is in front of us, rather than what we would like to be in front of us. Instead of listening to Hugh Henry, Andy Kerr seems to have listened to his friend at the Scotland Office. Its recent publication "Expenditure and Revenue in Scotland", which claims to be based on the Office for National Statistics's publication "Government Expenditure and Revenue in Scotland", is along the lines of Andy Kerr's thinking. He accused the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth of "deception"; I suggest that the deception comes directly from Andy Kerr's colleague at the Scotland Office. The Scotland Office's report was entirely selective in its statements, with a lack of balance and analysis but much imagination. It excluded large chunks of the revenue that is gathered from Scotland, but managed to lever in expenditure that did not actually occur. It also excluded council tax revenue but included local authority expenditure, thereby creating a phantom gap in Scotland's accounts. There are other anomalies and analytical failings in the Scotland Office document, as there are in the posturings of the Labour group here today. I emphasise my disappointment at the fact that the Secretary of State for Scotland, supposedly  Scotland's man in the Westminster Cabinet, rather than the other way round, would wish to tell the people whom he represents—the people of Scotland—that they are not paying their way, that they are subsidy junkies and that they are too poor or stupid to be let out alone. I find that sad and strange and I ask whether the Secretary of State for Scotland is a little out of touch with some of his colleagues here, who have clearly grasped that perpetual negativity is in no one's interests, either individually or collectively. Two weeks ago, I said that we must think about how changes to public spending will change the economic and social outlook of our country. There must be a rethinking of the priorities of Scottish public spending, and every politician in Scotland will have to think hard about what they want to do. The sums of money that all of us wish were available for distribution are not in the budget. Every member of the Parliament would want more money to be available for public services, even if we disagree in some measure about how to spend the funds. The point is that we are where we are and must take the appropriate decisions. As we know, the cab sec has taken decisions that he thinks are appropriate. I note the decision that he has taken on the boiler scrappage scheme and on Sarah Boyack's motion in the Business Bulletin , which was signed by every member of the Labour group, calling for that. John Swinney has delivered, yet we still hear from the Labour group that it will not vote for the budget. What do we have to do to get some degree of positive outlook from the Labour group? We have a limited pot of money to use. The cabinet secretary has done the best possible job of apportioning the resources in the budget. There has been constructive dialogue with some colleagues from other parties, but sadly not with the front bench of the Labour group, which has lodged an amendment calling for the reinstatement of GARL. I ask those who intend to support that amendment—from Jeremy Purvis's speech, it seems that Lib Dems intend to do so—to consider and to reflect further on two things. As my colleague Kenny Gibson mentioned, the original feasibility study by SKM, which was published during the term of the previous Administration, was not convinced of the perceived benefits of GARL—in fact, it was quite damning in some regards. I suggest that members look at that study.

No. I am in my last minute. I ask members to reflect on the fact that 54 per cent of 2010-11 expenditure on the 36 major capital projects in Scotland—if I had more time, I would go into more detail about how those  projects are run and managed and what completion means—will be on projects that are either in Glasgow or will be of direct benefit to Glasgow. Let us stop this nonsense about the Government putting Glasgow down—that is not happening. I ask all members to support the cabinet secretary's budget.

To ask the Scottish Government how it supports housing co-operatives. (S3O-9334)

Does the minister share my dismay that, since the introduction of the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001, the number of Scottish housing co-operatives has dropped from 45 to 18? Will he confirm that the Government endorses the  housing co-operative as a sustainable and valuable community ownership model and that he will continue to offer support for it?

To ask the Scottish Government what support it gives to workers' co-operatives. (S3O-9230)

Is the minister aware that, with the help of CDS, the internationally successful Clansman Dynamics Ltd in East Kilbride has just been subject to an employee buyout and may in fact be the world's first co-operative operating in the field of designing and manufacturing industrial robots? Does he agree that the co-operative route is one way of ensuring the future vitality of companies and that it should be investigated by others? Will he join me in congratulating Dick Philbrick, the former owner of the company, who encouraged and supported the employee buyout and remains an employee of the firm as managing director?

Will the member give way?

Does Mary Mulligan accept that, if the chancellor had allowed further acceleration of capital budgets, as requested across the Parliament, we might not have been in this position and might have been able to boost the housing market further?

Right after assuming office in 2007, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth was faced with the tightest spending settlement under devolution. Then, of course, the UK  economy collapsed, and now we face painful cuts in the stipend from London. Despite that, John Swinney created the conditions in which the council tax has been frozen, business rates have been cut, prescription charges have been driven down, 1,000 extra police officers have been recruited, the graduate endowment tuition fee has been abolished, and £1.6 billion has been invested in housing. The cabinet secretary promised £1.6 billion over three years for housing, and that is what we got. When the ill winds of recession blew north from London, it was John Swinney who argued that we needed an acceleration of capital spending to keep the worst of the wolves from Scotland's door, and he got it. That is why housing spend was higher in the previous budget than it is in this one. The Scottish Government was protecting Scottish jobs by accelerating spend. If Mr Swinney had had his way, there would have been further acceleration of capital spend this year, with associated housing expenditure. Credit must be given to Iain Gray for backing the cabinet secretary's call to London. Sadly, it was to no avail: as we learned, the chancellor was less agreeable and the request was denied. In the run-up to the general election, the chancellor, Alistair Darling, is already warning of further massive cuts—as, of course, is George Osborne on behalf of the Conservative party. Parties that compete to see whose cuts are the deepest are of no use to Scotland, and it does us no good to have a spat about who can best manage the decline of the UK economy. Scotland needs a vision for the future. It is not enough to demand uncosted changes to the budget, or to argue for one or two capital projects. This is a time to think beyond narrow political advantage. It is a time for political vision and courage. As the cuts begin to bite, there will be no option but to pass them on. As a Parliament and politicians, we should also be thinking seriously about how changes to public spending will affect the economic and social outlook of our country. We must face reality and, like every family in this country that faces straitened circumstances in the recession, we have to make serious decisions about what we should spend our money on. We will be able to manage those eye-wateringly tight budgets in the future only if every party is realistic and argues its case while listening to the arguments of others. Each and every one of us will have to be clear about which policy outcomes we consider to be in Scotland's interests and why. Policy should drive budgets, rather than budgets driving policy. The purpose and focus of our politics have to be about building a better future.  I believe that Scotland's best days are not behind us—I believe that they are ahead of us and that we should all work to make them happen. It is undeniable that there are challenges.

As has been said many times, the Parliament is open to debate and the cabinet secretary is open to discussion. No viable alternative to the budget has been brought forward by any party in the Parliament that believes that GARL should be reinstated. As I said, it is time to get beyond narrow political advantage and face reality.

No, thank you. There are challenges to face. There have been massive increases in public spending in recent years, not least the billions of pounds to bail out the banks, but it has been on the credit card and it is debt that must be repaid by the UK Government. The deficits that the UK is running are truly astronomical. I find it interesting that they are caused by the same people who like to argue that Scotland could not survive as an independent country because we might have to run a small deficit from time to time.

Certainly.

I recommend that Andy Kerr looks at the latest Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development reports and projects to find out what small countries in Europe are capable of. As far as possible, the budget prepares Scotland to face the challenges ahead and sets the country on the road to recovery. It is not all that we would wish done nor all that should be done, but it is all that can be done within the limited power of a devolved Government. Full control of the levers of economic management would obviously be much more desirable and would afford Scotland the manoeuvrability and flexibility that a nation of 5 million should have. That would allow the Government to do much more to protect the country and set us on the road to recovery, as has happened in those small countries that Mr Kerr can read about in the OECD reports. Until we  have that control, we must all pull together for the good of the nation. An important step in that is to agree the budget.

Like others, I commend the members of the literacy commission. Their work has obviously been hard because the commission report refers to the lack of empirical data on the subject on which to accurately base measurement and comparison and it cites data from the range of sources that it used. It has not been an easy job to pull the report together. Regardless of what people think of the detail in the commission's report, it certainly shows that we should not be complacent, but, a bit like Christina McKelvie, I do not believe that we should put out a message of doom and failure either. As Cathy Jamieson and others mentioned, since 1999 this Parliament has recognised the importance of education incorporating functional literacy from nursery schooling right through to lifelong learning.  Indeed, in 2006 when the OECD followed up its 2001 international adult literacy survey, the Scotland background paper noted the learning opportunities accessed by adults in Scotland, which prompted envious praise from practitioners in England. We must have balance in our discussions and in our terminology. As Rhona Brankin pointed out, too often people understand the phrase "functional illiteracy" to mean that people cannot read or write a word or a sentence. The terminology gives a false impression of the subject under discussion. However, we have to recognise the disadvantages that deep-seated functional illiteracy brings to individuals of all ages. As was ably outlined by Hugh Henry, it brings great disadvantages to individuals, families, groups and communities. Hugh Henry referenced the Dugdale and Clark study, which looked in great detail at the effects of community illiteracy. That leads directly to the introductory paragraph to the commission's recommendations and its call to recognise that socioeconomic issues are the main underlying cause of illiteracy and the need for programmes to address those problems. Socioeconomic issues underpin so many problems in our society, right across the board: in the areas of justice, education, attainment and many others. Many programmes over many decades have purported to address those problems. I must be getting on a bit because I can think back to urban aid programmes, social inclusion partnerships and so on. As others have said, those programmes have not always been hugely successful. The Labour motion mentions pilot schemes and I make two pleas in that regard. The first is that although a pilot scheme cannot be long term, it should look at long-term solutions to address the problems, which are deep-seated, as Hugh Henry said earlier. We should not undertake pilot schemes, walk away from them and then come up with another initiative; something sustainable has to be done. Many have tried and failed in that regard. The second plea is that we should not focus too much on attainment in primary schools alone. We have to look at the whole picture because, as the Dugdale and Clark study showed, family and community illiteracy is an issue. If functional literacy or absolute illiteracy is a problem in a family, the child will be severely disadvantaged, so let us look at families as a whole.

I thank Mr McNulty for that clarification of some of his views. It goes back to what I said about programmes over the years. Nurture programmes by other names have run in areas of deprivation in various parts of Scotland but, sadly, they have run out of funding. They perhaps worked for a year, two years or three years, but then there was nothing. The Parliament has discussed that before. I emphasise the absolute need for sustainable programmes. We cannot sort these deep-seated issues in two, three, four or five years; it will probably be two, if not three generations before we see the results that we require. We have to think long term. That is why I am glad that there is general cross-party consensus in today's debate. Too often, great things get started, but then opposition for the sake of opposition kicks in and they are stopped. It is extremely important to pledge to work on this issue in the long term. A very important part of functional literacy is of course literacy per se, or absolute literacy—the ability to sit down with a book, which Aileen Campbell, Sandra White and others mentioned. I thought that the bookstart programme was a great initiative that could be incorporated in the nurture scenario. Literacy is important to our nation's wellbeing. Reading in English, Scots or Gaelic—in languages of all sorts—is important to our wellbeing and it should always be encouraged. Books should be a huge part of any programme that is developed.

To ask the Scottish Government what impact the United Kingdom pre-budget report will have on the Scottish Government budget for 2010-11. (S3O-8914)

That was short, sharp and sweet. In the regrettable absence from the PBR of any fiscal stimulus in the form of accelerated capital expenditure, does the cabinet secretary agree with the director general of the Confederation of British Industry, who, in relation to the increase in national insurance, considers that the United Kingdom Chancellor of the Exchequer "has made a serious mistake imposing an extra jobs tax at a time when the economic recovery will still be fragile"?

I echo the thanks to all who took part in the compilation of the report. This is the first time that I have seen through a budget process as a member of the Finance Committee. It was an interesting time at which to join the committee. As the report says: "a number of factors have meant that the Draft Budget 2010-11 is significantly different from the original plans." Under the good stewardship of the committee's convener, Andrew Welsh, our budget scrutiny was an interesting operation. In the main, the Finance Committee and subject committees' recommendations are requests for further information and not recommendations that seek to point the Government in different directions from its aim in drafting the budget. The information that committees seek will become increasingly important as we move forward. As the cabinet secretary said, our budgeting in the years to come "presents a major and unprecedented challenge". Audit Scotland made it clear in its analysis that "by 2013-14, the gap between planned Scottish Government spending and the budget available could be between £1.2 and £2.9 billion." We are entering a time when public expenditure will prove increasingly difficult. As John Swinney said, that will probably be for "the best part of 20 years". Paragraphs 131 to 138 of the report indicate in no small measure the budget pressures that arise from the massive, and rising, costs of PFI and PPP. The report highlights "PPP contracts for 2010-11 to be £820 million". The Scottish Government will have much less room for manoeuvre in future years.

I agree absolutely with that. I have said that many times in the Parliament. I turn to subject committee reports to the Finance Committee. Interestingly, there were no calls for alternative spending proposals; the general view is that the Government is on the right track. For example, the Local Government and Communities Committee said that the Government "should continue to consider ways of maximising its expenditure on tackling fuel poverty in ways that help those most in need."  That is not a proposal to alter spending plans; it is more of a plea to keep on doing good work. In considering prison running costs, the Justice Committee sought an assurance from the Government that it keeps costs under review. Again, that is not a proposal but a plea to keep an eye on things. Surely any Government would seek to respond positively to such a scenario. We have heard a lot about economic growth—of course, that is the objective of Mr Swinney's work. The Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee noted that the freezing of the budget for internationalisation activities in the enterprise agencies was a cut in real terms; we heard a lot about that in the Finance Committee and in this morning's debate. The Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee questioned, as is its right, whether the correct decisions had been taken and asked for a review of the budget line. If borrowing powers and the normal levers of economic and fiscal management were available to us, we could inject funds into that area and many others, which would help to drag Scotland out of recession. As the convener said, we are dealing with a fixed pot of money; decisions have to be made about where best to spend the money. I think that it was Malcolm Chisholm who talked about a reduction in the budget for VisitScotland and noted that the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee had asked for that budget line to be reviewed. As I said, there is a fixed pot of cash. Homecoming brought record numbers of visitors to Scotland. It would be good if we could build on that and see additional results, but it is simply not possible to create money that does not exist.

No, thank you. I turn to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee's recommendation that the Scottish Government consider using the additional £10 million for renewable energy projects for a successor to the wave and tidal energy support scheme. In addition, the committee is looking for a commitment from the Government that moneys will continue to be provided on a year-to-year basis. The Government has already shown leadership in the promotion of renewables with the saltire prize. The UK Government seems only now to be catching up on that.

No, thank you. Flexibility is important in ensuring that things keep moving forward. Locking the country into fixed spending in future years does not provide the flexibility for us to deal with the very big issues that  are coming up. I only wish that Westminster would be a bit more flexible. I hope that the cabinet secretary and Iain Gray, leader of the Labour group, will keep lobbying Westminster for further acceleration of cash. Such fiscal stimulus is absolutely required. As we heard yesterday, we seem to be the only country in the G8 that is not looking for any kind of fiscal stimulus. I know that I have to finish, Presiding Officer. The absolute fact of this budget process, which was reflected by the Finance Committee, is that no other committee proposed an amendment to the budget. No one brought forward an amendment on GARL, either—we are hearing a lot of empty rhetoric about GARL. There is no seriousness there. No alternative to the cabinet secretary's proposal has been suggested.

Does the member accept that since devolution at least 14 orders under the Scotland Act 1998 have transferred significant powers to the Parliament, including powers on major issues such as rail infrastructure, and that therefore a comparison with the devolution settlement under Donald Dewar 10 years ago is not at all valid? Indeed, that is proof of the maxim that devolution is a process, not an event.

As others did, I looked forward to publication of the pre-budget report on 9 December, because I hoped that the joint campaign by the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth and the Labour leader Iain Gray would result in an acceleration of further capital funding, which is required fiscal stimulus that would complement the Scottish Government's economic recovery plan. Sadly that did not happen, but I hope that the campaign continues by both the Scottish Government and the Labour group. I will address a couple of points that members have raised. Wendy Alexander talked about the Scotland-based banks. Scotland is, unfortunately, currently part of the UK, so international banks are based in Scotland in that context. We keep hearing the accusation that Scotland could not have afforded to bail out the banks on its own, but the straight truth is that the UK could not afford to do so, either. We should include Northern Rock among those banks—it is not just the Scotland-based banks that were bailed out. That massive increase in Government indebtedness will hang around the necks of future generations like a millstone—it is the fault of the UK Government and its regulatory failure. I return to the topic of Scotland and the pre-budget report. The Scottish Government's economic recovery plan is good and it is useful; those points have been proven. There is much in the plan that supports business, and we had hoped that the pre-budget report would complement some of the plan because the small business bonus scheme in Scotland has been highly successful. One thing that I welcome in the chancellor's pre-budget report is that the corporation tax issue has been deferred until 2011. That is good news in a  way, because it means that there will be another year before the drivers of Scotland's economy are hit by it. However, the fact that it is happening at all is cause for concern, as is the rise in national insurance and its effect on business, which members have also mentioned today. It is interesting to hear how eager the Labour group in the Scottish Parliament is to quote the Confederation of British Industry; these are changed days. However, I will quote the CBI back at Labour members. Richard Lambert, the CBI director general, said that "The Government had made a serious mistake imposing an extra jobs tax at a time when the economic recovery will still be fragile." I have no idea why, if the chancellor is really interested in using business to stimulate the economy, he thinks that that is a good idea. I have to admit that the following points suffer from a lack of detail from the chancellor, but I am also concerned about the extra £500 million of credit that will be made available under the enterprise finance guarantee. As commentators throughout the country keep telling us, the banks are still not lending or operating the existing enterprise finance guarantee, even with the UK Government's assurances that the lending is covered. Indeed, I am sure that all MSPs have had evidence from small businesses in their areas that the system is simply not working properly. Perhaps the banks do not think that the Government is good for the money these days, but even the banks that are to all intents and purposes publicly owned are not following the Government's line and extending credit facilities to business. Perhaps the UK Government should use its position as majority shareholder in those banks to ensure that such credit, which will be used to stimulate the economy, is forthcoming. I also note the announcement of a growth capital fund for businesses that cannot get credit. As a result, not only is the public purse standing guarantor for credit under the enterprise finance guarantee, but the Government is going to provide funds to businesses that the banks are refusing to give money to under the very guarantee that is about to receive an extra £500 million of credit. All that smacks of chaos at the heart of the Treasury's attempts to address the economic turmoil, which I suggest again was partly caused by the lack of proper regulatory control of the financial markets. I do not have time to say much more, but I certainly think that we need a lot more detail on the measures to control bankers' bonuses. The one-off tax on bonuses of more than £25,000, which will be paid by the banks and not the individuals concerned, sounds a bit populist; it seems like a good idea that should raise some  money. However, Roy Maugham, tax partner at UHY Hacker Young, has said: "This is one of the most easily dodged taxes in years. Almost all banks will be able to put off formal agreements on bonuses until after April. The ease with which this tax can be ducked raises the question of whether this is a political move to appease voters rather than a genuine attempt to raise money for the Treasury." I share his concerns. The promises that we have been given lack a lot of detail, and I am sure that Parliament will agree that we need the same fiscal stimulus that the other G8 countries introduced. We are the only country that did not put in place such measures, and we are the only country that has yet to come out of recession. We must get together and keep making the argument to the Chancellor of the Exchequer—whoever he or she might be in a year or so—that the Scottish economy must be provided with the stimulus that it needs. After all, our hands are tied by the lack of the independent status that so many small nations across the world take for granted.

Will the member give way?

I left it too late.

I congratulate Bill Kidd for bringing the debate to the chamber and for issuing the invitation that resulted in Alexander Mora Mora's visit to Scotland on 20 November. That was an achievement of which we should all be proud. Paragraph 3 of article 2 of the charter of the United Nations states: "All members shall settle their international disputes by peaceful means in such a manner that international peace and security, and justice, are not endangered." Many of the nation signatories to that charter would do well to remember that statement. I am absolutely delighted that people across the world have decided to take part in the march for peace. It is fascinating to see who is taking part. The world march was a humanist proposal, but people of various belief systems—people of religious faith or of no faith—and pacifists and non-pacifists are coming together to say, "Enough. What is happening in our world today is ridiculous. There is too much violence of all sorts." That is not as simple as if it were just about nuclear weapons; it encompasses the world. We find that more civilians are being killed in conflicts than ever before, because of the changing nature of war. We have Governments that actively carry out what I would say are terrorist acts against their own populations in order to do no more than maintain control. I am really pleased that Bill Kidd managed to bring the beacon of peace to Scotland, which is so important. For all that we have a military history, which we talk a lot about, we also have a good history of peaceful reconciliation and of finding ways forward in conflict resolution. I often think that Scotland is in a great position, particularly since the Parliament reconvened more than 10 years ago, to take a bit of a lead in such issues. We are a small nation that is in the process of re-establishing itself through self-government, but we should never underestimate the fact that we have achieved significant constitutional change in a totally peaceful and democratic fashion. For all that we shout and bawl at each other and take stances in here, we should never underestimate what we have achieved. In today's world, which is a very dangerous place, that is to be lauded and applauded. We should recognise the number of people from countries and legislatures throughout the world who come here to learn from this Parliament about  how those things can be achieved. In case I am accused of plagiarism, I should say at this point that I am referring to something that I wrote myself. We have had delegations from eastern Europe, Latin America, south-east Asia and Africa. A few years ago, this Parliament endorsed a visit by the Palestinian Legislative Council and agreed to share good practice. That is extremely important in today's world and very forward-looking for an institution that is as young as ours. Scotland should be staking its place in Europe and the world and it should have the vision to promote peace and stability actively. Bill Kidd said that sometimes these aspirations are seen as a bit idealistic and naive. Elaine Smith said that, too, when she was promoting peace education during a debate in Parliament some time ago. As I said when we talked about the peace stone—the Sconestone—going around the world, if we cut off the roots to any kind of idealism, we will never advance and we will never get anywhere. Our reputation for democratic and peaceful constitutional change means that we could be established in the world as a force in aiding conflict resolution. We can invite people here from overseas and provide a peaceful setting for mediation and negotiation. I cannot remember which countries were involved, but that was done a few years ago—I think that Angus Robertson headed it up—with some eastern European states that were suffering conflict at the time. We can invite people here and we can send Scots outward, too, in the spirit of international co-operation and world stability. We might well be a small nation, but we can find a new way of going forward and make a real mark in the world.

To ask the First Minister what impact the pre-budget report will have on Scotland. (S3F-2093)

As the First Minister said, North Sea oil revenues are projected to reach up to £50 billion from this year to 2014. Does he agree that the £9.5 billion increase in that projection strengthens the case for capital acceleration, as called for by the Government and the Opposition in this Parliament? Does he agree that the chancellor's intransigence and Scottish Labour's ineffectiveness is indeed holding back Scotland's economic recovery?

Does Rhona Brankin accept that it was a referendum of the Scottish people that brought the Parliament into being?

It will come as no surprise to anyone in the chamber that nationalists are in favour of having the Parliament take on the full responsibilities of a sovereign state; nor will it come as much of a surprise that we favour more responsibility coming our way. The minister's motion reflects that position in urging that "where there is consensus ... recommendations are implemented before the dissolution of the current UK Parliament." Today we have heard a great deal about what can be done.  Of course, there is the thorny question of the financial proposals. The tax proposals in the Calman report have been the subject of some discussion since it was published. Much has been made of the fact that the proposed 10p Holyrood tax would not be optional but would be hedged about with restrictions and hard wired to policies made in Whitehall over which this chamber has no control. There would be responsibility without control. I am in no way suggesting that Whitehall actively plots to deprive Scotland of the resource that she needs. However, I contend that, necessarily, its eyes are fixed on the south-east of England and its ears tuned to London, and that we in Scotland need to work together to get the best deal for Scotland.

Not just now, thank you. Since the previous debate on the Calman commission in June, a white paper has been issued by the Secretary of State for Scotland. It varies from the Calman report slightly, but not overly much. The proposed Scottish tax will apply to all rates of tax—basic, higher and the new 50p surtax—and those rates will all move in tandem. Scotland would not be able to increase one and decrease another; nor could we just cut the basic rate to give the lowest paid a break. We could not increase the threshold, and we could not offer additional relief to people bringing up children, for example. Westminster would still control the tax system.

The SNP's current position is, as ever, that we should have a referendum of the Scottish people to decide whether we want to have full levers of control over our nation. The proposal in the white paper is that an amount—which the Treasury predicts would be equivalent to a 10p tax cut in Scotland in the coming year—would be removed from the block grant each year. In effect, that means that no responsibility would be transferred to the Scottish Government and Parliament, as the adjustments to the block grant would remove the effects of Scottish Government actions on the economy. Measures introduced by the Scottish Government that improved the economy and increased tax yield would, under normal Government operations in a normal country, result in an increased flow of money to Scottish coffers. Under the Murphy system, that increased tax yield would be removed  by the Treasury each year. Similarly, if one of the other parties took power at some point and its actions damaged the Scottish economy, thus reducing the tax yield, the Treasury would increase the block grant to compensate. That means that the Scottish Government and the Scottish Parliament would have the responsibility of setting the economy, but they would not have either the responsibility of dealing with the consequences or the ability to disburse the fruits of good decisions. That surely is not good for the Government, the Parliament, or the nation.

Derek Brownlee will be pleased to know that I will make suggestions in that regard later in my speech. The proposal on taxation policy is no more flexible than the 3p tax-varying power, although its scope is wider. With Whitehall still controlling the block grant, the power to vary tax is surrounded by considerations of whether exercising it would be offset by a decrease in the block grant by a Government in London that needs to find savings.

No—I want to get on, thank you. It would be better, of course, to transfer all power over all taxation and spending to Scotland, but that is perhaps a different debate. Back in June I noted that, although Calman mooted further borrowing powers, such powers would be ineffective. As Professors Andrew Hughes Hallett and Drew Scott argued—as have others since—the Calman proposals in that regard would result in financial instability. Because of an overreliance on one taxation stream and an inability to borrow to smooth variations in income, the Scottish Government could be forced to cut costs or raise taxes during a downturn, thus inflicting even more damage on the Scottish economy. Jim Murphy's white paper proposes maintaining Scotland's current borrowing ability, but his successors would still be the only bankers in town. He talks about a new borrowing power, but it would have to be financed from raising taxes, not from revenue, and the limits would still be set by the Treasury, lumping Scotland in as just another Government department. Scotland's local authorities and quangos would also be in the  borrowing envelope that would be set by the Treasury, so there would be no scope for movement—the proposal is a financial straitjacket. As per the minister's motion, I urge that, "where there is consensus", Calman's recommendations should be implemented without delay. My response to Conservative colleagues on our right with regard to the proposals on taxation, borrowing and financial powers is that members of this institution should—jointly, across the Parliament—consider financial powers that would benefit Scotland in the transition to independence.

I thank Sandra White for securing the debate. The cross-party group on asylum seekers and refugees was one of the first cross-party groups to be set up in the Parliament. It was established in 1999 because we had news of the dispersal of asylum seekers in Glasgow. The group was indeed cross party and members will excuse me if I name a few folk who were active in it: Sandra White, of course, James Douglas-Hamilton, Donald Gorrie, Elaine Smith and Tommy  Sheridan. There were others, and Patrick Harvie is the group's current convener. Not just those members but most members, including the previous Executive, felt the same way about the issue. The current Government feels the same way. I remember that an attempt by Jack McConnell and Nicol Stephen to establish a protocol on dawn raids was scuppered by the then UK minister. To that group of people I can add civic Scotland, churches, voluntary support groups, people who worked at Dungavel in various roles and even the locals in Strathaven, where I live. People came from all over the country to take part in vigils at Dungavel. Scotland cares about the detention of children. Concern about the issue is not the preserve of a single person, group or political party. There is consensus: it is wrong to lock up children. It is wrong to lock up someone who has done no wrong, whatever their age, but locking up children is much worse. It is immoral, unethical and brutal to lock up a child, whether they are with one parent, two parents or unaccompanied—and to add to that experience the experience of seeing a parent in handcuffs. The evidence of the effect on children is there for anyone to see, as a result of the pilot study at Yarl's Wood. I experienced particular horror when I read that one child reported the re-emergence of post-traumatic stress disorder. I have seen the effects of PTSD on someone close to me. How on earth can we justify inflicting such horror on a child in this country? We all care and I suspect that we are all frustrated that despite the existence of the Children (Scotland) Act 1995 there seems to be a little piece of Scotland—wherever an asylum seeker family happens to be—that is not Scotland and over which we have no jurisdiction. Many people have tried to tackle the issue and there has been progress, but the last resort or exceptional circumstance criterion is not being applied. According to Scotland's Commissioner for Children and Young People, more than 100 children have been detained at Dungavel during the past year, so the detention of children is not an exceptional occurrence but a normal part of the process of deporting a family. The detention of children at Dungavel is limited to 72 hours, but a stay in Dungavel is often a precursor to a move to detention elsewhere in the UK. We send children who have been part of our community and sometimes have been born in Scotland away from Scotland and the people that they know, to be locked up. There is no doubt that the UK Government is wrong to detain children. It is right that Scotland  stands against the detention of children. As I said in Parliament four years ago—the same was said five, six, seven, eight, nine and 10 years ago—we must all get together and keep shouting about how wrong the detention of children at Dungavel is. Four years and one week ago, I said: "We all want the practices to stop, because such treatment offends us and it offends the people against whom it is meted out; it offends those who have come to care for those people in their community and it offends everyone who has dignity."— [ Official Report , 23 November 2005; c 21005.]  That still stands.

I, too, congratulate Shirley-Anne Somerville on securing the debate. Understandably, it has been very much centred on Edinburgh and the Lothians. I thought that I would redress the balance a wee bit and talk about what was done in Glasgow and the west of Scotland. The first women's suffrage society in Glasgow was formed in 1870. Then there was the Glasgow and West of Scotland Association for Women's Suffrage. As Christine Grahame said, that association soon became the Women's Social and Political Union and the breakaway, non-violent Women's Freedom League. There was peaceful revolt, and some quite noisy revolt in Glasgow. The Glasgow suffragettes went down to London and took part in window-smashing raids in 1912. Dorothea Chalmers Smith was imprisoned for housebreaking with intent to set fire in Park Gardens in 1913. That took place in the culture of society in relation to women that some members have mentioned. As we know, history always favours the victors. There is an awful lot of history in Scotland, the UK and Europe where the part played by women is not mentioned. Women were very active in all sorts of campaigns to make society a bit better. Looking back at the trades movement, for example, we can see the roots of the women's suffrage movement. Elspeth King wrote some really interesting stuff about the subject. She wrote: "The weaving trade ... was totally female in Scotland", unlike in the north of England, where it consisted of men, women and children. Wages were consequently lower in Scotland. The first women's strike took place as early as 1768, in Paisley. It was reported:  "a female combination ... has been entered into by the young women of this place ... who refuse to work, unless on higher wages." And quite right, too. It was a woman weaver, I think in 1832, who called for the vote, and that takes me back to the radical uprising in 1820. We rightly talk about the men who suffered at that time, but there were women who were part of that movement, too, as can be seen in the progress that was made. I know that there are women in the chamber who have read Marion Reid's book, "A Plea for Women". That book was way ahead of its time, and it is a reference that we should all look at often. It was first published in the mid-19 th century. Marion Reid spoke about the roles of men and women in society. I love the quote: "the effects on men of an artificially inflated sense of their prerogatives are just as unfortunate as those of constant depreciation on women." She was not just shouting about giving women rights; she recognised that those are human rights that have an effect on everyone in society. That is how it is: it is a human right to be treated the same as anyone else. As Johann Lamont said, with all this talk about positive discrimination, it is as if women are trying to get something very special that nobody else has. When one part of society holds the power, it is only right that society considers how to rebalance that power. Women do not hold the power in our society today. I will end with a poem from another Glasgow woman, Marion Bernstein, written in 1876. She wrote: "I dreamt that the nineteenth century Had entirely passed away And had given place to a more advanced And very much brighter day For women's rights were established quite And man could the fact discern That he'd long be teaching his grandmamma What she didn't require to learn There were female chiefs in the Cabinet (Much better than males I'm sure!) And the Commons were three-parts feminine While the Lords were seen no more!" Although the intervening century and a quarter has thankfully seen our focus shift away from Westminster towards Holyrood, it is disappointing that, in the 21 st century, we still have not got as far as Marion Bernstein hoped for by the end of the 19 th century. I hope that, as our Parliament develops, we will no longer need to measure the progress of women towards equality but will be able to take it as a given.

I congratulate Jack McConnell on securing this important debate. The importance of world AIDS day on 1 December should be recognised; its aims are to be welcomed. As Jack's motion says, "there are now 33.2 million people living with HIV, including 2.5 million children".  Then there is the added issue of the age of those who become infected with HIV: half of them become infected before they are 25 and die before they are 35. Like Jack McConnell, I attended the event during the festival of politics at which Annie Lennox told us about her sing campaign, which was inspired by listening to Nelson Mandela in Africa. The name of the campaign is extremely positive and reflects the fact that song is an important way to spread a message, particularly in places such as South Africa, which has a tradition of activist songs and singing. It is a way to create solidarity and communicate messages because people are encouraged and inspired by singing. That is particularly important when we consider the stigma that AIDS and HIV have around the world. It is a big issue. There are communities in sub-Saharan Africa in which people are scared to be tested to find out whether they are HIV positive because of the stigma that it brings upon them. As Annie Lennox mentioned—and I emphasise—those with the best intentions can often inadvertently make that problem worse. Where particular religious persuasions have issues with some of the preventive measures that can be used to combat HIV, that becomes a big problem and the stigma becomes even worse. I cannot remember the name of the group of visitors from Africa that I went along to listen to one day, but I was fascinated by them. They were a group of clerics—ministers—who were actively working in their respective villages to promote awareness of HIV and preventive measures. That is very important and it was very brave of those religious people to do that within their communities. It is to be welcomed. Although she was inspired in Africa, Annie Lennox also talked about the situation here. It is a problem. We should never bury our heads in the sand, although, as Jack McConnell says, we are fortunate that we can manage the condition here. The HIV infection and AIDS quarterly report up to March this year said that, cumulatively, there were almost 6,000 HIV reports and 1,500 AIDS cases. It also said that the total number of deaths was 1,594. I am pleased that the Government is taking action—Shona Robison, the Minister for Public Health and Sport, will speak about that in her response to the debate. It is extremely important that we have a much more co-ordinated approach to improve access to specialist HIV care and to prevent HIV transmission. It is also important that we get that co-ordination right. Great stuff is being done all over Lanarkshire for world AIDS day on 1 December. There are awareness-raising events involving colleges, North  Lanarkshire Council, South Lanarkshire Council, general practitioners, dentists and pharmacists. I also mention the west Lanarkshire girl guides. Those young women have a link with Ghana and some of them hope to go out there next year. One thing that they want to talk about when they go is AIDS awareness. Young people relating to other young people across the globe can help to make a big difference. I echo the call for the Parliament to take seriously Annie Lennox's offer to be in some way an ambassador for international development for the Parliament. We should never underestimate the impact that people such as Annie Lennox can have. She is known internationally; people love her and the way that she cares about the issue shines from her. We should back the sing campaign and the Parliament should seriously consider taking up that generous offer.

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth has had with the UK Government in relation to further acceleration of capital expenditure. (S3O-8472)

I know that the cabinet secretary has welcomed the broad political and civic  consensus that further acceleration of capital expenditure would be advantageous to Scotland's economy and, indeed, to social housing as a stated priority of the Government. Has he had an indication that the chancellor's pre-budget report will give some comfort to all those who recognise the need for continuation of the accelerated capital expenditure programme?

Is the First Minister aware that former Conservative leader Iain Duncan Smith recently called for the scrapping of sentences of two months or less in England? Does he welcome this admission from the Conservative Party that short sentences are, to quote IDS, "farcical"? Does he agree—

Does the First Minister agree that Conservatives and Labour members in Scotland should start to base their prison policy on evidence rather than perceived populism?

Is the cabinet secretary aware of the concern of elected members of South Lanarkshire Council that restrictions on the future revenue budget are due to the increasing servicing costs of the private finance initiative/public-private partnership schools project?

Presiding Officer, this is a worrying day, right enough, because I find myself agreeing with both George Foulkes and Bill Aitken.  Scotland needs many things, and improvements to our record on fires and fire fatalities should be near the top of our list. It is important that we all pay tribute to the fire prevention work that is being done by fire boards and Scotland's firefighters. The report makes it clear that there is a long-term downward trend in fire-related deaths in Scotland, and much of that must be due to the hard work of the fire boards and firefighters in preventing fires and persuading people to take responsibility for their own safety. The downward trend is also due to the continuing improvements in the fire service that have come about through hard work and continuous training. We should note that contribution to the overall health of our nation. However, I pick up on John Lamont's comments, as did the FBU, about the lack of evaluation. Surely we can work towards changing that. I also understand that there is a problem to be addressed in the number of fires that are started deliberately and without concern for others. That must be addressed through the actions of a number of agencies such as our police forces, and the educational efforts of our fire boards. Looking at the report, I see that there is a bit of an elephant in the room. According to the report, alcohol plays a part in 62 per cent of fire deaths across Scotland. Almost two thirds of all fire deaths are connected to the consumption of alcohol, as far as is known, but the figures might be underreported; in fact, the report speculates that the figure probably is underreported, because there is no requirement on fire investigators to look for evidence of alcohol consumption being related to fire deaths. The figures will report only when there is overwhelming evidence that alcohol consumption was a factor in the fire. We are left to speculate on what the true figure might be; Nigel Don also referred to that when he mentioned analysing the figures from the top of the pyramid down to the base. I assume that there is no way of determining how many fatalities are caused by a fire that has no link to alcohol consumption. However, the effects of alcohol on a sleeping resident could have played a part in their death. Senses are dulled by alcohol and lack of awareness certainly precludes precipitate action. I know that my colleague Stewart Maxwell will talk more about safety cigarettes, and they can help, but we do not have such things as safety chip pans, frying pans or toasters, for example. In addition, the report deals with fire fatalities without taking into account injuries that are caused by fire. It might be rather interesting to see how the breakdown of figures shows up circumstances in which the fire does not result in a fatality. A whole load of injuries might be caused by fires, but we do not have a note of them today. It would be  instructive for us to have that information, so I encourage the minister to consider the possibility of pulling together more information to let us all see the extent of the problem. The Sweeney report majors heavily on joint working and collaboration in prevention, and the alcohol issue cuts across Government portfolios, so it would be useful to have that information. There is no information in the report about fires that cause no death or injury.

I take on board what Stewart Maxwell says, but in a climate in which we talk about the scourge of alcohol in Scotland's society, we must consider the issues across the board. In reporting on fatalities and injuries that have been caused by fire, when we say that a fire death was caused by a cigarette, we must ask whether that happened because the person who was smoking the cigarette was too drunk to know what they were doing with it. Are deaths in chip pan fires caused when someone comes home from the pub drunk and fancies chips? As I said, the issue is extremely difficult but we must consider it because there are social and financial costs to the individual and to society. The financial aspect includes the costs of replacing possessions, whether or not they are insured, sending out the firefighters and providing accommodation for those who are rendered homeless. The report makes it clear that Scotland suffers more fires per head of population than anywhere else in the United Kingdom. There must—I should not say "must" because I do not know; that is the problem. There may be a partial explanation for that in Scotland's relationship with alcohol. There are no recommendations in the report on how to address the connection between alcohol consumption and fire deaths. That is understandable, because it is a difficult area for any firemaster or fire board to tread in, as Stewart Maxwell said. However, it is a matter that we must address, a problem that we have to face up to and a social and financial burden that we could do without.  We must address Scotland's unhealthy relationship with alcohol and I support the Scottish Government in its efforts to do that. We may have a related problem that we should also examine: the link between alcohol consumption and fire fatalities and injuries. I urge the minister to investigate what can be done to examine the link between alcohol and not only fire deaths but fire injuries and fires in which no injury or death resulted. There may also be a case for investigating fires that are set deliberately by people who have drunk too much—people who might not dream of doing such a thing in any other case. Is that another result of the booze culture in Scotland and one that puts other people's lives at risk? I believe that the link between alcohol and avoidable fire fatalities, injuries and damage is worthy of investigation. I hope that the Parliament agrees.

To ask the First Minister what impact the Scottish Government considers that the return of the east coast mainline rail service to public ownership will have on services between Scotland and London. (S3F-2007)

I am very concerned that Labour's plan to cut Glasgow's rail link to the east coast main line will further disadvantage Scotland. Does the First Minister agree that the energies of Labour politicians should be focused on persuading their London colleagues to stop cutting services to Scotland?

I thank all members who have signed the motion, and those who are in the chamber. At the end of August this year, the Rev Neil Galbraith—the parish minister in Cathcart and the founder of the Glasgow the Caring City initiative—called to tell me all about the Sconestone that was to be presented to him by the First Minister, and the honour that he felt at being chosen as the Sconestone's first keeper, prior to its being sent round the world on a never-ending journey of kindness. I was intrigued, and I became even more so when, along with Neil Galbraith as the first keeper, I went to Hunter primary school in East Kilbride. Along with all the pupils, I learned more about the stone and how its sculptor Warren MacLeod, from Nova Scotia, was inspired. Warren MacLeod lived in the north-east of Scotland for some time, and was fascinated by the neolithic carved stone orbs—more than 380 of them—that have been found there over the years. When Warren was given the bronze cast of the stone that had been found on the Brahn estate, just north of Inverness, he was hooked. He combined the concept of our 17 th century Brahn seer with the neolithic orbs, and created the Sconestone, which is, I understand, currently in Austria. The stone is a six-sided orb with three carved portals, each of which represents a view into the past, the present and the future. It represents wisdom: the wisdom to learn from the past, understand the present and plan for the future.  Today—November 11—is armistice day, when we remember those who made the ultimate sacrifice. It is a day on which we remember the past and those who still serve in the present and, I hope, on which we consider a future that is free of war and conflict. When Warren MacLeod spoke to Calum MacDonald of Runrig about the possibility of launching the stone at the band's homecoming Scotland 2009 concert in Scone, Calum suggested that it be called the Sconestone, which links it to the stone of destiny upon which the kings of the Picts and of Scotland were crowned. Warren liked that idea—he said: "my stone is a new stone ... with a new destiny ... to go on a never-ending journey of kindness from hand to hand, keeper to keeper around the world." That is simple, straightforward and inspiring, as many of the best ideas are. The children at Hunter primary school were certainly inspired. They loved the story and the stone. Every one of them who was there that day touched, rubbed or held the stone and pledged to perform an act of kindness. They made a kindness tree to mark the day on which the stone visited their school. They endorsed entirely the ethos of the stone and they were delighted that such a beautiful object—essentially Scottish in form and symbolic values—was heading round the world. The stone is travelling round the world, to Nova Scotia, where the House of Assembly unanimously endorsed resolution No 683 in favour, to the United States, Hungary, Romania, Slovakia, the Czech Republic and Austria. It is only a little over two months since its launch. The rules of the Sconestone are simple. Whoever is honoured to be the keeper must do at least one act of kindness; they must keep the stone for no more than seven days; they must encourage friends and strangers to touch the stone and pledge an act of kindness; and they must pass the stone to a person who can be trusted to honour its purpose. I urge members to log on to the Sconestone.com website to track progress and see the marvellous initiatives that have been carried out by the keepers so far. I do not have time to detail them all, but I will mention a couple. In Hungary, the keeper, political correspondent Tamas Szalay, and the clown doctors took the stone to the Pen Heim children's hospital to spread magic and kindness. It went from there to a ceilidh at the Caledonia pub in Budapest, where I am sure that magic and kindness were further spread. Franciscan brother Bojte Csaba, as keeper in Romania, spread the word about the needs of street children. So far, Brother Csaba's Saint  Francis Foundation in Transylvania has adopted and fostered almost 1,500 children. Sadly, that work still has a long way to go. In New York, Barbara Mahon, the third keeper, took the stone to the 9/11 2009 gathering, where it was warmly received by the families, friends and colleagues of those who lost their lives eight years ago. As I said, an inspiration to Warren MacLeod was that wisdom is to learn from the past, understand the present and plan for the future; the hope is that, all over the world, the Sconestone and its inherent ethos will further inspire. That is certainly the case here in Scotland, where the Rev Neil Galbraith is already working on a legacy plan. Many here will know the good work that Glasgow the Caring City has done in the provision of humanitarian assistance and care in more than 50 countries around the world—the charity provides care and support wherever there is a need. The Rev Neil Galbraith's view—shared, I am sure, by all in the Parliament—is that here at home, in Scotland, there should be no such thing as child poverty. After all, Scotland's children deserve better. There is cross-party support for Glasgow the Caring City's cross out child poverty in Scotland initiative. I understand that the statement of intent, compiled by the Rev Neil Galbraith and Tom Harris MP, has been signed by the First Minister. Again, the aspirations are simple and straightforward. They include the statements that "no society can be truly at ease with itself while significant numbers of children live in poverty" and that "the elimination of child poverty must be a priority for us all" because "poverty corrodes children's health, their happiness, their safety and their aspirations." Furthermore, "only through the elimination of child poverty can we expect the children of Scotland to live their lives to the full, and to be able to enjoy the opportunities that the rest of society take for granted." Those are only a selection of the statements from the Cathcart declaration. I am sure that members will be further informed about the initiative before too long. I urge everyone to support it. All too often, initiatives such as the Sconestone and aspirations such as spreading kindness can be considered naive and, some would say, over idealistic. However, if the children of Hunter primary school in East Kilbride can be inspired and understand the concept of spreading good, so can adults from all walks of life. If the life of any one person in this world is cheered by the Sconestone,  it is worth while. If the legacy of the first keeper is to help eradicate child poverty in Scotland, we should all embrace the concept of using Scottish symbolism and values to stimulate acts of kindness. I learned earlier today that this week is world kindness week and that Friday is world kindness day. Again, I thank members who are present for the debate. I hope that they will pledge to perform an act of kindness on Friday, which is world kindness day, and to pass the word to all those who were, unfortunately, unable to be present this evening.

While meeting many businesses in Lanarkshire recently, I have noticed that the view is prevalent that when times are rough—in times of recession—it is essential not to drop training and to hone businesses so that they can be successful when we come out of recession. Can the cabinet secretary explain further today's announcement of funding to support business improvement techniques? I understand that that involves work-based training, especially for manufacturing and engineering businesses. Can she give us an idea of the level of interest among companies large and small in taking up the offer?

It amazes me that it is nine years since the National  Parks (Scotland) Act 2000 was passed. I was on the Transport and the Environment Committee at the time, and I think that I am right in saying that Sarah Boyack was the minister. I remember the general consensus on the designation of national parks. As Liam McArthur and Gil Paterson said, they were long overdue when one considers the international work of John Muir. As Sarah Boyack said earlier, it was essential to protect our outstanding landscape and heritage. That worthy statement is so important because we do have outstanding landscapes and a wonderful heritage. I look at the principles and objectives of our two national parks as written and followed in the Cairngorms and Loch Lomond and the Trossachs. Those of the Cairngorms talk about conserving and enhancing biodiversity and landscapes, as well as sustainable deer management, which is very particular to that area. The Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park recognises that it represents some of Scotland's most iconic landscapes and reflects Scotland's identity through the natural and cultural heritage that it promotes and protects. So we start from a good base of what national parks are about. However, as we have heard from the minister and others today, also behind the national park designations and their progress were issues such as the economic and social development of communities. Our national parks are about people, as well as wildlife and landscapes. We have heard today about the successes of both parks in that regard. For example, there is tourism and its inherent business, transport initiatives, training schemes and grant administration. I know that there are concerns. Jamie McGrigor spoke about concerns about planning requirements. I hope that he takes comfort in and supports the measures that came into effect in August to create a more effective planning system in order to support economic recovery. Those measures will impact on the planning functions of national parks. The changes include the establishment of local review bodies so that councillors rather than the Scottish Government can review decisions about small-scale local developments. That change was introduced because, historically, a large volume of planning applications were routinely notified by planning authorities to ministers for consideration, but around 90 per cent of those applications did not require decisions to be taken at the national level. The changes also mean that there is a requirement on developers to consult communities before they submit major development proposals. That is more important in our national parks than anywhere else. More information on planning decisions will also be made available. It is  extremely important that we consider those things in the round and the benefits that can be brought to our national parks as a result of them. I was interested in what Jackie Baillie said about local occupancy conditions, which are an issue. That is one example that shows why it was important to recognise that the time was right for review. We can consider our experiences over the past nine years and try to make improvements for the future. A lot has happened in the nine years since the 2000 act was passed; it is time to review what has happened and implement measures. I therefore welcome the minister's statement. She outlined sensible measures, particularly the designation of a defined term for the ministerially chaired strategy group, so that it does not go on for ever. That is extremely important. Rob Gibson's speech was interesting. We should never think that one solution fits all; rather, we should always consider what is best for local communities and how that will serve Scotland's national interest. Over the decades, successive committees of inquiry, way back to the Ramsay committee in 1945, have recommended other locations for national parks. Different locations have been mooted over the years, including Glen Affric, Glen Cannich, Strathfarrar, Ben Nevis, Glencoe, Loch Torridon, Loch Maree and Loch Broom. As recently as February 2009, Harris in the Western Isles voted in a local referendum, by 732 votes to 311, to petition the Scottish Government for the parish area to be recognised as a national park. When he was the Minister for Environment, Michael Russell said that he would consider such a request if it had the community's support. I understand that the request is still open to consideration. There is a democratic element. That takes us back to what Rob Gibson talked about. The wish must come from the community. Things that are community driven are always more sustainable. We should never try to impose a model that has worked in one place on to somewhere else. We have talked about the economic benefits of the parks, and I opened my speech by talking about the absolute requirement to protect our fabulous landscapes and heritage. However, we should not forget that our national parks can also be about fun and enjoyment. Indeed, the Loch Lomond and the Trossachs National Park Authority talks clearly about special places and co-ordinating the efforts of local communities and all the different sectors to deliver better integration of activities, the best use of resources and better results in terms of environmental, economic and social benefits. We should never underestimate the sense of wellbeing that being out and about in  our wonderful landscapes creates for people. That is important. National parks are to be welcomed and I support our having the debate, which has been interesting. National parks are about sustainable development, biodiversity and economic development, but they are also about the health and wellbeing of the people of this nation. I return to what Chris Harvie said. I will not quote Gerard Manley Hopkins; rather, I will paraphrase him. We have all those things, but let us never forget the absolute joy and importance of preserving our wildernesses for future generations.

Does the member welcome the plans that have been announced to assess 60 abandoned cottages and farmsteads in the Cairngorms for possible conversion to affordable housing?

Irene Oldfather is going to become very embarrassed by the praise that is being heaped on her tonight. I have to say that, much as she is a cheery wee soul, she is looking even happier today than I have seen her looking for a long time. She is just beaming, which is a mark of the honesty and integrity with which she has been campaigning on dementia for so long. To have achieved another step forward in how we deal with dementia is to be commended. I will not try to mention everybody who has been involved, because I will miss somebody out and someone will take the huff, but everyone has done a tremendous job. I am not an expert on dementia, and I do not know as much about it as many other people do. I have been fortunate in that my family and those who are close to me have not been sufferers—yet. We all know that it can happen to anyone at any time. I remember that many years ago, when Nicola Sturgeon and I were out campaigning in a by-election, we spoke to a couple and the lady was suffering from dementia. Nicola and I still talk about it, because even at that time the lady was younger than I was. She was between Nicola's age and mine. Although the vast majority of  sufferers are over 65, as the figures show, there are people who suffer from pre-senile dementia, which must be a huge burden for their families. The projected figures for South Lanarkshire, where I live and which my constituency covers, bear thinking about. It is reckoned that, during a 10-year period, the number of sufferers in South Lanarkshire will increase by 25 per cent. However, the increase in East Kilbride is estimated at 51 per cent, which raises issues. Dr Simpson spoke a lot of sense about how we ask service providers to deal with the issues. Talking of service providers, there is a group in my constituency that I have come to know well—the East Kilbride dementia group. The group supports dementia sufferers who are still living in the community and works to maintain their independence. I am hugely impressed by the work that it does, particularly as it was founded in 1991 and has been working all this time. It has accepted a massive challenge and it has succeeded because it pushed out the boundaries and did so with a great passion and belief. It believes in a homely environment with small groups of service users and that the ideal setting has a service user to staff ratio of no more than 3:1. The group helps people to maintain their independence, supports and helps people to live at home and provides opportunities for social activity. I thought it was great when the group told me that, although the users might not remember that they had a day out or where they went, as the old clichés might suggest, they will have the sense of wellbeing that is so important because it maintains the sense of life and of being worth while. We should never forget that, because it is just as important as many of the other aspects. The last thing I want to mention is a wonderful example of community spirit. A small company in East Kilbride called Ecebs recently did a team-building exercise with its staff and it decided to help a local charity. It went to the East Kilbride dementia group and 30 Ecebs staff—the entire staff complement—turned up for an away day at the group's premises. From the managing director Alan Moody right down, the entire team spent the whole day completely redecorating the group's premises and doing all the gardening and handyman and handywoman jobs that needed to be done. Is that not a wonderful example of community spirit? There were benefits for both sides. Ecebs benefited from its teamwork and the dementia group benefited from the work that was carried out for them. That is to be commended. I hope that other small and large companies that tune into some of what we talk about in Parliament will take up that idea, rather than pay consultants a fortune to run team-building exercises, which can be done in the local community.  Again, I congratulate Irene Oldfather and everyone else.

Congratulations.

I doubt that.

To ask the Scottish Executive what effect inherited private finance initiative/public-private partnership payments will have on its future budgets. (S3O-8095)

Is the cabinet secretary concerned about the effects of PFI/PPP projects on local authority budgets? An illustration is that the total cost for South Lanarkshire PFI/PPP schools over the lifetime of the contracts will be more than £1 billion. Revenue budgets over that period, which are already restricted as a result of cuts from Westminster, will be further restricted by servicing those contracts. Is the cabinet secretary concerned that local authorities are in that position? Does he agree that the previous Administration in Scotland was lax in not making better use of the public's money by using traditional procurement?

Does the cabinet secretary agree that, rather than indulging in blatant scaremongering about the national health service and wallowing in negativity, members of the Labour group would better serve this nation by urging their Westminster colleagues to implement capital acceleration and powers for this Parliament to enable Scotland's Government, in partnership with Scotland's Parliament and civic society, to further protect jobs, support families and communities, and keep our investment in skills, innovation and industries of the future?

I, too, thank everyone involved in what was an interesting and timeous inquiry. The evidence sessions were worth while and informative, as were the discussions among MSP colleagues in private session.  As the report makes clear, there are facts that cannot be disputed and which create the background against which everything else must be painted. It is a background of recession, with difficult times ahead and hard choices to be made. It is clear that the cash that is available to the Scottish Government for 2010-11 is lower than was ever originally envisaged. To quote the committee's report, that "takes the Scottish Government and Parliament into new and potentially challenging territory." That will not be a one-off for 2011, of course. Professor Bell's report, which forms a supplement to the committee's report, is valuable in that regard, and it informed much of the discussion that the committee had with those who gave evidence. In his introduction, Professor Bell writes: "it is unlikely that there will be any real increase in the resources to support Scottish Government spending programmes over the next five years. Indeed, they may fall. This is a marked contrast to the period since 2001 during which the real resources available to the Scottish government grew at an unprecedented rate." Professor Bell also takes "as given what is widely accepted by most serious commentators on the British economy, namely, that it will be some time before any effective economic recovery takes place."

I intend to address that point later in my speech. Mr Kerr has been jumping up and down and seems impatient; he will just have to wait. Professor Bell and witnesses to the committee flagged up the debt issue, which Derek Brownlee mentioned. Even when the corner is turned and we are told that we are no longer technically in recession, the unprecedented level of borrowing that is the result of the UK's management of the economy will have serious consequences for Scotland's public spending profile, well beyond the short term. As Professor Bell concludes: "the more profound effects on public services will arise due to the 'overhang' of debt that has to be repaid by the UK government and the negative effect that will have on public spending throughout the UK ... over at least the next decade." Under the current constitutional settlement, if interest rates rise the effect on UK finances will again mean that the Scottish budget is hammered. The Scottish Government will be constrained by the Barnett squeeze, by increasing payments for inherited PFI projects and by the ridiculous situation whereby, unlike Scottish local authorities, the Northern Ireland Executive and even English  parish councils, the Scottish Government is unable to borrow. There has been talk recently about how we must all pull together. Of course we should do so. An important step that the Parliament could take would be to campaign unanimously for borrowing powers for Scotland, which would give us the flexibility prudently to allow Scotland's Parliament to be more responsive to Scotland's needs. Many people support that approach, from Unison and the Scottish Trades Union Congress to the Royal Society of Edinburgh and our churches. We should work together for borrowing powers. On the subject of political consensus, I will seek consensus with Mr Kerr. We must get beyond the game of ping-pong in which members argue, "It's a cut", "No it's not", "Yes, it is." That is not constructive for anyone. Let us consider the facts. At the beginning of the three-year spending review, a settlement was agreed and publicly funded organisations were given an indication of their spending capacity for the period. Then, £500 million was wheeched away by the chancellor in his 2008 pre-budget report. The budget is now £500 million less than was previously advised. Public bodies will receive £500 million less than was expected. Some MSPs have worked in public services and some of them have probably been budget holders in public service organisations. If they had been promised funding and then had it withdrawn, they would have been in no doubt whatever that there had been a cut. That has to be faced. The Finance Committee urged subject committees carefully to reflect on its report. Hard times are ahead, and the Parliament and Government must face them together. We should all rise to that challenge.

In Diageo's "Corporate Citizenship Report 2008", Paul Walsh says: "The most powerful way for a business to do good is to do good business." Given that Diageo appears to interpret good business as anything that is in the interests of its shareholders, regardless of its social impact, does the cabinet secretary agree that that interpretation of doing good is far from sustainable and makes a mockery of the concept of corporate citizenship?

Like the First Minister, I was delighted to note this week that there are now 1,000 more police officers in Scotland than there were when the SNP took the reins of Government in 2007. That represents the fulfilment—ahead of schedule—of another election promise, and it is a mark of the effectiveness of this SNP Government. The election of the SNP more than two years ago did not change just who was in government; it changed the way in which we are governed. Scottish ministers now lead the country, make  space for Scotland in the world and stand up for Scotland's interests. The third programme for government will take Scotland further forward. Its aspirations are to make Scotland a better and fairer place, and to build the foundations of a more successful, responsible and confident country. I am pleased that the national conversation will come to a climax with the referendum bill, as was laid out in the manifesto on which we were elected—we are bringing it on exactly on timetable. The national conversation has engaged people throughout Scotland: there has been standing room only at some events, and responses have flooded in. Scotland's people delivered devolution by referendum—they have the right to be heard again. There are understandable differences of opinion about the constitutional direction that Scotland should take—that is healthy—but surely no member would not defend and support democracy. Who among us would deny the democratic right of a nation to choose its own future? Who would deny the right of citizens or subjects to cast their votes for that future? Scotland is moving forward, and it is for the Scottish people to decide how far and how fast it should do so. While seeking to move our nation forward on the constitution, the SNP Government also intends to move forward Scotland's legal profession. It intends to review and renew the framework within which that profession operates. I am sure that that will be supported across the chamber. The key points are to maintain access to justice and to ensure that the integrity of Scotland's legal system is protected. That is an important piece of work. The same applies to the debtor protection bill and the debt and family homes bill. Such bills may not create big headlines, but they will deliver improvements in the law on debt. Such legislation can show our Parliament at its best. In considering such bills, members across political divides work solidly and constructively in committees to ensure good outcomes. SNP ministers have shown their willingness to engage with committees, which I am sure will continue. There are also proposed bills on crofting reform and on wildlife and the natural environment, further legislation on alcohol, and the Forth crossing bill. I am delighted that there will be a housing bill, which must finally end the right to buy new social housing and extend the opportunities for pressured area status. Those are sensible ways to preserve public investment in housing and to work towards everyone having a decent roof over their head.

I contend that the Labour Party broke with the past when it extended the right to buy to housing associations some years ago. In the housing bill, there will be amending provisions for ancient monuments and listed buildings that are informed by the excellent work that the Historic Environment Advisory Council for Scotland has carried out. The proposed introduction of patients' rights legislation and legislation to reform the children's hearings system are particularly welcome. Both will improve services for people who are at their most vulnerable. I am sure that many colleagues in the chamber will expand on those themes.

I commend my Government for working as a minority Government with other parties around the chamber. It has often worked with the Conservatives in that context. One role of Government is that it should continue things, just as it should innovate—a Government should look back and see how things can be improved. The Scottish Government works innovatively and continues things that have happened in the past. In addition to the bills that I have mentioned, seven bills are already making their way through the system. As in this year's programme, there are elements of legislative housekeeping. However, some of the legislation—in train and in prospect—is radical. It looks to the future and finds Scottish ways of dealing with Scottish issues. The programme for government—the legislative outline that we are debating—is a continuation of the path on which the SNP set out two years ago. It is a necessary refreshment of government in Scotland. The mere administration of Scotland—which for far too long we had through the Scottish Office and then, with a couple of exceptions, from the Scottish Executive coalition for eight years—is now genuine government for Scotland. The Scottish Government is engaging with Scotland and the wider world. Recent events have shown that Scottish ministers can, and do, face extremely difficult situations. They meet those situations head on and take the correct decisions. Parliament and the Government that has been appointed from within it are proving that Scotland can rule itself. That is what has been achieved  over the past two years. The programme for government gives me confidence that improvement will continue. I commend to Parliament the referendum bill and the rest of the programme for government. May we legislate in harmony.

As a Central Scotland MSP who is concerned for the future of Kilmarnock following Diageo's proposals, I wish that the debate were not necessary. Nevertheless, I thank my colleague, Willie Coffey, for initiating the debate and for initiating—with Kilmarnock Football Club—the petition that is moving towards its aim of attracting 100,000 signatures. The wide spread of signatures that the petition has received from all around the globe emphasises the reach of the Johnnie Walker brand. East Ayrshire Council, too, has been extremely effective in developing a response to Diageo's proposals. Councillor Dougie Reid and his team, with the support of opposition group leaders and their respective teams, have provided important leadership in the community's response to the threat to the local economy. The threat to the local economy is major—a fact that has been recognised and acted on by the Cabinet Secretary  for Finance and Sustainable Growth and by the Scottish Government. In questions on the cabinet secretary's earlier statement on Diageo, I spoke of the importance of heritage and provenance to the premium brand that is Scotch whisky. The importance of the Johnnie Walker brand was a feature of the speeches that we heard from Willie Coffey and other members in the debate. The whole Scotch whisky industry is widely respected around the globe—its reputation has been hard fought for and built up over many years. Recognising the presence of whisky in the international market, I was surprised to see the analysis that was carried out by Donald Blair, which highlighted the poor rate of growth in the production of whisky since the 1970s. Apart from a short upswing in the lead-up to the recession, growth has averaged no more than about 1 per cent per annum for the past 25-30 years. Diageo's decision to shed such a large number of jobs has turned attention to the industry in a way that has not happened for many years. Communities and workers up and down Scotland are asking, "If jobs at Johnnie Walker—the world's leading whisky brand—are not safe, what jobs in the industry are safe?" Willie Coffey's suggestion that the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee conduct an inquiry into the future of the industry is helpful. That could help Parliament and the Government to identify barriers to growth of the industry, and give further consideration to the issues of heritage and provenance. That could help to set the industry on the path towards sustainable volume growth—not the growth in value that helped Diageo to pile up more than £2 billion of profit while throwing hundreds of workers on to the streets. The committee could address how we might gain a proper understanding of the place of whisky in the UK domestic market. Despite significant growth in the consumption of spirits in the UK, sales of whisky have declined by some 40 per cent. I understand from Willie Coffey that Johnnie Walker Red Label is not even offered for sale in some supermarkets in the Kilmarnock area. Also, despite its international profile, Johnnie Walker does not feature in the UK's leading brands. The committee could also consider alcohol duty. Some have said that the Johnnie Walker issue has no link to the debate on alcohol duty, but the future of the industry cannot be examined without consideration of all the issues. A unit of alcohol that is bought in the form of whisky costs the consumer 23p, whereas the cost of strong cider is just 4p. That is not fair at the best of times, but it is unacceptable at a time when hundreds of jobs are going in the whisky industry. Such issues must be addressed where they should be addressed,  which is by those who have the power to address them properly. Willie Coffey spoke of the dedication and loyalty to Johnnie Walker of the Kilmarnock workers. By contrast, dedication and loyalty of Diageo to the Kilmarnock workers is lacking. In looking at Diageo's corporate responsibility policies, I found nothing on Scotland, but note that Diageo Ireland says: "Our business is driven by the belief that we have a wide responsibility to the communities and the environments of Ireland." I say to Diageo: you also have that responsibility to Scotland. Start showing some.

We all know the importance of the Scotch whisky industry to Scotland and the important place of Diageo in that industry. That is why Unite's campaign to keep Diageo jobs in Scotland is so well supported throughout the parties. Does the cabinet secretary share my concern that Diageo's announcement potentially undervalues the heritage and provenance of whisky? We all must take very seriously the possible damage to whisky as a premium brand internationally.

I have real concerns on the Calman proposal to devolve 10p of income tax to Scotland, which could lead to an unexpected drop in income tax revenue. That, coupled with very limited borrowing powers, would leave the Scottish Government not with an underspend, but with a shortfall to report. Does the cabinet secretary agree that those proposals would leave Scotland in an extremely vulnerable position? Surely the Scottish Government would be forced to initiate swift spending cuts or have the prospect of being beholden to the Treasury for a last-minute bailout?

There are a couple of things that I wish to make clear at the start. First, no party in this land reconvened this Parliament; it was Scotland's people who did it, and it is Scotland's people who will deliver further for this nation. Secondly, I want to make clear the reality of where we are today in relation to funding. With minor exceptions, the Scottish Parliament is just another department of the UK Government for the purposes of funding. Strangely, the role of arguing for a fair share for Scotland rests with the Secretary of State for Scotland rather than with the Scottish ministers. After all, the secretary of state is the only one who sits at the Westminster Cabinet table. One of the minor exceptions was that the Parliament was to be responsible for local taxation. However, now that we have a Scottish Government that wishes to exercise that responsibility—by abolishing the discredited council tax—the resources to deliver such a change have been redefined as no longer being in the Scottish block. Effectively, Westminster  removed that devolved power, telling this Parliament, "If you reform local taxation to lift poorer people out of the tax net, we will remove the benefits from Scotland's poor—but continue to subsidise a regressive local tax in other parts of the UK". Given time, I could go on to cover the examples of free personal care, student grants and housing benefit, all of which have been debated at length in this chamber. I am sure that members have seen a pattern emerging over the past 10 years. As has been said, "Power devolved is power retained." After 10 years, we now know how that retention is exercised: it is through the control of finance. Calman is offering more of the same: devolution in theory; Westminster control in practice. Calman's proposal is to forget the 3p optional Scottish income tax and to adopt an obligatory 10p Scottish income tax. That tax is obligatory, as it is hedged about with conditions and hard-wired to policy decisions that still lie with Westminster. To do other than apply the 10p tax would be to risk the sort of quagmire of negotiation with the UK Treasury from which this Parliament and Scotland have already suffered the consequences. The inflexibility of the proposed arrangement is its biggest drawback—proof of Powell's adage that power devolved is power retained.

No. There is no scope for altering the balance between the upper and lower rates and for changing allowance rates—it is yet another regressive tax to be foisted on the Parliament. Calman moots further borrowing powers. Although those powers may be welcome, the fact that he has designated Jim Murphy as the only banker in town severely undermines their value. Without effective borrowing powers, the Parliament would be taking a significant risk in varying levels of taxation. As Professors Andrew Hughes Hallett and Drew Scott have argued, the Calman proposals would result in financial instability. Because of overreliance on one taxation stream and the inability to borrow to smooth variations in income, the Scottish Government could be forced to cut costs or raise taxes during a downturn, thus inflicting even further damage on the Scottish economy. The combination of Calman's tax and borrowing proposals could result in the Scottish Government having to make in-year alterations to budgets as income tax projections varied. The problem with Calman is the problem with devolution—a lack of balance.  To operate financial powers effectively, it may be necessary to make a series of adjustments to achieve our objective. That is real responsibility and control. Whether by accident or design—I will leave members to work out for themselves which it is—Calman would leave the Scottish Government accountable to its electorate for decisions forced on it by Westminster's continued control of the Parliament's finances. Calman proposes that we should get responsibility with no control, while Westminster retains control with no accountability.

I have often found that, when the Opposition has to listen to the truth, it reverts to its tired old arguments. All Governments and Parliaments should be accountable to their electorate. When the Scottish people decide that Scotland will be independent, the independent Government in Scotland will be accountable to its electorate for all the decisions that are taken in this independent country. That is why the SNP's amendment calls for continued debate, why decisions on matters as important as the Calman proposals should be taken by the Scottish people, and why those who care about the future of Scotland should vote for the SNP amendment.

I welcome the debate, which has been initiated by Jim Tolson. It is apposite that we are having it in the run-up to armed forces day on 27 June. It is absolutely true that the armed forces have great respect for any soldier who fights within the ranks, no matter where they were raised or from where they were recruited. The Gurkhas are almost the stuff of legend. People hear about those strong and committed soldiers and the fiercely contested recruitment process that goes on in Nepal to win the right to be a Gurkha soldier. There was therefore general revulsion when people realised, as a result of a campaign, how the Gurkha widows were being treated. There was also outrage with the recognition that the Government at Westminster tried to put what I would call disingenuous conditions on the right of retired Gurkhas to live here. Jim Tolson talked about the very basic condition, which was that soldiers had to serve 20 years for automatic qualification, but rank-and-file Gurkhas serve only 15 years. That seemed a very strange condition.  The Gurkha campaign did not arrive from nowhere. A lot of people have worked for the campaign for many years, and it has been fuelled by individual cases of injustice. At the time, I was shocked by the story of Honorary Lieutenant Tul Bahadur Pun, who had to get special leave to enter the UK for medical treatment in 2007 and in fact had to rely on the charity of the Gurkha brigade for welfare support while he was here. This was a soldier who won the Victoria Cross for his bravery in Burma in 1944, when he took on and defeated Japanese machine-gun bunkers single-handedly after they had killed the rest of his section. After he was refused treatment at a national health service hospital, he was so disgusted that he turned in his medals at Downing Street. I understand that he was told that he was due the NHS thousands of pounds in payment for the treatment that he had already received. I pay tribute to Nick Clegg, who joined Mr Pun on that demonstration in June 2008. By one of those strange coincidences that come round, it turned out that that soldier had saved the life of Joanna Lumley's father by carrying him back to a medical post under fire after he had been shot. As we all now know, it was after reading her father's diary that Ms Lumley became involved in the Gurkha campaign—and a very good profile she gave to it. We should all honour her for that, as well as honouring all the other people who have campaigned so hard over the years, such as Major Bill MacKay of Dunfermline, who was mentioned by Jim Tolson and who is mentioned in the motion. As I said, those who fight for this country deserve equal respect, whether they come from Scotland, England, Wales, Ireland, Commonwealth countries or Nepal. I believe that the armed forces have that feeling and give that recognition. My colleague the Minister for Schools and Skills, Keith Brown, served alongside the Gurkhas in the Falklands when he was a marine. As Jim Tolson said, Gurkhas have been part of the army for almost 200 years, and 200,000 Gurkhas fought in the two world wars, with 45,000 believed to have lost their lives fighting for Britain. I absolutely endorse the point that, if someone is willing to die for this country, they should be allowed to live in it. When the then Home Secretary, Jacqui Smith, made her announcements about the UK Government turnaround, she made some commitments, one of which was that the 1,400 outstanding applications for settlement that were currently with the UK Border Agency would be processed on the basis of the new policy as a matter of urgency before 11 June. That date has now passed, and I have been unable to find out whether the target was met. I hope that someone here who has been closely involved will be able to  find out and reassure people that the action has matched the rhetoric.

To ask the Scottish Executive what importance it places on having combined falls prevention and bone health strategies in community health partnerships in relation to osteoporosis services. (S3O-7156)

I thank the minister for her detailed answer. On the basis of that information, is it possible for her department to identify whether strategic and operational plans on falls and bone health are linking effectively to osteoporosis fragility and fracture services throughout Scotland?

This afternoon's debate is underpinned by the state of the UK economy and discussions about that. There has been what has been described as an unprecedented collapse of gross domestic product in the UK economy, with the highest-ever peacetime levels of public debt. That cannot be blamed solely on the bank bail-outs, as so many are keen to do—it is about debt that was accumulated in previous Labour years to help balance the books. Just one example of the UK Government's historic financial irresponsibility is the fact that, due to the introduction of the international financial reporting standards, off-balance-sheet PFI transactions must now be accounted for correctly and, indeed, bailed out by the Treasury. Where does the risk lie now? It lies with the public purse, despite the risk premium that has been paid to developers and speculators over the years. John Swinney outlined the effect on Scottish Government expenditure that that is having. The former and current Chancellors of the Exchequer and their colleagues are now scrabbling around to try to obfuscate reality and to obscure their inefficiencies, which are legion. When was the last time that one of Mr Darling's growth predictions turned out to be correct? I have no time to detail all the occasions that it took for him to move his estimate of public sector net borrowing from £38 billion to £180 billion.

No. The chancellor's previous forecasts destroy any credibility in those that he makes for the future. As we heard from Alex Johnstone, we have been left with a burden of debt. The chancellor's estimate of UK Government borrowing in 2009-10 is £175 billion. The recent economic projections of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development estimate that in 2010 the UK's gross public debt, which is one of the Maastricht criteria, will be 66 per cent of GDP—double that of Finland and 20 per cent higher than that of Ireland. The OECD's projections also show nations' financial liabilities.

I will not give way to Mr Kerr. I am teaching him something—I wish that he would sit down and listen to me. Sadly, the UK is again way out on its own, running net financial liabilities of 43 per cent of GDP in 2010. I find it interesting that small, independent Norway is offering money to the IMF while Peter Mandelson is preparing the UK to go, cap in hand, to ask for funds. The stark figures that I have given can be illustrated for Scotland in the budget cuts that are now being imposed. In the chancellor's budget, there was confirmation that £500 million of cuts will be made to the Scottish budget next year and beyond. All serious commentators are clear—a cut in public services is being imposed by the Westminster Government.

Rhodri Morgan, the First Minister of Wales, has said: "The Archangel Gabriel could not find such proposed cuts ... without damaging public services". I rather like the analysis of Bob Crow, who said: "With a combined £30bn worth of public sector cuts and privatisation, this budget represents the final political suicide note of the New Labour government." The Deputy Prime Minister, Harriet Harman, has stated: "You cannot cut your way out of recession—you can only grow your way out of recession." The cuts come against a backdrop of the UK's fiscal stimulus package for 2010 being weaker than those of almost all other G20 countries. What does the £500 million cut potentially mean for the annual Scottish budget? It means damage to education, our health services and other front-line services. Thankfully, the good husbandry of the Scottish Government has already allowed it to take action, within its limited powers, to tackle the recession. There has been a reshaping and acceleration of capital expenditure. The Government is ensuring that its activity supports economic development: advice to businesses and individuals is being increased, and the small business bonus scheme was welcomed across the board. The Scottish Government has shown imaginative thinking, from which Westminster could learn. Westminster could support Scotland and rethink some of its previous ridiculous refusals, some of which were outlined by Brian Adam. It could hand over Scotland's £120 million fossil fuel levy. It could hand over Scotland's accrued council tax benefit. It could agree the Barnett consequentials for the London Olympics  regeneration spending, and the £1.2 billion increase in UK prison expenditure. The most imaginative thinking of all would be to stop peddling the myths about Trident jobs and to support Scotland, and indeed the world, by hitting the Trident replacement programme on the head.

I am in my last minute. In the present financial climate, public services should not be sacrificed on the altar of weapons of mass destruction. John Swinney is quite right in his motion: Parliament should express "its deep concern at the contents of the Chancellor of the Exchequer's Budget last week". We should be honest and recognise "that this is a product of poor financial management of the UK economy in recent years", and we should get behind a Scottish Government that wishes to make proposals "for 2010-11 that will support a sustainable economy and effective public services". Scotland deserves that from its representatives.

I joined the Finance Committee only lately, so I did not have the pleasure of listening to the evidence, but I did have the pleasure of reading the report, which was the Parliament's first true scrutiny of the Government's approach to capital investment. The inquiry was worth while. The Scottish Government has engaged in the process—that is evident from its detailed responses to the committee's recommendations. The inquiry represented the first real engagement on the issue between the Parliament and the Government. Of course, the previous Administration attempted to convince us and the public that analysis had been undertaken to ensure that Scotland obtained the best value for money when procuring major public projects, but that was not the case. In June 2003, the then First Minister formally announced the Fraser inquiry—which he had trailed before the 2003 election, of course—into the Holyrood project's management. He said on the record that that investigation's purpose was to produce not only a clear public record of events in that project, but a set of recommendations for future large-scale public construction projects. The  recommendations were not produced—the then Scottish Executive conveniently forgot that commitment. In 2002, the Finance Committee undertook an inquiry into PFI. Despite the evidence that it took, no detailed analysis was made of the work of the principal witness—the much-respected Professor Allyson Pollock—as the then responsible minister, Mr Andy Kerr, admitted in a parliamentary answer in 2004.

No—oh well, I will give way briefly on that point.

Mr Andy Kerr has always been very good at selecting little soundbites, but that will not wash this time. He should work with the Government to consider the best future for Scotland. The facts about PFI speak for themselves. In January 2006, the Labour-Lib Dem Administration bought out the contract for Inverness airport for £27.5 million, although the airport cost a private company only £9.6 million to build. Still Labour defended PFI. The contract for West Lothian College had to be bought out at a cost of £20 million, because 35 per cent of the college's expenditure was on property costs and an average of only 9 per cent was on further education. The companies behind the deal to build Hairmyres hospital—that Labour flagship project—gained around £145 million from an initial investment of just £8.4 million. Despite all those examples, Labour continues to defend PFI. Indeed, its refusal to admit that PFI was not a good deal for the taxpayer is typical of new Labour. Also typical is its attack on the Scottish Futures Trust. In terms of PFI, the Labour Party cannot defend the indefensible. It therefore goes on the attack with no consideration of constructive engagement for the benefit of all. PFI has never been worthy of defence. It is no more than a cynical exercise that has allowed Governments of the day to keep capital projects off balance sheet. We have known for some years now that the international financial reporting standards would apply. We also knew the effect that the IFRS would have on accounting for such projects. Despite that, the Labour Party carried on regardless: it continued to build; it continued to defend the indefensible.  PFI is a child of the age of irresponsibility—terrible irresponsibility. It gave Labour a perfect way of taking credit for building without having to pay for it. And that from a generation of Labour politicians who received free education and the benefit of schools and hospitals that were built within the public sector. How selfish Labour is to disregard in such a cavalier fashion the needs of those who come after.

Labour's obsession with PFI has mortgaged Scotland's future. It should work with us to make it better.

It is not uncommon in a debate such as this to reel off a list of great Scottish scientists from history, but I would rather concentrate on the hard scientific work that is going on today. I am fortunate to live in the East Kilbride constituency and, as it is part of Central Scotland, to represent Scotland's oldest new town. East Kilbride houses a small but very significant science park that demonstrates Scotland's edge in science. Among the range of successful companies there is Controlled Therapeutics, which develops and produces pharmaceuticals. The workforce in East Kilbride developed a vaginal insert to aid childbirth in cases where the birth is medically induced. That product is now the world  leader, and Controlled Therapeutics estimates that "Every minute of every day a woman somewhere in the world will give birth assisted by one of our pessaries." That is science at its best, with a Scottish company's expertise used and recognised across the world. In September last year, the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism, Jim Mather, announced the Scottish Government's support for Controlled Therapeutics under the regional selective assistance scheme, which helped to protect the existing jobs and to create 23 new ones. That is building success on top of success—it is making the most of what we have. East Kilbride's science park also houses Crucial Technology Europe, a division of Micron. It direct-sells memory upgrades for computers and other electronic devices. Filtronic Comtek designs, manufactures and markets components for cellular infrastructures. We are also fortunate to have the headquarters of the Worldmark group, which began in East Kilbride. Its logo is "Global Solutions ... Locally". Worldmark's operation in East Kilbride includes the company's research and development functions, as well as manufacturing. That is crucial. We all recognise that business enterprise research and development expenditure is not as high as it should be in Scotland and that it does not reflect our capabilities. Studies have shown that, despite Scotland's universities having punched above their weight for research framework programme grants from the European Union, for example, that is not reflected in the private sector. Some of that can be put down to methods of accountability, with some company branches in Scotland having their R and D work registered at headquarters elsewhere, but it is vital to recognise and to promote further the interface between academia and business. The cabinet secretary recognises that, through objectives to increase public-private knowledge transfer, to address issues of intellectual copyright—she mentioned that today—to encourage private sector research collaboration, and to take forward the proposal from Universities Scotland for a single forum for all available intellectual property from Scottish institutions. I note from the Royal Society of Edinburgh's paper, which was kindly supplied to us all prior to the debate, its view that "since the joint RSE/Scottish Enterprise Commercialisation Report , there has been a dramatic improvement in the efficiency and drive of the Scottish universities in connecting with business." That is welcome. I also note from the RSE paper the reiteration of the European Union's move towards a European research area. With its skills  and expertise, Scotland should take full advantage of that, working and collaborating with partners, with our UK neighbours and with others. Scientific research and development is a discipline that is ripe for collaboration, whether among national and international academic institutions, through regional initiatives, through private enterprise or indeed—I say this to Rhona Brankin, in her absence—through independent nations sharing expertise with mutual trust and respect. Scotland has a good and justified reputation internationally for the quality of its science base. We should celebrate that, but we should do so without complacency. There has been much discussion about enthusing laypeople and, particularly, pupils and scholars. The Government is taking that on board, as are others. In that regard, too, science has a home in East Kilbride. One of our residents, retired physicist Dr Ravi Singhal, gives free public lectures in the James Watt auditorium, which are filled by people who are eager to learn about physics. He has just completed his sixth series of lectures as part of the community education initiative under the science for all programme. I hope that Mr Singhal repeats the endeavour, because I would very much like to go along and learn. The Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning has mentioned in the past the importance that she places on science development. I will continue to support her and the Government in driving Scotland forward and keeping us ahead of the game. Fiona Hyslop has long stressed, in opposition as well as in government, that science and technology are allied but distinct topics. I look forward to hearing from the Government how those linked streams will be progressed, in parallel with the skills and innovation strategies.

It is good to hear so much consensus, but we have that because the issue is straightforward. It was correct that offences that are motivated by racial prejudice were recognised in the Crime and Disorder Act 1998; it was correct that, in 2003, the Parliament agreed to introduce a statutory aggravation for crimes that are motivated by religious prejudice; it was correct for the Parliament, at the same time, to consider Robin Harper's amendment that related to disability, sexual orientation, gender and age; and it is absolutely correct for the Parliament to agree to the principles of the Offences (Aggravation by Prejudice) (Scotland) Bill. I commend Patrick Harvie for his work on the subject and the Cabinet Secretary for Justice and the Government for their commitment and the assistance that they have given. Just as no one in Scotland should be targeted or victimised because of their race or religion, no one in Scotland should be targeted because of their sexual orientation, transgender identity or disability. The proposals will mean that the divisive and scarring crimes that we are talking about are taken more seriously by the justice system and by society more generally.  That is a very positive message to send out, and it should lead to more effective deterrence. It will also bring us into line with the rest of the UK, which dealt with the matter in 2003. As has been said already, the bill does not propose any new offence; instead a new statutory aggravation will be applied to any crime of motivation by "malice and ill-will" on the ground of the victim's actual or presumed disability, sexual orientation or transgender identity, in parallel with existing statutory aggravations of motivation by "malice and ill-will" on the ground of the victim's actual or presumed race or religion. The perpetrator will be guilty of an aggravated offence and the court will have to take that into account when deciding a sentence. It is important to remember that the aggravation is based on the motivation of the accused, not the identity of the victim. That will send out a strong message and introduce greater consistency. Like others, I hope that it will encourage more victims of such crime to report offences because of the clear message that society recognises the abhorrence of the motivation behind them. It will ensure the recording of the levels of such crimes, which is crucial for any nation that believes in parity of esteem and respect for all whose actions do not harm others. Figures provided by Inclusion Scotland show that people with disability are four times more likely to be violently assaulted than people without disability and almost twice as likely to be burgled. The organisation states that visually impaired people are four times more likely to be verbally and physically abused than sighted people. People with mental health issues are 11 times more likely to be victimised and 90 per cent of adults with a learning difficulty report being bullied. Some people are sceptical of such figures but, whether or not there is doubt about them, one instance of abuse is too many and once is enough for a message to be sent out. The motive of such crimes can be to take advantage of a victim's vulnerability or their being a bit different. If it is about easy targeting and perceiving people as weak, it is about preying on the vulnerable, which is just not acceptable. Some people think that introducing legislation is unnecessary and that society should consider other ways of dealing with the problem, such as taking action at the other end. The two options are not mutually exclusive, and work goes on at both ends across society. I commend cultural and arts organisations for the action that they take, such as Lung Ha's Theatre Company in Edinburgh, which has long worked with adults with learning difficulties. Many of members have attended their plays, which have portrayed the difficulties of living with learning difficulties and shown how people  are bullied, both institutionally and by society in general. More great work is done by Theatre Nemo in East Kilbride, which deals with mental health issues in the health service and justice system. The work that we do is two-pronged, and we have to look at the issues from both sides. The National AIDS Trust wrote to us all. It has a particular interest in section 1(8) of the bill about the definition of disability, which includes any "condition which has (or may have) a substantial or long-term effect", such as HIV/AIDS. Stigma and discrimination are a distressing and dangerous reality for many people who live with HIV. One in three people with HIV has experienced discrimination linked to their HIV positive status. Again, it is very important that we take measures to show everyone that that is not acceptable. The bill has a journey to make through stages 2 and 3, and changes might come its way, but in general I am content that it moves us in the right direction. The ultimate aim of us all is to get to the point where people are accepted with no prejudice and no law is needed to enforce that principle. We are not there yet, so I support absolutely the bill.

The Parliament may well remember that, as Chancellor of the Exchequer, Gordon Brown sold more than 600 properties that were occupied by the Government's tax collectors to Mapeley Estates, a company that uses tax havens such as Guernsey and Bermuda to avoid paying United Kingdom taxes. Does the First Minister agree that it is indeed ironic that, while HM Revenue and Customs offices in Scotland are closing and Labour MPs rail against tax avoidance, a private company will continue to profit from assets that were transferred from public to private ownership by the current UK Prime Minister?

The Scottish Government uses various methods to make representations on European policy matters that affect Scotland. For instance, we regularly meet European commissioners and respond to their consultations, we attend meetings of the European Council, and we brief MEPs. We also remain in regular contact with our Whitehall counterparts to promote Scottish interests in the establishment of the United Kingdom's position.

I presume that we are discussing the EU-Israel association agreement, which sets out the framework for interaction between the EU and Israel on issues such as the economy, trade, security and diplomatic relations. Article 2 of the agreement states: "Relations between the Parties, as well as all the provisions of the Agreement itself, shall be based on respect for human rights and democratic principles". I know that a colleague of Mr O'Donnell's in the House of Lords, Baroness Tonge, has asked Lord Malloch-Brown about the conditionality clauses in the agreement and about what discussions have taken place. Of course, as things stand, Scotland is not involved in the negotiation of EU association agreements. If Scotland were an independent member state, it would be in a far better position to consider the balance between promoting trade and diplomatic relations, and making progress on wider political and human rights issues.

We are front loading spending on our European structural funds programmes and have already awarded approximately £200 million to almost 300 projects. Eighteen businesses accepted regional selective assistance of more than £16 million in the three months to the end of December, creating or safeguarding more than 1,300 jobs. The First Minister met European Commission representatives on 27 January to discuss Scotland's role in the energy projects that are being discussed in Brussels in relation to urgent EU funding. I could say plenty more on the subject, Presiding Officer, but I suspect that you do not want me to.

I have to hold my hands up on this one: I cannot give Irene Oldfather any detail on the matter. As she knows, we have our China plan, which is part of our international framework. We are serious about our relationship with China on trade, education and business. She also knows that the First Minister and the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning will visit China shortly to promote Scotland's interests. We have always said that we will do the best that we can in the interests of Scotland. We deal with the United Kingdom Government and have many constructive discussions on many issues. I am more than happy to give full details to Irene Oldfather in her position as convener of the European and External Relations Committee.

The Government is not satisfied that we have the right level of engagement with the European Union. It is clear that, as an independent state in the European Union, our  voice would be heard more strongly. However, we are aware of opportunities in the European Union, one example of which is the proposed list of projects that would benefit from European core funding. Those in the energy sector relate to infrastructure projects, carbon capture and storage and the development of offshore wind power. We are talking to the UK Government on how the various EU and UK funding streams might mesh. Those discussions will continue, as will discussions with our counterparts in Europe and all the relevant agencies. We will ensure that we best represent Scotland and Scotland's interests.

We are already involved in a number of partnerships that involve the members and associate members of the four motors for Europe, including the districts of creativity and the creativity world forum. The Scottish Government seeks to work with European partners where there is scope to collaborate in a specific policy area or where we can share policy experiences.

As I stated, we always seek to work with partners across Europe on a wide variety of topics when there is clear benefit in doing so. The most recent example is the agreement that the First Minister reached with the Catalan Government to work to achieve a lasting legacy from the Glasgow 2014 Commonwealth games. My colleague Jim Mather has visited Lombardy for talks on energy, and the minister with responsibility for research and universities in Baden-Württemberg has visited Edinburgh for discussions on renewable energy. We are also looking at the ways in which we might co-operate on a range of areas with the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology and the Government of Baden-Württemberg. I thank Chris Harvie for the  assistance that he has given Fiona Hyslop and me in that regard.

On Tuesday 27 January, I met representatives of Scotland-based organisations and the Disasters Emergency Committee Scotland to hear at first hand about their work and to discuss how best the Scottish Government can assist them. We have received funding bids from Scotland-based organisations to support their humanitarian work in Gaza. We will assess all those applications as quickly as possible to ensure that funds can be released and made available as a matter of urgency to assist people on the ground. As the Deputy First Minister confirmed, the national health service in Scotland is ready to help civilians affected by the humanitarian crisis in Gaza.

I wish that we could guarantee absolutely that the border will be open and that the aid will get through to the right people. However, the agencies with which we are working—from the largest, such as Islamic Relief Scotland and Oxfam Scotland, right down to smaller agencies such as Edinburgh Direct Aid and Glasgow the Caring City—have vast experience in that regard. We will look at what they put in front of us in their applications and we will judge, on the basis of their expertise, the most effective way of getting aid in. Kenneth Gibson asked about the assistance that we are providing to other areas affected by humanitarian crises. Parliament may remember that the previous Administration gave aid to Sri Lanka and Pakistan. In the past year or so, we have given aid to Darfur. I am currently considering applications to the humanitarian aid fund for the Democratic Republic of Congo.

As I mentioned in my reply to Kenneth Gibson's question, I have met representatives of Scotland-based aid organisations. I am hugely impressed both by the response, knowledge and expertise of agencies based in Scotland and by the response of the public, not least members, to the crisis in Gaza. Today Pauline McNeill co-ordinated some work with Edinburgh Direct Aid; I know that Roseanna Cunningham, Kenneth Gibson and many others have helped with that appeal. That is a mark of a caring Scotland.

All members recognise that humanitarian aid should always be focused on the people who need it. The First Minister has issued a call to the BBC to rethink its decision not to broadcast the appeal for Gaza. As Nicol Stephen pointed out, it is admirable how much money has been raised despite the BBC's decision not to broadcast the appeal. Nicol Stephen asked how much funding the Scottish Government will give to Gaza. We have received applications and will consider them; I hope to be able to make an announcement on the issue fairly soon. However, when we consider appeals such as those for Gaza and the Congo, it is not simply a matter of our donating a certain amount of money. The important point is that the aid is effective. It is up to the experts who work in Scotland and in our aid agencies to come to us  and tell us how money can best be used. It is also a matter of complementing other work that is already going on. For example, as everyone knows, we work very closely with the Department for International Development to ensure that projects work well together.

I echo Pauline McNeill's concerns about the border closing. John Wilson brought me up to date on the matter a short while ago—as Pauline McNeill has always done in relation to the current situation. When I met representatives of non-governmental organisations, I met not just those from the larger organisations that form part of the Disasters Emergency Committee, as Edinburgh Direct Aid was also represented. It was not possible for anyone from Glasgow the Caring City to be present, because they were working very hard on something else on the same day. I can give an assurance that serious consideration is given to every application that is received. We are working on the applications at the moment so that we can assist as quickly as possible.

As Elaine Murray knows, Dumfries and Galloway's homecoming on  your doorstep programme is supported by the local council and the Scottish Government. The programme offers a fantastic range of events across the region throughout the year, engaging communities, boosting tourism and working for the benefit of all. I had a great time down at Dumfries and Galloway's opening celebration, Burns light, and I had a very constructive meeting with the local authority while I was there, at which the council outlined its plans for developing a sustainable legacy for its area.

The issue of the Theatre Royal has been raised with me by councillors from Dumfries, and the local council recognises the need for improved performing arts facilities in Dumfries and Galloway. The council is working with all partners to find a sustainable solution. The Scottish Arts Council had pledged support for the Dumfries Theatre Royal Trust, with lottery funding of £1.7 million, back in March 2005. Sadly, the project fell though. The Scottish Arts Council and Historic Scotland have been kept fully informed of activities, and they both fed into the recent workshop day, at which performing arts provision for the region was considered. On the regeneration fund that has been announced—I say this in the spirit of consensus—Mr Swinney, who is heading up the fund, will discuss with others how it should best move forward, as he has pledged to do.

The Scottish Government fully recognises the importance of museums and collections the length and breadth of Scotland, from the Pier arts centre in Orkney to the archaeology collection in Dumfries and Galloway. Scotland is blessed with so many local museums, with collections that both reflect local  heritage and are of national and international importance. Local authorities that fund such museums should be commended. The Scottish mining museum is just one of 33 collections that have been awarded the status of a recognised collection of national significance under the Scottish Government's recognition scheme, which is run by Museums Galleries Scotland.

I recently had a very constructive meeting with the museum's chair, Mr Henry McLeish. We discussed the on-going review of the business plan for the museum. When that is complete, we will continue our discussions with the museum, which have been going on for many months. The Government has already helped the mining museum and the other industrial museums with capital funding—to a level unmatched, I believe, by previous capital allocations. Revenue funding is, of course, a matter for Museums Galleries Scotland.

I am delighted by the great degree of consensus that we have had today and by the quality of the debate. I was pleased that Pauline McNeill said that we need to revisit the issue from time to time, as that acknowledges its importance and reflects what many other speakers said. She also said that the Government needs to be ambitious about the use of the 2005 act; we must all be that. The Government's draft plan is out for consultation and other public agencies—such as the councils, with more to follow—have Gaelic plans up and running. However, as many have said today, we must not say, "Right, we've done that" and put the plans on a shelf. We must use the plans as living documents for a living language and culture and expand them all the time. Peter Peacock was hugely influential in the shaping of the 2005 act, as he was the relevant minister at the time. While I was sitting being lectured earlier, I was thinking of calling him Captain Peacock. However, I appreciate his input into the process. It is important that everyone moves forward in a spirit of consensus. That said, Ted Brocklebank always has to get in a wee dig about Scots and English. I have no problem describing English as a dialect of Scots— no problem at all. There is, however, a serious point in what Mr Brocklebank said. He was quite right when he stated that no native Gaelic speaker does not understand English. That is where we are today—but there are plenty of native Gaels who do not understand Gaelic. That reflects the history, as Rob Gibson pointed out, of the legislation against Gaelic language and culture and of the people who were affected by it. That is one of the reasons—as Pauline McNeill and other members have pointed out—for being proactive and ambitious today. Johann Lamont's contribution summed up that history, because she comes from a family that is a product of the putting down of the Gaels and the language, and of how people learned to deal with that. The onus is on us all to move forward, and there are many ways to do so. Practically every speaker mentioned education, which shows just how important it is. It cannot be denied that there are challenges. Secondary education, which was mentioned, is a challenge for many reasons, but the Government is working closely on it and we want to do what we can to move forward. The Minister for Schools and Skills, who is sitting beside me, and I recently met jointly Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education and Bòrd na Gàidhlig to discuss those issues. I liked the contributions about education from John Farquhar Munro and Dave Stewart, and the suggestions about the importance of the spoken word. That is not to do down grammar, language construction or anything else involved in learning, but the Gaelic language comes from an oral tradition. The absolute beauty of its sound means that Gaelic is something to sit and listen to and enjoy—and laugh and cry about, even if you do not understand it. The spoken word is very important—learning to speak and to sing are as important as other aspects of education. It is important to reach young people, too, and there are lots of ways to do that. Some initiatives have been mentioned, such as the Gaelic online dictionary. It is great that we have something like that now, and the people who have been instrumental in that project should be congratulated. Bashir Ahmad recently told me that there is a move to translate the Qur'an into Gaelic, which is wonderful. The mygaelic social networking site that Pauline McNeill spoke about is hugely important in trying to reach young people. I was at a conference on Lewis recently about community initiatives for Gaelic. It was great to hear the young people telling my age group—and some who were older than me—that we have to listen to them about how they want their language to be used. Mygaelic—the Gaelic Facebook, if you like—is a way forward for young people to be able to be able  to use their own language, or their language of choice, to communicate in all sorts of ways. The subject of BBC Alba—and its vibrancy—has been raised many times. It is not just about having a Gaelic channel, but about everything that is behind that. The production companies such as mac tv, Media nan Eilean and Studio Alba are hugely important. That shows that there is an economy in Gaelic culture and language that can lead, as Rob Gibson said, to the potential for Gaelic to underpin growth in the Highlands and Islands, which is very important.

I have been doing that for many months—indeed, I am meeting the chair of BBC Alba, Alasdair Morrison, again soon to discuss the next step in our joint strategy on that, because it is hugely important for many reasons. Sabhal Mòr Ostaig has been mentioned a lot and has received glowing praise. I was delighted when the First Minister opened the Fàs creative centre in the college. Again, that is about encouraging work on the economy in the Highlands and Islands. It has been interesting to discuss the various cultural aspects of Gaelic. Rob Gibson referred to a jagged edge, and how it can be perceived that Gaelic stops here and Scots starts there. However, part of the beauty of our nation is the fluidity of the way in which all the different cultures fuse and mesh. I was interested in Willie Coffey's contribution about Robert Burns and his familiarity with Gaelic. The other night, I spoke to Margaret Bennett, who has done much good work for the school of Scottish studies. She also told me about Robert Burns's interaction with Gaelic. We heard about the crossover with Hugh MacDiarmid, who translated Duncan Ban McIntyre's poetry with help from Sorley MacLean. That represented a collaboration of poets of different styles. Just last year, I was delighted to be at the premier of Ronald Stevenson's "In Praise of Ben Doran", which was about Hugh MacDiarmid's translations of the poetry of Duncan Ban McIntyre. Education is important. Ken Macintosh and many others talked about the benefits of Gaelic schools for education generally, as well as for the bilingualism and, often, trilingualism that is the result of children learning Gaelic at an early age. That has been proven over and over again. I am pleased that Ken Macintosh welcomed the First  Minister's announcement at the Mod about the capital budget for Gaelic schools. The Minister for Schools and Skills has asked me to point out that there are other resources too. We all want education to move on quickly, but we should not get despondent about it. There is glow—the schools intranet—and there is the scholar programme run by Heriot-Watt University, which provides access to Gaelic learning and raises Gaelic's profile in non-Gaelic speaking areas. Peter Peacock talked about road signage. He is right to say that in our draft Gaelic plan we have discussed Transport Scotland's research on how road signs can affect accidents. Transport Scotland says that once the research is completed it will consider whether to increase bilingual signage on trunk roads and so on. I ask members, many of whom feel strongly about that, to put in submissions about the draft Gaelic plan and let us see that strength of feeling. On the subject of signs, I am delighted to confirm to Peter Peacock that the Scottish Government did indeed ensure that the signage at Government buildings was bilingual. I am delighted to hear that he wants the Gaelic to be much more prominent.  The member continued in Gaelic.  A-rithist, tapadh leibh airson ur taic. Tha mi a' coimhead air adhart ri freagairtean dhan phlana agus barrachd adhartais air feadh Alba. Mòran taing.  Following is the simultaneous interpretation:  Again, thank you for your support. I am looking forward to responses to the plan and to more progress throughout Scotland. Many thanks.

Feasgar math. Is e latha cudromach a tha ann airson Riaghaltas na h-Alba agus cùisean Gàidhlig. Tha sinn air a bhith ag obair gu dìcheallach airson taic a thoirt dhan Ghàidhlig ann an tòrr dhòighean—ann am foghlam, ealain, craoladh agus barrachd tron bhliadhna. An-diugh, tha sinn a' dol air adhart le plana Gàidhlig Riaghaltas na h-Alba.  Following is the simultaneous interpretation:  Good afternoon. This is a very important day for the Scottish Government and for Gaelic matters. We have been working hard to support Gaelic in many ways: in education, in the arts, in broadcasting and more throughout the year. Today, we are taking another step with the Scottish Government's Gaelic plan.  The member continued in English.  I am pleased to announce today that the Scottish Government has published its consultation paper for our draft Gaelic language plan. I am very pleased with it, and I hope that everyone else in the chamber is, too—apart from with the inevitable drafting error, which has now been corrected. I apologise for that. Gaelic belongs to Scotland and is a unique and essential part of the rich cultural life of Scotland, so we must ensure that we take the necessary steps to secure its place in the future. The Scottish Government has made its position very clear: we came to Government with a strong programme of ambitious Gaelic commitments, on which we are making good and steady progress. My hope is that those commitments and initiatives, and the increased funding that we are putting in place, will improve the status and appeal of the language. I hope that they will also lead to an increase in use of Gaelic in the home, at school, in the community,  at the workplace, in the arts and in public life generally. Along with five others, the Scottish Government was one of the initial public bodies to receive a notice to produce a Gaelic language plan by Bòrd na Gàidhlig. The Scottish Government's Gaelic language plan sets out the measures to be taken in relation to use of Gaelic within Government. It will set out how the Scottish Government will use, and enable use of, Gaelic in delivery of its services. The Scottish Government's Gaelic language plan will include commitments in relation to our corporate identity, our communications, our publications and our staffing. It will outline measures that we have put in place to support the promotion of Gaelic throughout Scotland, which are aimed at raising the status of Gaelic, promoting the use of Gaelic and encouraging learning of Gaelic. With our Gaelic plan, the Scottish Government will seek to raise awareness about, and to improve the status of Gaelic. I am pleased to announce that we hope to recruit a new Gaelic language plan development officer, who will have responsibility for implementing the plan and monitoring progress. I have been impressed with agencies such as Historic Scotland, Scottish Natural Heritage and the National Library of Scotland, which have begun work on their Gaelic language plans without having received formal notification. I encourage other bodies to do the same. Of course, other Scottish public authorities—Highland Council, Argyll and Bute Council, Comhairle nan Eilean Siar, Highlands and Islands Enterprise and the Scottish Parliament—have prepared Gaelic language plans and are moving forward with their implementation. Other bodies, including Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education, the Scottish Qualifications Authority, Learning and Teaching Scotland, the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council, Glasgow City Council and City of Edinburgh Council, are following suit. I congratulate all those bodies for their efforts. I am confident that Gaelic plans have improved the status and have increased awareness and use of Gaelic throughout Scotland. There will be further progress as more plans are prepared and finalised. There continues to be a need for expansion in Gaelic-medium education, which is vital to support growth in the number of Gaelic speakers. There has been good progress on Gaelic-medium education and important commitments have been made in Gaelic plans. Comhairle nan Eilean Siar's Gaelic plan contains a commitment to provide Gaelic-medium education as mainstream primary provision. Highland Council's Gaelic plan contains  a commitment to open a further two dedicated Gaelic schools—it has decided to move forward on the issue in Portree and Fort William. Discussions are also on-going about the possibility of a dedicated Gaelic school in Edinburgh. I take this opportunity to support the proposal and to remind councils of the Scottish Government's support for the establishment of dedicated Gaelic schools. The developments that I have described are good and welcome, and we need to maintain momentum. The Scottish Government has very much demonstrated its clear support for Gaelic education. We have increased our support for Gaelic-medium education throughout Scotland, and the Government's funding for resources to support teachers and pupils in Gaelic education is at an unprecedented level. A major review of Gaelic early years education was commissioned earlier this month. There can be no question about our commitment to Gaelic education in Scotland. The amendment in Pauline McNeill's name acknowledges the need for "continued investment in and expansion of Gaelic-medium education." That expansion is continuing and should continue in the future. The presence of Gaelic in our lives enriches us all, so it is essential that there be a living language community to support Gaelic. We must therefore give thought to how we will strengthen and grow that community. The language is in a fragile condition and I believe that we are at a critical point for Gaelic in Scotland. I am encouraged by the desire to support Gaelic that I find in Scottish public life, not least in the Parliament, where the issue enjoys cross-party support. I am encouraged, too, by the commitment and vitality of Gaelic speakers, learners and supporters. Efforts to keep the language fresh and current can be illustrated by recent developments, including the online Gaelic natural history database, "Faclan Nàdair", which was launched today by Scottish Natural Heritage. Such developments are encouraging. We welcome the success of MG Alba and we are all working together to ensure that the BBC Alba channel can be seen on Freeview, to the benefit of everyone in the country. There are encouraging signs in the Gaelic education sector, in the ambitious work of Sabhal Mòr Ostaig and in the development by Bòrd na Gàidhlig of public authority Gaelic plans. Our duty is to maintain that progress, to use the initiatives that have been put in place and to work to ensure a secure future for Gaelic so that the language has its rightful place in Scotland. I am aware that I have more time for speaking, but I will not use it because it is important that  other members can contribute fully to the debate. I hope to be able to respond to what they say. I look forward very much to receiving responses from members and others—individuals, organisations and public and private bodies right across the country—about the contents of our plan. We are here to listen to what people say. I move, That the Parliament recognises that Gaelic is an integral part of Scotland's heritage, national identity and current cultural life; welcomes and supports the launch of the consultation on the Scottish Government's draft Gaelic Language Plan, and acknowledges the work being carried out on the implementation of other Gaelic language plans by Argyll and Bute Council, Comhairle nan Eilean Siar, Edinburgh City Council, Glasgow City Council, Highland Council, the Scottish Parliament and Highland and Islands Enterprise.

I will take the very serious points first. I am always happy to meet Bill Kidd and am happy to include Bill Butler and Bill Aitken in such a meeting. It struck me that they could be called the three Bills. I do not want to go into detail at the moment, but we should note that the Scottish Arts Council supports and promotes youth theatre. I understand that Knightswood Youth Theatre is in discussion with the SAC.  Bill Butler asked about discussions with other local authorities on issues that are related to the topic of debate. I recently attended an interesting conference with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and some local authorities. I am sure that other ministers with direct responsibility for the issues to which members have referred have also attended such conferences. However, that is a discussion for another time. I do not tonight want to take any time away from congratulating Knightswood Youth Theatre on winning, and celebrating its winning, the Philip Lawrence award. That is an exceptional achievement that celebrates both the standard of citizenship that those involved have shown, and the outstanding contributions that the theatre group has made to its community. It really is inspiring. When we think of the remarkable work that has been done in the theatre group's short existence, it is even more inspiring. I have a particular delight in taking part in the debate, having heard from our four colleagues who all represent the Knightswood area, because I was born in Lincoln Avenue in Knightswood and lived most of my teenage years just round the corner in Baldric Road. I therefore know the area where all the youngsters in the theatre group come from. I know the problems that the group has faced over the past few years and I know how people have worked to make Knightswood a community that stands up to be counted. Those efforts have been made by the young people involved and those who have taken the time to organise, teach and support the group. It is a great example of community spirit. Sandra White mentioned the influence of the group from the Lincoln Avenue flats on things that are so important to us. Again, that is to be celebrated. Aileen Ritchie needs a special mention, although, as Bill Kidd said, it is always hard to mention individuals. However, she deserves to be mentioned again for her continued support for the arts in Glasgow. We should never forget that the award that the youth theatre has won was set up in memory of Philip Lawrence. What happened to him was tragic, and it highlighted problems that are faced by the nations in the United Kingdom. What has happened in his name shows the great courage that citizens can have when they care about their communities. Philip Lawrence was an inspirational figure whose legacy continues in the annual awards. His deep-seated conviction was that all young people are capable of achieving great things, as the members of Knightswood Youth Theatre have shown.  Knightswood Youth Theatre is also a great example of how the arts can tackle a huge range of realities in young people's lives by using theatre for expression. As Bill Aitken said, serious issues such as racism, bullying, friendship, alcoholism, romance, divorce and teenage suicide have all been addressed in a way that allows the young people involved to be heard. In bringing together local residents, Knightswood Youth Theatre gives Glasgow's asylum seekers, refugees and young people a chance to tell each other their stories, to share experiences and to celebrate the differences that make each of them interesting. Collectively, such differences give something very special to an area. The youth theatre's approach is great because it leads to improved understanding of different belief systems and encourages young people to overcome difficulties. Such activities are part of real community development, whereby folk take the initiative and grow something that really matters to them. The Scottish Government is committed to supporting community development. The recently published "Culture: Culture Delivers" encourages use of culture as an important way of advancing local and national wellbeing and, indeed, prosperity. The cashback for communities initiatives also continue to run throughout the country. Those projects—which are funded by money that has been confiscated from convicted criminals—include a range of partnerships with Scottish sporting, arts and business associations that encourage young people to see that they can choose different paths and have different aspirations. As Bill Kidd said, Knightswood Youth Theatre has also received support from LINKES, which is a project that is run by and for people in the area. LINKES has received funding from the Government's fairer Scotland fund. I reiterate that the success that Knightswood Youth Theatre has attained in its short history is nothing short of outstanding. From a series of pilot workshops in early 2007, the youth theatre went on to sell-out nights at Glasgow's Tron theatre in 2008. Audiences have talked about its performances—I have not yet had the privilege of attending one, but I shall—which have, I understand, reduced some to tears of sadness and of joy. That is great talent that these young folk have exhibited. For the third year running, the National Theatre of Scotland has invited Knightswood Youth Theatre to perform at the exchange festival, which again demonstrates the quality and impact of the group's work. Another wonderful outcome of Knightswood Youth Theatre's work so far is that, as well as providing enjoyment and sharing stories with the community and with the whole of Scotland, the  group has uncovered several talented performers. The youth theatre's approach has allowed its members to have the confidence to perform, to act, to write and even to direct. It has been able to nurture the talent and gifts that each individual has within them. In particular, I congratulate Marlene Madenge on being offered a role alongside a professional cast in the National Theatre of Scotland's production of "365" at the Edinburgh festival last year. I saw that performance, which was a very moving piece of theatre. I am sure that the performance was a great experience for Marlene and for those whom she took along with her to enjoy both the play and the recognition that was given to Knightswood Youth Theatre.  I thank Bill Kidd for lodging the motion, which has provided us with the opportunity to congratulate Knightswood Youth Theatre not only on its success in the Philip Lawrence awards but on its continuing work, which has helped a community to come together. The use of drama is very powerful in confronting the difficult challenges that face many individuals and communities. I wish the group continued and increasing success in its future productions. I know that some of its members are in Parliament today—I see them sitting in the gallery—so let me say that I very much look forward to meeting them.  Meeting closed at 17:29.

Officials have been in regular contact with colleagues in the Foreign and Commonwealth Office to monitor the on-going situation and identify where the Scottish Government may be able to offer assistance in relation to its commitments in its international development policy. During the recent debate on Gaza, the Deputy First Minister and I made it clear that our international development policy already confirms our commitment to consider assistance in times of humanitarian crisis and that the Scottish Government stands ready to respond favourably to any requests for humanitarian assistance for Gaza. That message was further reinforced by the First Minister during First Minister's question time and endorsed by the Parliament.

Scotland's readiness to respond to the crisis has been admirable and reinforces our role as a responsible nation that is determined to play its part to help those who are in greatest need. It is worth mentioning that a fundraising dinner for Islamic Relief Scotland that Sandra White attended in Lanarkshire last night raised £98,000 for medical aid and equipment for Gaza. That is a mark of the commitment of people in Scotland. I have arranged to meet Scotland-based organisations later this month to hear of their work  first hand and to discuss how best the Government can assist them at this sensitive and dangerous time. I have mentioned previously the contact that we have constantly with the Department for International Development, the FCO and colleagues across the Scottish Government, the United Kingdom and the health boards in Scotland. The Government's response will be informed by those discussions, and I will ensure that all members are aware of the progress of that response because I am well aware of the unanimous agreement that Scotland should help.

Yes. Glasgow the Caring City is an amazing organisation for the speed and appropriateness of its response to humanitarian crises throughout the world. I am aware of the its work over the past month or so, and officials in our international development department have been in discussion with Mr Galbraith from the charity.

The National Theatre of Scotland has been allocated £4.49 million from the Scottish Government in 2009-10.

"Black Watch" has indeed been remarkably successful. The Scottish Government's international touring fund contributed to the cost of the NTS presenting the play in its enormously successful 2007 New York run. When the NTS was invited to play another season in New York in 2008, it earned enough at the box office from an audience of more than 26,000 to cover all its direct costs without the need for further Government investment. Ticket income from all NTS productions has increased by 46 per cent from £1.3 million in 2007-08 to a projected £1.9 million in 2008-09.

I am always keen to engage with EU counterparts when the opportunity arises, and since taking office I have met a number of my ministerial counterparts including, most recently, ministers from the Governments of Catalonia, Hungary and Ireland. I also regularly attend meetings of the joint ministerial committee on Europe, at which issues of mutual importance are discussed. The committee will next meet in March. Of course, I take all opportunities to promote Scotland's interests, whether at home or abroad.

I take every opportunity to promote Scotland's year of homecoming—and, indeed, all of Scotland's attractions—to EU and other ministerial counterparts. For example, at the annual reception for the consular corps, which will take place on 20 January, the First Minister and I will invite representatives of the countries represented in Scotland not only to participate in homecoming but to consider how their country's citizens might take part.

It is always best to be exact, Presiding Officer. As announced in Parliament on 3 September 2008, we plan to legislate for creative Scotland's principles and functions in the proposed public services reform bill.

We are finalising the transition costs, which will be presented to Parliament at the appropriate time. That is as it should be.

What is important to the Government and recipients of funding is having a transparent system for disbursing such funds. We are working with partners to create the best possible system for giving funding to creators in our country.

We will agree to differ on the difficulties of presenting plans for creative Scotland to Parliament last year. I contend that the Opposition lacked understanding, which forced the bill's failure. It is perfectly right to bring our plans for creative Scotland back to Parliament in the public services reform bill. As Opposition members have said, we do not need to go down the legislative route, but legislation is important, not least to establish the arm's-length principle for the arts, which had never been mooted until our Administration produced the Creative Scotland Bill. Parliamentary scrutiny will take place when the public services reform bill is introduced.

The Scotland's culture  website was a pilot that began in 2002, which the Scottish Library and Information Council developed and ran for the then Scottish Executive. I understand that the council is considering how to develop the site.

As Cathie Craigie and I have said, the website started as a pilot portal. The Scottish Library and Information Council developed it until 2006, when the council decided, using its own funding, to retain a member of staff to develop the website. The council has examined how to continue to resource the website and is considering giving it a serious revamp. In March last year, I announced our support for the establishment of digital access Scotland—a forum to encourage and improve access to Scotland's archives, libraries and museums—of which SLIC, Museums Galleries Scotland, the Scottish Council on Archives, Historic Scotland and the national collections are a part. I imagine that SLIC is working closely with its partners to ensure that the Scotland's culture website, for which it is responsible, corresponds with and enhances other work that the Government is funding.

The Scottish Government and its partner agencies support extensive cultural exchange activity involving young people and will continue to do so in 2009 and beyond.

I would be delighted to visit the Aberdeen international youth festival this year and will try my hardest to do so. I was disappointed not to be able to go last year because I have heard very good things about it. The festival receives lottery funding from the Scottish Arts Council, and I was amazed to read that, since 1973, around 33,000 young people from 81 countries have performed at it. It is indeed a success. This year, the participants are also taking part in the year of homecoming, with support from EventScotland. The festival is only one of many young persons initiatives in the arts that the Government funds. I am pleased to say that we also sponsored three students from screen academy Scotland to attend the world congress of film schools in Beijing in October 2008. We will continue to consider how we can best support such initiatives, because they are very important.

I am currently arranging meetings with various groups to discuss the establishment of creative Scotland. The Scottish Artists Union is, of course, welcome to participate.

I remind Ken Macintosh that, last year, I announced to the Parliament £5 million for new and innovative funding for the arts and creativity under creative Scotland.

We have increased support for architecture to almost £2 million. A key priority is to integrate architecture more effectively with other policies on the built environment, including the reform of the planning system and the Scottish sustainable communities initiative. In autumn 2008, I commenced a review of Architecture and Design Scotland, and I intend to announce the outcome of that review before the Easter recess.

The aim is to provide a stronger focus on the creation of better places within a modernised planning system. The directorate for the built environment was established in February last year, and work is now under way that draws together architecture, planning and building standards. That includes policy on designing streets, advice on master planning and support for improved skills and training in urban design and place making. I intend to announce further work in a statement on policy following the outcome of the review of Architecture and Design Scotland.

The Scottish Government's role in the development of the cultural programme is that of a full and active partner and the main sponsor of the games. The directorate for Europe, external affairs and culture is represented at all relevant working group meetings.

I reassure Patricia Ferguson that the work is in progress and that the Melbourne games in the state of Victoria are one of the successful events that provided a legacy that we are examining as we put together our programme for the games and consider the legacy that we can give the country. We are studying the international examples closely and taking them into account.

The funding arrangements for Scottish Language Dictionaries that have prevailed until now do not serve the best interests of the organisation. I am currently considering how that situation may be addressed.

I reassure Marlyn Glen that I am considering how the situation may be addressed. I do not think that the funding arrangements that were put in place by our predecessors in government best serve the interests of that organisation. The Scottish Arts Council, which funds Scottish Language Dictionaries, has agreed transitional funding until November 2009, which has allowed me the space to consider how best to take the matter forward. The member may be interested to know that we are arranging a major seminar for 9 February, in Stirling, with representatives of the Scottish language groups, Scottish Language Dictionaries and other interested people, to consider the results of the audit of the Scots language that we commissioned and to discuss ways of moving forward to protect the heritage Marlyn Glen referred to.

It is absolutely right that the Parliament discusses these issues. Throughout the debate, we have heard the depth of feeling that the developing humanitarian crisis in Gaza has generated here and elsewhere. In Scotland, the UK and beyond, people have been demonstrating because they are sickened by what they are seeing and because they recognise that a death by violence is an unjust death. We have heard about the history and complexity of the politics of the region, which are long standing. We heard about the failure of UN resolutions and the failure to secure a viable two-state solution for Palestine and Israel. All citizens of the world have the right to go about their business without fear of attack and, as we have heard today, a people must attend to its security. However, the Israeli Government must also know that world opinion and its long-term self-interest cannot be reconciled with the effects that the recent bombing and ground offensive have had on the people of Gaza. More than 600 Palestinians have died since the military offensive began and more than 13,000 people have been displaced. As Sandra White and others have said, people have been displaced within a tight settlement, which has been blockaded for such a long time. These people have nowhere to run to. Food is in short supply and more than 70 per cent of people are without a water supply. Medical facilities are under extreme pressure. As the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees said, having a three-hour cease-fire each day on both sides and having a humanitarian corridor open, is completely insufficient to feed 750,000 people a day. A permanent cease-fire is needed. Whatever one believes about the politics of the region, the humanitarian plight of the people of Gaza is straightforward. At least we have achieved consensus on that today. I am glad that we can all add our support to those Scots and Scottish organisations that are contributing to the international efforts to confront the food, water, energy and medical emergencies that the conflict in Gaza has brought about. A number of NGOs and aid agencies that are based in Scotland are currently working in Gaza. For example, Christian Aid Scotland is supporting the partner organisation the Palestinian Medical Relief Society, which is working in Gaza's hospitals. Also, Mercy Corps Scotland expects to deliver more than $250,000 of food, non-food  items and medical supplies to the war-affected families. However, its truck-load of food commodities remains in the queue of vehicles at the closed border for entry into Gaza. The border is also closed to humanitarian personnel. Mercy Corps is continuing to lobby and make applications for entry into the Gaza strip to enable it to disperse those supplies. The British Red Cross has donated £75,000 to the Palestinian Red Crescent Society. We have heard much in the debate about the work of Islamic Relief. Its assistance includes emergency food supplies, food aid to hospitals and the purchase of medical equipment in the west bank for delivery to Gaza. In addition, Save the Children is providing food and medical supplies and Oxfam UK, which works with partners in Gaza, is trying to gain access. As Nicola Sturgeon said, Scottish Government officials are in regular contact with NGOs who are working on the ground in Gaza. We stand ready to respond favourably to any request for humanitarian assistance. In that regard, the main problem at the moment, according to Department for International Development, is not the lack of assistance that is being offered but the ability to get that assistance to the people of Gaza. As Des McNulty said, we all have a responsibility to try to help any people who are suffering as much as the people of Gaza are suffering; they need that human response from the rest of us. I return to the cease-fire. Only a complete cessation of violence will suffice; three-hourly pauses in bombing are absolutely insufficient to help the Gazan people. Only when arms are laid to rest and dialogue begins will the people of Gaza be able to rebuild their lives. We are in contact with DFID, as we are with the Scottish NGOs and the Foreign and Commonwealth Office. It is essential that, when we are enabled to be of assistance, the response should be a co-ordinated one. DFID has pledged £4 million of humanitarian assistance. Again, it has stated with our full backing that full and safe access for supplies and aid workers is essential. On behalf of the Parliament, I express our respect for Scottish aid workers who go to places of danger. We respect their absolute care for the plight of others wherever they live in the world. The long-term peace and security of the peoples of Israel and Palestine depend on meaningful dialogue and a two-state solution. At times, one can feel that people have been talking for long enough and that we are hitting our heads off a brick wall, but finding a meaningful solution to any violent conflict around the world is never easy. Any solution depends on dialogue and on people of closed minds opening up their minds. We have seen examples of that many times round the  world. I am sure that each member can think of an example. Closed minds have to be opened; there has to be a new beginning. Courage and bravery on both sides are needed if people are to start afresh and sit down together. All Governments must care seriously about the people whom they represent. Governments around the world, particularly those with influence, should be striving to represent their people and working to achieve a solution. I ask members to support the motion at decision time.

The fact that the debate has been extended is a mark of the strong feeling that exists throughout Scotland on this subject. There is so much to be said that it could not be said in a whole day of debate in the Parliament. Pauline McNeill eloquently and passionately outlined the current situation in Gaza. A civilisation is being systematically destroyed over the years. She also mentioned the people from important ranks in life who recognise the humanitarian aspects of the Palestinian cause, as well as the political aspects in many cases. Sadly, it is ordinary people who are paying the price all the time. Pauline McNeill, Sandra White and Hugh O'Donnell saw that at first hand when, on the third trip of Dignity, they witnessed the blockade and the effects of the siege of Gaza. Politicians are sometimes accused of being populist and leaping on causes. I want to put on record the fact that those three MSPs are long-standing activists on issues relating to the middle east. Pauline McNeill has visited Palestine before; Sandra White has visited Lebanon; the first time any of us met Hugh O'Donnell, his interest and passion in the subject was marked. Ted Brocklebank asked why we should have a cross-party group on Palestine. I think that the answer is very plain and straightforward: Palestine is suffering and people are dying each day, or starving—as Jackie Baillie and others have outlined. If people can do nothing else, it is valuable to raise awareness and focus on the issue. I used to be a member of the group, which includes representation from a broad cross-section  of society. It is not a talking shop about one particular aspect of the situation; it is a genuine way of bringing people together to try to find a solution to the terrible things that are happening in Palestine. As Sandra White said, collective punishment is going on in Palestine, and we have a collective responsibility to make people aware of that and to do what we can to stop it. As Sandra White, Bashir Ahmad and Jackie Baillie said, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights has its 60 th anniversary this year. Sadly, there are many examples across the world of human rights not being respected. Hugh O'Donnell reminded us of the need to keep talking, and noted that if people had stopped talking about South Africa or Northern Ireland we might not have arrived at solutions there. Therefore, even if, as Robin Harper says, it is frustrating that the round-table discussions keep breaking down, it is time for action and incredibly important that we keep talking. The new discussions will focus on the UN Security Council's latest resolution, which encourages the USA, the European Union, the UN and Russia to keep working to help parties achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the middle east and to support the negotiations that were launched in November 2007. The Scottish Government supports the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination and recognises the need for a two-state solution. There is general agreement in this chamber that that is the way to secure a safe and secure future for Israel and Palestine. We support any efforts to secure that comprehensive, just and lasting peace, and we welcome the new UN resolution.

I was just about to address the humanitarian work that is being done by individuals and organisations across Scotland. There cannot be any moral and just person who would deny the right of people who are suffering to receive humanitarian aid or who would not support the provision of that aid. Indeed, in August, when there were issues about aid getting into Gaza, the First Minister wrote to the ambassadors of Egypt and Israel in London to impress on them the importance of humanitarian aid being taken to a people who are suffering. As I said before, it is always the ordinary people who end up paying the price in these conflicts. Scotland-based non-governmental organisations do a huge amount of work in Gaza. There has always been an affinity between Scotland and Palestine. All sorts of organisations are involved, from the Theatre Workshop, which Robin Harper  mentioned, and Palcrafts, which Sarah Boyack mentioned, to organisations such as Edinburgh Direct Aid and Medical Aid for Palestine. Many people have been very quietly doing fantastic work for a long time. The generosity of Scottish people in supporting those charities must be commended. Bishop Desmond Tutu talked about prisoners of hope. We should share the optimism that that phrase suggests. We must never give up on an ideal because, if we do, we are giving up on the people who are suffering. We should look forward with an absolute hope that one of the true priorities of President-elect Barack Obama will be to drive forward the peace process. On the back of the new UN resolution, the time is right for everyone to step up to the mark and be absolutely serious that 2009 should be the year when we see a potential solution for the trouble in the middle east.

I should first clarify a point of procedure. The Scottish Government would in the first instance be required to satisfy the United Kingdom Government of its ability to implement specified additional undertakings with regard to extending part III coverage to Scots before the UK Government made any referral in that respect to the Council of Europe. Any additional measures of support for the Scots language to be ratified by the UK Government would likely have to be in place at the time of ratification. I think, therefore, that the right thing to do just now is to ensure that, as a minimum, the undertakings that have already been ratified in respect of Scots in part II of the charter are being fulfilled in the best possible manner.

I am concerned by the case that Mr Wilson has highlighted, given that all those who sign up to the charter have a responsibility for ensuring that these matters are progressed. I am happy to meet Mr Wilson to find out more about the case so that we can indeed make representations to the UK Government.

Various stances have been taken in this interesting debate, but there is a general recognition of the importance of quality and plurality in public service broadcasting. The Scottish Government wants to ensure that public service broadcasting fully meets Scotland's needs in the future. We have the benefit of the Scottish Broadcasting Commission's report to guide us on the matter. As I said earlier, we used the report's recommendations as our starting point for formulating our response to the Ofcom review. I remind everyone that we are committed to taking forward the Scottish Broadcasting Commission's recommendations. Members have expressed support for that. The debate focused on STV and the necessity of competition in public service broadcasting. The Scottish Government recognises and values STV's contribution to broadcasting in Scotland, but I remain a wee bit concerned that the only safeguard to plurality in Scotland is in the hands of a commercial company whose decisions are based ultimately on commercial factors.

Everything that I have said, and everything that I put in the response to Ofcom, suggests that plurality means considering and discussing all the options and coming up with the best option for Scotland. We have not adopted any particular model. Pauline McNeill mentioned radio, as she has in the past. I agree that radio is an extremely important part of broadcasting. Often in the morning, it is on the radio—especially local radio stations—that people pick up the news and current affairs that relate to them. Be they in Glasgow,  Skye or Fife, people hear things on local radio that interest them. The Scottish Government wants to ensure that radio services are maintained. Recently, officials sent a submission to Barry Cox, the chair of the UK digital radio working group, setting out the issues that we have with any proposed move towards digital radio in the UK, and especially about coverage throughout Scotland. That brings me to the Lib Dem amendment. I completely understand where it is coming from. I have stated before in the chamber that we have concerns about coverage in the Borders, Perth and other places as digitalisation is rolled out. We will abstain from the votes on the Lib Dem amendment and the motion. That does not detract from our sympathy with what has been said, but I have a firm reason for our abstaining from the votes: Ofcom cannot force the commercial operators to upgrade the relay transmitters. However, discussions are taking place between Ofcom and the commercial operators to try to move the matter forward, and all members should support those important discussions. On the seventh mux, the Scottish Government has already sought an assurance from Ofcom that it will fully consider the Scottish federation of local television's submissions on the matter. We support the sentiment behind the Liberal Democrats' amendment and I assure them that they have our support on the matter, as I have stated many times before. I close by reiterating my recognition of the value of STV to Scotland. It is valued by viewers as part of the broadcasting industry, and it is valued as a contributor to the economy. It has some much-watched programmes, and I hope that it remains part of the public service broadcasting landscape in Scotland. It is a recognised and valued brand that has the potential to continue to maintain variety and plurality in Scotland.

It is timely that the debate is being held today, given that 4 December is the closing date for responding to the Ofcom consultation. Sadly, the debate is also timely following yesterday's news that BBC Scotland intends to cut even more jobs in addition to those that it cut earlier this year. It is hard to correlate that with Mark Thompson's commitment to production expansion in Scotland, which he said would have a floor, not a ceiling, of 9 per cent. Understandably, many in the Parliament and beyond will be concerned about jobs and programming. I generally support the motion, but I cannot support its reference to supporting Ofcom's enhanced evolution model. Our response to the consultation, which is now on Ofcom's website, states that the Scottish Government has no preference for any of Ofcom's long-term models, provided that they are adapted to take full account of the recommendations of the Scottish Broadcasting Commission report. We recognise that a commercial broadcaster can make a vital and vibrant contribution to broadcasting in Scotland. STV has a strong history, has a familiar and valued brand, and is a strong contributor to competition. As a provider of national and local news, STV is one of the strongest channel 3 licensees, with 42 per cent of people relying on it as their main source of news about Scotland. STV plays an important part in the Scottish broadcasting industry and makes a valued contribution to the economy. We also recognise that STV is part of a complex licensing agreement with ITV that can pose difficulties, bring benefits and raise concerns. Most recently, those concerns have been about how STV can maintain its public service broadcasting commitments if ITV walks away from its public service broadcasting licence. I know that STV remains committed to being part of the public  service broadcasting landscape in Scotland. STV can continue to play a part in offering variety and competition in Scotland. We said as much in our response to Ofcom. However, as Ofcom's review suggests, we should also look at alternatives. We should not be restricted to focusing on plurality of news. The Ofcom PSB review recognises that the requirements of the nations of the UK extend to "sufficient content ... to address their distinct political and cultural needs". Research that was carried out by the Scottish Broadcasting Commission found that audiences in Scotland are less satisfied with current levels of provision in other key genres of programmes about Scotland. The proposed Scottish network would satisfy that demand for more Scottish programmes. In research that was carried out for the Scottish Broadcasting Commission, 82 per cent of those who were asked stated that they would be interested in watching a new Scottish television channel. The Scottish network would increase the opportunities for Scotland to see itself in a variety of quality programmes that would be available to all. For an example of the desire for quality programming, we need look no further than BBC Alba. Its success since its launch in September shows that there is an appetite for quality Scottish content. The new channel secured viewing figures of 600,000 in its first week. Like members from all parties in the Parliament, I urge the BBC trust to give the new channel Freeview carriage so that it can reach all of Scotland and achieve its potential. Ultimately, Ofcom has put forward a number of proposals for consultation. In the 8 October debate on the Scottish Broadcasting Commission report, I urged all members to respond to Ofcom's consultation. I hope that many have taken that opportunity to shape the future of public service broadcasting in Scotland.

That was quite a note for Pauline McNeill to finish on—I thank her for that suggestion. There has been some debate about whether it is appropriate to have a party-political debate about St Andrew's day, but, as a few members have said, as well as being a day of celebration it is a day to reflect on what it means to be Scottish and on how we see the future of Scotland. I reiterate  that our national conversation on Scotland's constitutional future allows everyone to debate and discuss the kind of Scotland that we want and how best to achieve it. St Andrew's day is the perfect time to celebrate and reflect. I will make two comments at the outset. First, Dennis Canavan is in the public gallery, despite being noted in absentia by Christine Grahame. We all acknowledge the role that he played in relation to St Andrew's day. [ Applause. ] I still acknowledge that role, because I can sense him looking over my shoulder to ensure that I do not do anything terribly wrong. Secondly, I am glad that Pauline McNeill mentioned our great variety of music and culture, from our traditions to contemporary work. She also mentioned Scottish Opera. I am delighted to be going to see its latest production, "La Traviata", in Edinburgh's Festival theatre tonight. I suspect that other members are going to that, too. The debate has been very good. We started with Ted Brocklebank congratulating the BBC on its new history series, which seems to be catching the popular imagination—I have heard many people speaking about it. That programme provides a really good backdrop to St Andrew's day and the BBC is to be congratulated on it. Ted Brocklebank talked about how we link events such as the year of homecoming and winter festivals with tourism. I say to him and to others, including John Farquhar Munro, that the point is to link all that up. Members would be pleasantly surprised—although I would prefer them to know what is happening than to be surprised—if they logged on to the websites to see what is happening from St Andrew's day through to the winter white festival, which VisitScotland is running; the winter festivals; hogmanay and new year, which is a great festival for Scotland; and right through to Celtic Connections in Glasgow. Throughout the country, events are happening—Inverness has also been mentioned. That will run through to Scotland week as part of the homecoming year. I have heard many times about Ted Brocklebank's aversion to bekilted politicians. The First Minister did not wear a kilt in this year's tartan day parade, but Iain Smith looked charming in his kilt and I thought that the Red Hot Chilli Pipers had good knees. We are linking initiatives all the way through, because that is important. That ties in with the serious side—what the Government is already doing through its economic recovery programme, which Iain Smith mentioned. That is important, too. This year more than ever, we need to promote Scotland as a place to live, learn, work, do business and invest in and to visit. Yes—we can use St Andrew's day, the winter festivals and  homecoming as part of the economic recovery programme. We are intensifying our activity and support for homecoming 2009 because tourism is such an important sector.

I am sure that our First Minister will be delighted to consider the potential of a state of the nation address on St Andrew's day every year. I am sure that the country would welcome that, too. As for the St Andrews festival, Ted Brocklebank never misses a trick to promote St Andrews. Fife has a doughty breed of politicians, including Iain Smith and Tricia Marwick, who always push for St Andrews to be up front. They make a formidable front line for Fife. I am happy to tell Ted Brocklebank that the St Andrews festival was paid on 21 November, but I take on board his point and I am happy to make the commitment to examine it. If the feeling is that funding agreements are made too late, we will look at that. John Farquhar Munro asked how much funding has been earmarked for the winter festival. He also said that it was much less than that which we have put into the expo fund. When it comes to our culture and heritage and the promotion of our country, the important point is linking everything that we do. Nothing should be seen in isolation. What matters are the links between events that take place all through the year. We have wonderful festivals, whether they are the St Andrew's day celebrations, the winter festival, Edinburgh's festivals—of which there are many, including the expo-funded work—the homecoming, Celtic Connections or T in the Park, which Pauline McNeill mentioned. All those festivals link into the whole that is the promotion of Scotland. We are doing all that to the best advantage of Scotland and to our best economic advantage. I say to John Farquhar Munro that we expect to spend up to £434,000 on St Andrew's day and up to £200,000 on the winter festival. The Government is doing a lot. We have made the decision to use resources to drive increased tourism and add value to what is happening  already. I turn to Iain Smith's point on inviting bids for activities for the 2009 St Andrew's day at the end of the homecoming celebrations. A significant amount of funding has been awarded to event organisers, promoters and community groups for events throughout the duration of homecoming. We are continuing with that work. Pauline McNeill said that St Andrew's day should not be only about fun. She is absolutely right. This is a time for reflection on how we can do our best for Scotland. We must use whatever platform we have to do that. James Kelly's speech was interesting. At the outset, he made a good link between this morning's statement on science and this afternoon's debate on the St Andrew's day celebrations. Our engineering tradition is one of Scotland's wonderful traditions. That ties in closely with the homecoming theme of good Scottish minds and innovations and—indeed—Burns. I disagree with the comments that James Kelly made on the arc of prosperity. We cannot continue to ignore the fact that a number of those countries continue to perform strongly and have a higher standard of living than Scotland has. For example, Finland and Norway continue to perform relatively strongly: their gross domestic product for 2009 is forecast to grow by 0.6 per cent and 1.3 per cent respectively.

No, the member has just entered the chamber. He cannot just run into the chamber and expect to speak. Members on the Opposition benches should accept the point that such small countries have a certain degree of insulation when it comes to dips in the economy. I refer them to my great friend Alex Neil's motion, in which he notes that the UK's credit rating has been severely downgraded. It is not always the case that big is beautiful. John Farquhar Munro referred to the sites whose doors will be open free of charge as part of the St Andrew's day celebrations. Entry is free on 29 and 30 November to allow people to visit those places over the weekend. In that way, people can take part in Scotland's rich culture and heritage. That leads me to points that were made about St Andrew's day as a public holiday. Leading by example, the Scottish Government has agreed to give its staff 1 December as an additional public holiday for St Andrew's day. I am delighted that 20 other public bodies and Scottish Borders Council have decided to follow our lead. Of course, I should mention again Angus Council, which has done that for many years.

Let us celebrate St Andrew's day, but let us also use it for serious reflection on how we all can work together to Scotland's advantage. That applies to everyone in the chamber, all those in council chambers, and everyone across the country. Again, I say to everyone: happy St Andrew's day.

Nice knees.

Eleven minutes, Presiding Officer. Really? I am delighted to move the motion in my name. St Andrew's day is a time for everyone—whether at home or abroad—to celebrate the best of Scotland. It is a time when we can all enjoy ourselves and acknowledge Scottish achievements. It is a time when we recall our rich history and culture but also look to the vibrant, creative and confident nation that is Scotland today. All over Scotland, people are marking this important date in our calendar. Schools in places from Barra to Burntisland are joining in the national day of celebrations, with many of them using the occasion to engage pupils in exploring Scotland's culture and heritage and what it means to live in modern Scotland. Young people studying maths at St Columba's high school in Inverclyde have been exploring the symmetry of the saltire flag and looking at the work of great Scottish mathematicians. Annette Street primary school in Glasgow is bringing children together from the eight different countries and backgrounds that are represented at the school—including Pakistan, Malaysia and Afghanistan—around the theme of one Scotland, many cultures. Larkhall academy, which is visiting the Parliament today with Aileen Campbell MSP, is celebrating St Andrew's day with a unite Scotland campaign. We welcome the group's ethos and the range of activities that have been planned as part of that initiative to celebrate Scotland's cultural diversity—it is great stuff. The school is also working to raise funding of £20,000 as part of the Prince's Trust scholars challenge. Yesterday, as part of the fun of St Andrew's day, I was up at Edinburgh castle with Lorne primary school from Edinburgh, celebrating the fact that Historic Scotland is opening so many doors for free over the weekend of 29 and 30 November.

As always, one of our resident historians manages to throw me completely, but I am more than happy to consider the issue and to discuss it with Historic Scotland. Another good event is happening on Monday 1 December. With joint sponsorship from the Scottish Government and the Parliament, students from seven Scottish universities and a team from Oxford will take part in a debating championship in the Parliament, with the final being held in the chamber. We thank the Presiding Officer and the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body for agreeing to the use of the chamber. Building on last year's success, more visitor attractions than ever are opening their doors for free over the coming weekend. I am delighted that this year, for the first time, Edinburgh zoo has joined the initiative. This year, also for the first time, the Government has provided financial support not only to our six cities but to Blairgowrie and St Andrews for their celebrations. I know that Ted Brocklebank, after many months of lobbying, will join me in congratulating St Andrews on its success in attracting a substantial amount of additional local sponsorship. That is why I am delighted to accept his amendment. It is a mark of how important everyone feels that St Andrew's day is that his was the only amendment that was lodged. This is a time for consensus in celebration of our national day. Celebrations are taking place not just in Scotland, but throughout the world. Not just expatriate Scots, but people who have an affinity with Scotland are celebrating our national day. Our Scottish affairs offices in Beijing, Brussels and Washington are involved in a range of events. More than 90 diaspora groups around the world, from Ankara to Australia and from Ōsaka to Luxembourg, are organising celebrations. On our national day, we celebrate our rich cultural heritage and our national identity—everything about Scotland. It is a time to reflect not only on what it means to be Scottish, but on how we see the future of Scotland. Our national conversation on Scotland's constitutional future allows everyone to debate the kind of Scotland that we want and how we best achieve that. St Andrew's day is the perfect time to celebrate and reflect. This year's St Andrew's day is particularly special, because it provides the warm-up to the year of homecoming next year. Picking up the thread from St Andrew's day and the winter festivals, homecoming will be the biggest-ever  celebration of Scotland's achievements, culture and ties around the world. More than 300 events throughout Scotland are already planned to celebrate some of Scotland's great contributions to the world: Burns—2009 is the 250 th anniversary of his birth, after all—as well as whisky, golf, great Scottish minds and innovations, and that rich culture and heritage. The year of homecoming promises to be an extraordinary celebration of Scottish art, culture and heritage. Our national collections and performing companies and Edinburgh's festivals will play a prominent role in showcasing the wonderful creativity and energy that make up modern Scotland. With the Scottish Arts Council, Scottish Screen and other cultural bodies, we are working to develop a lasting legacy for Scotland's cultural sector.

The situation is as it was under the previous Administration. The question has been answered. In a consensual celebration of Scotland's national day, it is inappropriate to reduce ourselves to such petty questioning. Our national day is a time for enjoyment and celebration, as is right. While we celebrate, St Andrew's day has a serious side. Given the global economic downturn, we need to promote Scotland this year more than ever as a great place to live, learn, work, do business and invest in and to visit. We need to position Scotland to take early advantage of any recovery and continue our drive to increase sustainable economic growth. That is why, as part of the Government's economic recovery programme, we are intensifying our activity and support for homecoming 2009 and promoting it through the St Andrew's day and winter festivals programmes. Tourism is already a key sector in which Scotland has a comparative advantage but, in the light of recent changes in the exchange rate, we are focusing our efforts even more on boosting tourism and raising our international profile. We and our public sector partners are investing in all the important events in the Scottish calendar to promote Scotland domestically and internationally as a quality must-see, must-return destination. VisitScotland has brought forward £1.5 million of spending to 2008-09 to increase its marketing activity, which includes the marketing of homecoming.  We are also harnessing the contribution of the Scottish diaspora, through the globalscot and friends of Scotland networks, to boost the year of homecoming and encourage business development opportunities. We have set a clear target of 100,000 additional international visitors, which we expect not only to meet, but to exceed. As part of the Government's economic recovery programme, we will promote the food and drink sector. St Andrew's day serves as both a timely reminder that Scotland is one of the finest food producers in the world and an opportunity to showcase Scotland as such. It provides the perfect occasion to celebrate the wealth of high-quality and internationally trusted produce from our farms, seas and food manufacturers. While we encourage everyone to celebrate St Andrew's day, it is also good to remember why we celebrate it. St Andrew's day is part of our history and heritage. Around 832 AD at Athelstaneford in East Lothian, the broad white cross of St Andrew was seen against a bright blue sky. The National Flag Heritage Centre at Haddington celebrates year round the event that led to the saltire being adopted as our national flag. Each year, such celebrations culminate in the national celebration on 30 November, which this year falls on Sunday. I wish everyone a happy St Andrew's day. I move, That the Parliament believes in the importance of St Andrew's Day, Scotland's national day; recognises the opportunity that it presents for everyone in Scotland, and friends of Scotland around the world, to celebrate our history, culture and traditions as well as the vibrant, creative and dynamic nation that Scotland is today; notes the Scottish Government's support for a programme of events throughout Scotland as part of the Winter Festival, and supports the opportunity that St Andrew's Day provides to prepare the way for the 2009 Year of Homecoming, which will give a much-needed boost to the Scottish tourism sector and to the economy generally.

We have not as yet made any specific funding allocations within the  international development fund to the Indian subcontinent development programme. Decisions on funding will be informed by discussions with the relevant communities in Scotland. Initial discussions have begun and officials will be meeting the Network of International Development Agencies in Scotland and others to inform us where Scotland can add value.

There is quite a lot in this. It is important that we take the time, as we did with other areas of the international development policy when we focused and streamlined the policy, to consider where Scotland can add value and develop a robust programme that will deliver sustainable results. We have been keen to investigate the Indian subcontinent because of our historical links with the area, and to reflect modern patterns of migration and the cultural diversity in Scotland. It was selected in recognition of those links, to build a strong, fair and inclusive national identity and to express solidarity with communities that are represented in Scottish society. Such links are not altogether new: we already have a number of continuing commitments in Sri Lanka and Pakistan. Quite rightly, commitments that were made by the previous Administration focused on humanitarian aid. We will take lessons from that work into account as we move forward.

The Scottish Government has recently received advice from Historic Scotland on the state of the Scottish mining museum buildings and we are considering with the museum the case for potential capital funding over the current spending review period. We expect the museum to provide further details shortly.

Revenue funding is a matter for Museums Galleries Scotland, which deals with the industrial museums. This Government takes seriously the matter of capital funding for the industrial museums, whereas the previous Administration provided no capital assistance to such museums. We have already given £60,000 to the Scottish maritime museum and £25,000 to the Scottish mining museum for urgent repairs.

Absolutely. As part of St Andrew's day, many of Scotland's visitor attractions will be open free of charge or at discounted prices. Castles, museums, gardens and abbeys throughout Scotland will be participating as part of a joint initiative between the National Trust for Scotland, Historic Scotland and the Association of Scottish Visitor Attractions. The initiative was designed to encourage Scots and visitors to Scotland to celebrate Scotland's heritage and culture on Scotland's national day.

I have no plans to visit the headquarters of the Department for International Development in East Kilbride in the near future.

I visited DFID's Scottish headquarters on Friday 7 November—three weeks ago. There are currently no plans to undertake another visit but, as always, we will continue to liaise with DFID.

Yes. Both the local and national newspaper sectors play an important part in reflecting the character and identity of Scotland. Newspapers also play a vital role in providing plurality in the media, which is important to democracy.

We acknowledge a lot of the points that Robert Brown has made. Following the provisional conclusions of the BBC Trust, I encourage members to keep up the campaign that has been started, if they feel strongly about it. Local newspapers play a very important part in all our communities. Mr Brown might be interested to know that the First Minister, Mr Swinney and Mr Stevenson have all met press and print media associations over the past year because those  associations have expressed concern about the potential loss of revenue to local newspapers.

Yes, of course—I am happy to do that. A healthy and competitive television industry is vital to Scottish culture, which is why the Scottish Broadcasting Commission looked specifically at culture as one of its three phases of work and published "Interim Report on Cultural Phase" in March 2008. The findings of the commission's cultural report are reflected in its final report and recommendations.

The Government has not issued any guidance promoting or recommending that local authorities advertise or broadcast services online. The current UK code of recommended practice states that the primary criterion for decisions on using publicity should be cost effectiveness. As part of the shared services agenda, local authorities have developed a single online portal for all local authorities' recruitment and will be developing an online portal for public information notices. Although that will impact on the use of local and national press for advertising, it will deliver significant efficiency savings and allow funds to be diverted to front-line services. All those in public services must recognise that there is a duty to the people of Scotland to ensure that we make the best use of public funds.

The Scottish Government's priority is always Scotland and what is in Scotland's best interests. Our international engagement is driven by the Government's economic strategy and the need to place Scotland as a responsible nation and partner on the world stage. Our international framework informs that work and sets out how  international activities will contribute to the Government's purpose of increasing sustainable economic growth. The draft action plan on European engagement falls directly from the international framework and informs our European work. I recently presented our updated European Union priorities to the European and External Relations Committee.

When I met Ian McCartney MP to discuss the matter, it was made plain—it has been reinforced since—that the United Kingdom has responsibility for representing Scotland at the Shanghai expo, as it does for Wales, the North of Ireland and England, as part of the strategy.

I do not understand why Labour members think the UK Government should not represent Scotland on trade issues: it has responsibilities in that respect. In my discussion with Mr McCartney, I said that if the UK Government could come up with anything specific that could bring added value to Scotland—which is what the Scottish Government stands for—we would consider it.

I absolutely agree with Mr Hepburn that it is the right of the people to state their case for peaceful and democratic transfer of powers.

The Scottish Government's international development policy enables Scottish organisations to apply for funding for projects in Malawi that meet agreed priorities, that are sustainable and that help the Government of Malawi to meet its millennium development goals. To support that activity, the Scottish Government provides core funding to the Scotland Malawi Partnership to encourage networking and to facilitate partnerships between communities in Scotland and in Malawi.

It is important for everyone who is involved in international development to recognise that what Government does is only one small part of the massive contribution that is made right across civic Scotland to international development. Whether it involves schools, churches, community groups or individuals, that has been going on for decades, if not for centuries. We in Government have a responsibility to ensure that resources are targeted effectively. When such exchanges are essential to the long-term sustainability of the programme, they would be eligible for funding from the international development fund. In the recent development programme, funding was provided for a number of projects that include an element of exchange between Scotland and Malawi. Stenhouse primary school, for example, is involved in an initiative that is designed to promote effective leadership in primary schools. That project will give senior school and district staff from Malawi the  opportunity to shadow appropriate Edinburgh counterparts. I recognise that a great deal is going on; Government cannot be responsible for it all. As I said, that work has been going on for decades. Our core funding of the Scotland Malawi Partnership helps to pull some of that work together and gives appropriate advice.

I could talk about that for a long time, but I will talk about only one example. I am delighted that, following long discussions with the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations—a marvellous organisation that is the umbrella group for many in the third sector—we have provided it with funding to enable it to work in partnership with an equivalent organisation called the Council for Non-Governmental Organisations in Malawi, which is trying hard to build capacity so that the links in Malawian civic society can be strengthened. That is a great relationship. I believe that strengthening civic society underpins every other policy strand that we are involved with in Malawi.

The Scottish Government has a single purpose: to create a more successful Scotland that can flourish through increasing sustainable economic growth. A key part of achieving that purpose will be a vibrant, strategic and forward-thinking development organisation for the arts and culture that is fit for the 21 st century. That is why creative Scotland remains a priority for us. I could go on with many more examples, such as the Edinburgh festivals and the expo fund, homecoming 2009, Gaelic and Scots, the national performing companies, the national collections, the creative industries and our built heritage.

Because the Government shares the desire of the arts and culture community to avoid further delay after the unanimous agreement in this chamber—which was then voted down on the financial memorandum through the incompetence of the Opposition—we are setting up the new organisation, limited by guarantee, which will take everything forward. That will enable us to combine speed in establishing the new organisation—

If I am hearing that the Opposition does not want such things to be underpinned by legislation, that it does not want a proper public appointments process to be undertaken, that we should just ignore the will of Parliament—which quite clearly wanted to establish creative Scotland as a statutory body—and that, rather than enshrine the organisation in legislation, we should just take a hands-off approach, I am very surprised.

I am happy to consider any application for funding assistance for any museum. The Glasgow police museum's business case will, of course, be considered along with the many other applications that we receive. I would encourage the museum to talk in the first instance to Museums Galleries Scotland, which does a good job in respect of independent museums and local authority museums.

Tapadh leibh, Oifigear-riaghlaidh. Gaelic is unique to Scotland, and everyone here has recognised that, I am delighted to say. Everyone has also recognised that we must take necessary and urgent steps to secure Gaelic for the future. For that reason, I thank Alasdair Allan for lodging the motion for debate, and everyone else who has contributed. I am delighted that we had to extend the time for the debate; it is a mark of the respect of everyone in Parliament. The Scottish Government has made its position clear. We came to Government with a strong programme of ambitious Gaelic commitments, on which we are making good and steady progress. I hope that those commitments and initiatives, and the increased funding that we are putting in place, will improve the status and appeal of the language. I hope that it will also lead to an increase in the use of Gaelic in the home, school, community, workplace, the arts and in public life generally. I commend the Scottish public authorities that have prepared Gaelic language plans—Highland Council, Argyll and Bute Council, and Comhairle nan Eilean Siar—and are moving forward with their implementation. On this day, I also congratulate the Scottish Parliament on the launch of its Gaelic language plan. The Parliament has  taken vigorous steps to promote the language, including the language planning forum that is being held here tomorrow. I am confident that the Gaelic language plans have already led to an increase in the use of Gaelic. More progress must be made as plans are prepared and finalised. However, I take on board what Peter Peacock said: the plans cannot be left on a shelf—they must be constantly monitored, refreshed and renewed where necessary. The Scottish Government was one of the initial bodies to receive a notice to produce a Gaelic language plan from Bòrd na Gàidhlig. Our plan will set out the measures that are to be taken on the use of Gaelic in Government, and how the Scottish Government will use and enable the use of Gaelic in the delivery of its services. It will include commitments on our corporate identity, communications, publications and staffing, and it will outline measures that we have taken to support the promotion of Gaelic throughout Scotland. It will describe measures that are aimed at raising the status of Gaelic, promoting its use and encouraging its learning. When put together with the plans that are being rolled out by all the other public bodies, that could increase the status of Gaelic and the level of its use in Scotland. For that reason, I am pleased to be able to inform members that the Cabinet has considered and approved the Government's draft Gaelic plan, which will be prepared for a period of consultation in January 2009. The text of tonight's motion refers to the need for an expansion in Gaelic-medium education. I agree; it is vital to support the growth in the number of Gaelic speakers. The Highland Council Gaelic language plan contains a commitment to open two more dedicated Gaelic schools and, last week, the Highland Council moved forward on that in Portree and Fort William. Discussions are going on about the possibility of a dedicated Gaelic school in Edinburgh, the nation's capital city, and we are all aware of the success of the Glasgow Gaelic school and the increasing reputation of the Inverness Gaelic school. We have increased our support for Gaelic-medium education throughout Scotland. As Ken Macintosh said, we have made capital support available to authorities that would like to make progress with Gaelic-medium schools. We have also supported Gaelic teacher recruitment for reviewing Gaelic early-years education. We have increased provision for a range of education projects that Bòrd na Gàidhlig will implement. The Government's funding for resources to support teachers and pupils in Gaelic education is at an unprecedented level. There is no question  about the Government's and the Parliament's commitment to Gaelic-medium education in Scotland. The motion that we are debating refers to the importance of the survival of Gaelic as a community language. The presence of Gaelic in our lives and culture enriches every one of us. However, it is essential that we have a living language community to support that and that we give thought to how we strengthen and grow the community. That issue was discussed at a recent conference in Lewis that focused on growing Gaelic in communities. It was a good day: new initiatives were put in place and new funding was made available. It is vital that we maintain momentum in this very important area. It is important, too, that Bòrd na Gàidhlig gives further thought to how matters can be taken forward. I have written to it in that regard. Gaelic is in a fragile condition. We cannot be complacent, but like others I believe that we are at a critical point. I am very encouraged by the desire to support Gaelic that I find in Scottish public life, and I am encouraged by the commitment and vitality that I have found with Gaelic speakers, learners and supporters. Even this week, there have been encouraging signs of vitality. The Scottish Parliament's Gaelic plan has been launched, while a book of Gaelic poetry was launched last night. A new Gaelic novel was published today in Glasgow, and later this evening we have the final of the Gaelic high schools debating competition.  Those developments, and many more, are reasons for optimism and confidence, and our duty is to maintain progress, use the initiatives that have been put in place and work to ensure a secure future for Gaelic so that the language will continue to play a significant role in Scottish society and cultural life. I totally support the motion, and I am confident that all members will be able to support the necessary steps that will ensure the survival of Gaelic as a community language in Scotland. Tapadh leibh.  Meeting closed at 17:56.

The Scottish Government has not had any direct discussions with Dumfries and Galloway and Scottish Borders Councils about the possibility of a dedicated TV channel for the south of Scotland. However, on 17 November, officials met representatives of the local television sector, including a member of the south of Scotland TV working group.

The Scottish Government's priority is to take forward the Scottish Broadcasting Commission's recommendation to establish a Scottish network to which local television initiatives could be linked. I am aware that there are strong concerns in the south of Scotland that the proposals set out in the Office of Communications public service broadcasting review will reduce the provision of local services in the area and that local TV could replace those services. The local TV group should work with Ofcom to ensure that it can gain maximum coverage in the area. I would expect Ofcom to recognise the benefits of supporting that aim and to consider seriously business case proposals from the south of Scotland TV working group.

I am very aware of the issue, especially following the members' business debate on 5 November. It is a serious issue, particularly in the Scottish Borders, where half of the population will get fewer channels. As was agreed at the members' business debate on 5 November, we will do everything that we can to raise the issue with the United Kingdom Government. Following that debate, I wrote to the appropriate minister to highlight the concern.

I, too, thank Wendy Alexander for bringing the motion for debate. It is interesting to note the quite stunning degree of consensus that was achieved some three or four years ago. That tradition has certainly been kept up tonight, with members saying that singing is good for us and that they will bring the Paisley choir through. I have a vision of us all dressing up in Paisley pattern and singing a Parliament song before we start business every day—perhaps we would all be a lot cheerier if we did. Since it was established, Paisley's choral festival has certainly made its mark on the calendar of cultural events. As Wendy Alexander said, it builds on a long tradition of music in the area. The festival brochure quotes the provost of Renfrewshire Council, Celia Lawson, who states: "Renfrewshire has a long tradition of choral music, dating from the Abbey's foundation in 1163". The tradition certainly goes back a long time. For a long time, too—not nearly that long, I hasten to add, as I mean decades rather than centuries—I have been attending the odd choir performance in Paisley. It is a fact that Paisley abbey and Renfrewshire's choirs have very much been at the centre of choral music. I have been fortunate enough to have a friend who has been involved in those, so over the years I have seen that aspect of Paisley and it has been a great joy. It hardly seems possible that the vision of Voices in Paisley should have become a reality over the short period of four years. The festival has done exceedingly well.

I will if the member will agree with me and keep up the consensus.

I very much acknowledge and support the ambitions for the Paisley festival. I encourage the people involved to continue to build on the connections that they have already made with the Scottish Arts Council, EventScotland, Renfrewshire Council—which has been absolutely ace in the way that it has supported the event—Making Music Scotland and the Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama. There is no doubt that local festivals always bring many benefits. As well as the financial benefits, they provide a sense of community, an inflow of tourists and—as Bill Wilson mentioned—an opportunity for people to participate in cultural activities. As Annabel Goldie and Wendy Alexander said, such festivals not only provide performances by leading artists—the Paisley festival is a class example—but involve local young people, which is particularly good. That should carry on. A sense of achievement and of community spirit comes from performing with local choirs and taking part in workshops on singing. The festival builds a sense of community, pride in Paisley's past—which is clearly evident—and a distinct culture in the west of Scotland. At a concert last week or the week before, I was told that about 3,000 people now participate. Last year, I was able to attend the Starlight Youth Music Theatre event, which was a mark of exactly what Annabel Goldie talked about. I was also able to attend the last Sunday afternoon concert—when they had the Sunday afternoon concerts—which involved Cadenza, an Edinburgh-based choir, and the Russian choir that is based in Glasgow. That was an absolutely super way to spend a Sunday afternoon. I was interested to hear that Wendy Alexander had received an e-mail from Jennie Hynd, because I met Jennie that afternoon. That was another delight that Paisley brought me—I knew her many years ago through work, and Jennie was hugely enthusiastic about the benefits that the festival was bringing to Paisley. The festival committee has built up good connections with the local community and with educational, cultural and local government bodies. That kind of outward-looking attitude can draw attention to Paisley itself—highlighting a community that is justly proud of its heritage and confident in its future. Many of the performances at the festival have been noted by other members. I was interested to hear Annabel Goldie talk about Paisley's aspirations to host the Mod. A marked characteristic of the people running the festival is that they are outward looking and willing to grasp opportunities. This year, in a first for the festival, there was a gathering of Gaelic choirs, which marked Paisley's newly formed branch of An  Comunn Gaidhealach. The community is moving towards that aspiration. I understand that Paisley is unique in having a festival dedicated solely to choral music, and it is good that the festival has been supported by the organisations that I mentioned earlier when responding to Hugh Henry. Making Music Scotland is worthy of particular mention: it is one of the 13 volunteer committees in Making Music, which is the UK's largest umbrella body for amateur music. The National Youth Choir of Scotland is also worth a mention. It comprises national choirs and 11 area choirs, which have had a tremendous impact in encouraging singing among children. They do something that is very important for people's sense of wellbeing: they maintain an emphasis on fun. An esoteric performance can be wonderful and a great privilege to see, but we should never forget the importance of straightforward fun. The youth music initiative and the National Youth Choir of Scotland have worked together to ensure that many children can have that fun. After only four short years, the Paisley choral festival is decidedly on the map and its success has been acknowledged. As the organisers know, success depends on hard work in dealing with administration, raising funds and building relationships. The organisers have proved beyond doubt that they are more than capable of doing that work. I know that Parliament will join me in wishing the festival every success in the future.  Meeting closed at 17:37.

The Scottish Government has no powers to hold local  authorities to account when a building has been placed on the buildings at risk register. Placing a building on that non-statutory register creates no new legal powers or duties for either the Scottish Government or the local authority. Local authorities have a range of powers to choose from to prevent the deterioration of buildings, where they believe that it is appropriate for them to do that. The Government is strongly committed to local decision making. It is properly for the local authority to decide whether to intervene in any particular case. Historic Scotland funds the Scottish Civic Trust to compile and administer the buildings at risk register. It prioritises grant aid towards buildings that are at risk and is always willing to discuss individual cases with local authorities when they wish to seek advice.

I understand Ted Brocklebank's concern—the building is certainly showing signs of neglect. Internal works took place, but they ceased more than a year ago. The building has broken windows and is an eyesore on the back of the golf course, which is one of Scotland's jewels. Our inspector is in touch with Fife Council; we understand that a solution is being sought and we will monitor the situation.

We have increased funding for architecture to more than £1.8 million in this financial year. Within that sum, we increased our annual support for the Lighthouse from £350,000 to £450,000 and we increased our support for the Sust. programme on sustainability, which is based at the Lighthouse, from £200,000 to £450,000, which includes £150,000 to establish a Sust. resource centre. This year, I have also committed £75,000 towards the Scottish presence at the Venice biennale on architecture; increased annual funding of the Royal Incorporation of Architects in Scotland Doolan award by £10,000 to £25,000 to enable the development of public touring exhibitions; and committed £35,000 over three years for a new civic trust award for place making in Scotland. That is a clear demonstration of the Government's commitment to architecture and design in Scotland.

We have further developed the outreach programme that is managed by the  Lighthouse to support organisations, communities and individuals in ways that best meet their ambitions to create a better built environment. That support is wide ranging and can take the form of residences, workshops, events or festivals. Our proposals for the sustainable resource centre, as part of our enlarged Sust. initiative, will provide clients, design teams and users with opportunities to extend their understanding of sustainable materials and renewable energy sources. We continue to support the SIX student awards for architecture in collaboration with the RIAS. The awards exhibition, which is managed by the Lighthouse, supports our emerging talent. Of course, I will continue to explore how funds can best be utilised to support young and emerging design talent in Scotland.

The issue that the member raises has been on-going for a long time and I have had representations from people who care very much about the building. Consideration of the situation will continue.

Yes. As highlighted in the Scottish Broadcasting Commission report "Platform for Success", broadcasting is important to the economic, cultural and democratic health of the nation. The report recognises that more high-quality creative content can be produced in Scotland given the right environment. That will provide the basis from which Scotland can develop a dynamic and successful production industry, creating world-class content for worldwide audiences.

Yes. As was highlighted in the commission's report, plurality of services is extremely important to viewers, both for news services and more generally. The commission's research highlighted a desire on the part of the public for a Scottish network to service the whole of Scotland, and for all the public service broadcasters, including the BBC and ITV/STV, to ensure that their news services provide suitable coverage for all parts of the United Kingdom. The Scottish Government has indicated that it supports those recommendations. We will respond fully to the Broadcasting Commission by the end of the year.

The matter is obviously being discussed by the Conservative party at the moment. As is outlined in Ofcom's public service broadcasting review consultation, a number of issues will need to be considered, particularly the provision of local and national news on ITV/STV. The Scottish Government is considering its response to the Ofcom consultation, and we will respond by 4 December. I urge members  throughout the Parliament also to respond to Ofcom to ensure that all concerns are taken into account.

I thank Jeremy Purvis for bringing the debate to Parliament. It is timeous because of the forthcoming by-election and the first part of the switchover in the Borders. As we have heard, the Selkirk transmitter will begin its switchover tomorrow, which is a major step in broadcasting in this country. Members' speeches have been welcome. There is consensus, so I hope that we will all move  forward together to try to get the best possible outcome for people in the Borders and beyond. As has been said and as everyone is aware, digital switchover is reserved to the UK Government, and I understand that the matter was raised with UK ministers by MPs from the Borders and elsewhere in a debate at Westminster on 14 October. Obviously, the Scottish Government is extremely keen for the switchover to go smoothly in Scotland. I have on a number of occasions met representatives of Digital UK to discuss progress and to press Scotland's case. I met Digital UK representatives on 29 October to establish whether the Selkirk transmitter switchover was progressing according to plan and whether, in its view, people in the Scottish Borders were ready for switchover. The response that I received was positive, and there was discussion about the pilot in Whitehaven in Cumbria. Digital UK's figures show that by August, 88 per cent of main sets in the Borders and 40 per cent of secondary sets were ready for switchover. The figure for main sets is now up at around 90 per cent. Many areas of the Borders are served by relay transmitters, as we have heard, and the people who are served by them will not get the full service until much later. As has been mentioned here, we will not know until tomorrow the total effect of the switchover scheme, given the number of relay transmitters. I understand the concerns that have been expressed by everyone. Digital UK has informed me that seven advice points will be operating—in Duns, Galashiels, Eyemouth, Hawick, Peebles, Jedburgh and Kelso. The centres will be open for three days, around both switchover days, and will be staffed by Digital UK and help scheme staff. The Digital UK call centres will be able to provide advice to anyone who cannot make it to an advice point. Scottish Borders Council and local voluntary sector groups will provide crucial support, and I hope that their support is visible. Christine Grahame was quite right to point out that a lot of people who say that they are aware of what is going on do not really understand what has to be done. That brings me to the help scheme, which Jeremy Purvis mentions in his motion. The scheme was established to give help to those who need it most. The UK Government recently announced that the help scheme will be extended to all people living in care homes who have been, or will be, resident for six months. That change is welcomed by the Scottish Government. It came up at the Local Government and Communities Committee, and Shona Robison, on behalf of the Scottish Government, wrote to the Department for Culture, Media and Sport about the matter to ensure that people who receive free personal care  will not miss out on the help scheme. I have been advised that the information pack was sent to everyone who was eligible for it. In the Scottish Borders, that covered 16,000 people. I also understand that reminders were sent out. Uptake of the help scheme in the Borders, according to the most recent figures that I have, was about 15 per cent. However, the response rate among the eligible people whom I mentioned was much higher: about two thirds responded, either to accept or to say that they did not wish assistance. As Christine Grahame said, the situation might, however, become apparent when the time comes. People can access the help scheme beyond tomorrow. It will be open to eligible people until the switchover in the Border Television region is complete. That will be in July 2009, when the Caldbeck transmitter switches over. I am very much aware of the concern that rural areas are receiving a poorer service. More people in such areas receive their television signal from a relay transmitter and, as Ted Brocklebank and John Lamont pointed out, some areas in Scotland and Wales suffer because of that. The plan is for everyone in the Borders to continue to get public service broadcasting services. At this point, I will pick up on something that Jeremy Purvis said about any new Scottish digital channel. The Broadcasting Commission report recommended that that network should be carried, like all other public service broadcasters, on the public service broadcast multiplex. It should therefore be available to all. We should keep pushing for that. Pauline McNeill and John Lamont brought up the subject of digital radio, and different issues must be discussed in that regard. I recently met DCMS, together with its agent, and the Government will respond to its consultation. Digital switchover in the Borders is the first such exercise in Scotland following the pilot scheme in Whitehaven. We all hope that it goes well and we will keep our eye on it. On working with the UK Government, I want everyone to be assured that discussions have been on-going. I will send a copy of the Official Report of the debate to Westminster to show that there is genuine concern to ensure that people are not disadvantaged. It will be useful for Westminster to see the strength of feeling about BBC Alba, for example, which is so important to us all—we really must push to have it on Freeview. Please be assured that, as far as I am concerned, the move forward with digitalisation is a joint initiative and Scotland's case will always be pressed by this Government. Anyone who feels that they can usefully contribute to that should not  hesitate to do so. I hope that all Borders representatives will keep us informed of their perspective on how things are progressing with the digital switchover.   Meeting closed at 17:35.

As announced last Monday, the Scottish Government is funding 29 projects from the international development fund to continue our programme of support for sustainable development. The projects include programmes in education, health, civil society and economic development in Malawi. The new funding allocation means that we have met the annual commitment to allocate at least £3 million to the Malawi development programme, taking into account existing projects.

Several projects that received funding in our recent Malawi round will address specifically the needs of people with disabilities by enabling them to access educational, vocational and employment opportunities. Those include a project by the Global Concerns Trust that will provide carpentry and tailoring courses for adults with disability, and one by Malawi Tomorrow that promotes equality in education for blind and  visually impaired children. All the details of the projects are on our website—those are only two among others that affect the sector.

There is general recognition of the special work that we are doing in Malawi. For the first time, an amount has been ring fenced for Malawi each year and we have focused the international development policy. As members know, we have a section for sub-Saharan Africa. Fourteen applications for that have been received and are being assessed. I will make announcements on that in due course, but I expect the applications to be focused and to take into account our experience in Malawi.

That is an extremely important question. I was hugely impressed by Holyrood secondary school and would like to hear the outcome of the visit from the school. The Scotland Malawi Partnership does great work in Glasgow. Our team of officials in the Government also do a lot of great work to ensure that schools in Scotland and Malawi create links, which is extremely important. For example, one successful project in the present round has been run by Stenhouse primary school. That project can be used as a model of how to create co-operation agreements.

Traditional arts and the Scots language are extremely important to the Government. We are undertaking an audit of current provision for the Scots language to establish what measures are in place to promote it  and what opportunities exist to make further progress. I acknowledge that concerns have arisen following the Scottish Arts Council's recent decisions in its flexible funding allocations. I therefore welcome the council's extension of funding for Scots language organisations until October 2009 and its encouragement to three traditional arts groups to apply for further funding. I am considering how we can best ensure that our traditional arts can be supported in the longer term.

Since the flexible funding round, the Scottish Arts Council has announced a strategic fund of £300,000 to address the future of the affected organisations. So far, £80,000 of that money has been committed to supporting the Scots Language Resource Centre and Scottish Language Dictionaries for a further six months on completion of the current funding in April 2009. Further details of allocation will follow the Scottish Arts Council's discussions with the traditional music forum, and I will also hold discussions with the forum. The unsuccessful organisations have been invited to apply for up to £30,000 to address strategic issues.

I am very impressed by the recent survey that Mr Wilson carried out across education authorities in Scotland. As I said, I await the results of the audit into the Scots language, which I expect next month. I have committed to holding a major seminar of interested persons and organisations in January; I hope that Mr Wilson will attend that, in light of the findings of his survey, and contribute to the on-going discussion.

As I said at committee recently, the transition cost for creative Scotland will be in the financial memorandum to the public services reform bill, which is due to come to Parliament and to the appropriate parliamentary committee. Out of respect for the Parliament, the cost will be discussed at that time and not before.

Piping is an extremely important part of our national identity. Its economic importance includes drawing many visitors to Scotland. Piping competitions and events play a key part in our cultural calendar, and pipe bands and pipers from across Scotland and beyond regularly take part in national and international competitions. For the year of homecoming in 2009, piping will feature in many of the events including Celtic Connections, the north-east clan fortnight and the gathering.

Yes, of course. I join Mr McMillan in congratulating the College of Piping on reaching a landmark anniversary. I have promised to visit the college during its anniversary year. The important contribution that the college has made to piping in Scotland—and the world—through the many ways in which it promotes and encourages piping is quite astounding. The college has maintained a high standard of piping education over the years, and I am sure that it will continue to do so for many years to come.

As part of our six-point action plan in response to the global financial and economic situation, the Scottish Government will front-load spending on the 2007-13 European structural funds programmes to provide a direct stimulus to the Scottish economy. We have allocated £105 million under the European social fund and £138 million from the European regional development fund to projects across Scotland. Some £51 million of that funding has been allocated to community planning partnerships, which will help to support more than 30,000 people back into work and ensure that more than 20,000 people will gain relevant qualifications to ensure that they can develop skills to help progress through employment.

Yes. As I have always stressed, our European priorities are set out in such a way that we expect them to be flexible and able to adapt to changing circumstances. Similarly, the First Minister recently met the Secretary of State for Scotland to discuss areas of flexibility, in both Scotland and the United Kingdom. They have pledged to maintain regular contact and to work together in that regard. Of course, that will spread throughout Government with much discussion and co-operative ventures to ensure that we are doing the best for Scotland in economic terms.

Absolutely. The Government believes Scotland to be a strong part of Europe and wishes to work with our European partners to best advantage for Europe and Scotland, which is always at the forefront of our minds.

Scottish Screen uses four main criteria when assessing applications across all funding strands. They are: cultural impact; creative impact; the business case and ability to deliver; and market/audience interest. Specific information related to each funding strand can be found in the investment guidelines on the Scottish Screen website.

Sadly, I have not yet been able to see the film, although I look forward very much to seeing it because I have heard such excellent reports about it. "Stone of Destiny" was funded jointly by Scottish Screen and the Canadian Film Council. It received a standing ovation when it opened the Toronto film festival. So far, the film has been released only in cinemas in Scotland; it goes on general release in England and Wales on 14 November. Scottish Screen has said that, if asked, I should highlight that a cinematic release is deemed to be a loss leader even for the biggest films and that the money is made in residual sales of DVDs and so on. I feel confident that this little gem of a film—as it has been described to me by many people—will, like many other Scottish films, be enjoyed by people for years to come as it is, after all, about a part of Scotland's history.

Absolutely. We have many talented people in Scotland at all levels of the film  industry, from technicians all the way through to some of the finest actors and film makers in the world. When I look at some of the absolute gems that have been created in Scotland using Scottish-based artists, including that wonderful film "Stone of Destiny", I am sure that the future of the screen in Scotland is bright.

I congratulate BBC Alba on its success so far; with viewing figures released of more than 600,000 over its first week, it has exceeded the expectations of many. It is important that BBC Alba is able to build on that early success, establish its own identity and make progress by gaining access to other platforms. BBC Alba advises that there are no plans to include Scottish programmes produced in English on the new channel at this time.

It is important to remember that MG Alba's statutory remit is to commission and make programmes in Gaelic. To make English language programmes would be outside its statutory duties, so the introduction of English language programmes would cause some difficulties for MG Alba as a partner in BBC Alba. However, Miss Milne is right to raise the issue because the BBC trust would probably wish to assess the value and impact of the BBC Alba channel as it goes on. The BBC trust will do that, of course, in relation to BBC Alba moving to the Freeview platform. Over the years there will be many tests. We are working closely with the chair, board and staff of BBC Alba to ensure its continued success.

Intangible culture heritage is a concept that the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization promotes, which concerns a broad range of  factors that communities and individuals recognise to be part of their cultural heritage. The "Scoping and Mapping Intangible Cultural Heritage in Scotland" report makes a number of recommendations about maintaining and promoting aspects of our nation's identity, cultural practices and living traditions. Museums Galleries Scotland, which the Scottish Government supports financially, commissioned the report and is pursuing the implementation of its recommendations with Napier University, which conducted the research that underpins the report.

Museums Galleries Scotland, which commissioned the ICH report, is acting as policy leader and having further discussions with Napier University. There has been no financial impact on the Scottish Government at this stage. I await with interest the findings of Museums Galleries Scotland and Napier University.

That is an interesting point, and I will ensure that it is passed on to Museums Galleries Scotland and Napier University. I have often stated in the chamber that the Government is committed to the traditional arts and to recognition of them. I want very much to take on board those aspects in my discussions about how we preserve and promote our traditional arts. I have arranged cross-party meetings in the Parliament of representatives with an interest in this area. What Rob Gibson has raised will inform part of the discussion, which I look forward to very much.

I, too, thank Blair Jenkins and the commissioners, as well as the officers who supported the work of the commission. Like many other members, I also pay tribute to Ray Michie. When I lived and worked in Argyll, Ray Michie was my constituency MP, and I saw at first hand her hands-on work and how highly respected she was. This has been a generally excellent debate. I welcome the support for the work of the commission that many members have expressed. There are many points to respond to, and I will work through some of them. In the spirit of consensus, I wish to make it clear why I feel that we cannot support all the amendments. I particularly appreciated the contributions of Ted Brocklebank, Margo MacDonald and David Whitton. Sound opinions from those who have worked in any particular industry or profession and bring their experience to the chamber are always to be welcomed.  I thank Pauline McNeill for opening the debate by speaking about the wide picture of broadcasting in Scotland and the high expectations that people in Scotland are likely to have because of our bold step of establishing the Scottish Broadcasting Commission. The Parliament must try to live up to some of those high expectations. Ted Brocklebank spoke about the founding principles of broadcasting: informing, educating and entertaining. Those should always be held up as great ideals, and Margo MacDonald and Chris Harvie reminded us how easy it can be to slip away from them. Iain Smith said that there should be no slacking, and that it was time for action, by having a general agreement on more powers in order to make progress. That important point was contained in the Lib Dems' response to the commission: they said that there should be much greater accountability to the Scottish Parliament, including a formal role for the Parliament in the charter renewal process. On the point that Iain Smith made about it being time for action, I emphasise the time that was available to the Cultural Commission, which Ted Brocklebank mentioned. In 2005, that commission made certain recommendations, but nothing happened as a result. The Lib Dems' recommendation that there be much greater accountability to the Scottish Parliament might suggest to Jeremy and others that the chair of BBC Alba should be accountable to the Scottish Parliament—it is the Scottish taxpayer who is paying £12 million a year for BBC Alba, and there should therefore be a line of accountability from BBC Alba to Scottish ministers. The fact that there is no Ofcom appraisal system in place for the channel's chair is concerning. I have written to Ofcom about that, and it has now agreed to look into the matter. I have concerns about what Jeremy said in his speech.

I am sorry, Presiding Officer. I was a wee bit miffed by Mr Purvis's lack of trust in the Scottish National Party's ability to be politically impartial. I am concerned by how he tried to tie in the First Minister's comments, saying that the commission had let us down by not taking on board the First Minister's comments about Border TV. Mr Purvis cannot have it all ways. The Broadcasting Commission was clearly independent, which is what everyone would expect and desire. However, I understand the concerns about Border TV that Jeremy Purvis and  Christine Grahame expressed. I will say more about that when I talk about the amendment in Iain Smith's name. On the amendment in Pauline McNeill's name, the commission considered the future of broadcasting in Scotland within the current UK framework because there was no remit for it to examine other possibilities. However in its comments on devolution, the commission said: "We are making recommendations in this report to increase the influence Scotland has over its broadcasting services and the accountability of those services in Scotland. We are equally clear, however, that if these steps are unsuccessful in meeting the needs of the viewing public in Scotland, then the question of devolving all of broadcasting to Scotland may need to be considered in future." We should never close doors; we should always look forward and consider the best solution. The commission has gone a long way to build consensus across party lines. Although we differ from the Labour Party on the destination for broadcasting and on Scotland's future, I hope that we can maintain the wide consensus that exists on the next steps that are needed to make Scotland's broadcasting better for the people of Scotland. If the amendment in Pauline McNeill's name were agreed to, the amended motion would be confusing, because it would simultaneously call on the Parliament to accept that it should take "an active role in considering the broadcasting industry and services", and to recommend that the Calman commission consider that role. I have no problem with the Calman commission considering the case for extending the Parliament's role. The national conversation will do that, too.

No, I do not have time. If the amendment in Pauline McNeill's name were agreed to, the amended motion would not be clear. Therefore I cannot support the amendment and I will abstain in the vote on it. However, because the key point for all members is that we establish that there is wide support for the Scottish Broadcasting Commission's recommendations, I will support the motion, irrespective of the Parliament's vote on the amendment. On the amendment in Ted Brocklebank's name, I am happy for the network's commercial activity to be explored by the people who take the network forward. However, it would be wrong at this stage to tie the hands of the people who are involved in future work to develop the network, so we will vote against the amendment. I understand the concern that is expressed in the Liberal Democrat amendment, which we have  no problem accepting—[ Interruption. ]

Jeremy Purvis expressed concern about proposed changes to Border TV news and Iain Smith expressed concern about Ofcom's target of 3 per cent of Channel 4 production to come from the devolved nations. I emphasise that those proposals are still open for consultation. Everyone should try to meet the deadline for the closure of the consultation on 4 December. I have written to Andy Burnham about the proposals and Ofcom's review and I hope to meet him soon. The First Minister will discuss the matter with Ed Richards, the chief executive officer of Ofcom, on 5 November. I would like to address many points that were made in the debate. Cathy Peattie made an important point about the sale of spectrum and the seventh multiplex. The matter can be raised when the First Minister meets Ed Richards on 5 November and it can be raised with Andy Burnham, when he has responded to my letter to him. No options for the use of spectrum are closed off. Officials in the Scottish Government have raised many such issues directly in meetings with Ofcom. Ken Macintosh talked about radio. I recently met Barry Cox, who is chair of the digital radio working group. That dialogue will continue and will reflect people's concerns. The commission reached across party boundaries and set out an achievable and inspiring vision for broadcasting. Its report is well timed, given all the points that members made in the debate. There can be no solution to the problems that face public service broadcasting in the UK unless we address problems in Scotland. The Government will engage vigorously with Ofcom and Westminster, to advocate the commission's recommendations and in particular to advocate a Scottish network. I encourage members of all parties to continue the commission's spirit of shared understanding by joining us in that advocacy and moving forward in the spirit of team Scotland. I urge members to support the motion.

The Scottish Government thinks that it is unacceptable that only 11 of the Lewis chessmen are based in Scotland while the other 82 remain in London. We believe that our chessmen should be held in the country in which they were discovered. I discussed the chessmen when I visited the British Museum in January this year, but have been disappointed by its apparent lack of responsiveness to continuing that dialogue. However, I have managed to secure a meeting with the director of the British Museum on Monday, 6 October. I hope that our discussion will be constructive. I am sure that the member will be interested to know that there have been positive operational discussions between the British Museum and the National Museums of Scotland about potential future exhibitions of the chessmen in Scotland and future collaboration on research. The National Museums of Scotland is also considering activities involving the chessmen for the year of homecoming in 2009.

Every case should be considered on its own merits. The case for the  Lewis chessmen is particularly strong, and there is no reason whatsoever why, under the current United Kingdom settlement, the British Museum should not return the chessmen to the national museum of Scotland. Of course, come independence, how such things are dealt with will change.

That is, of course, an operational matter for the National Museums of Scotland. There is on-going constructive dialogue with the national museum of Scotland and museums throughout our nation on how we can use our collections to best advantage. I have no doubt whatsoever that agreement will be reached between the national museum of Scotland and Lewis so that Lewis's legacy can be properly displayed through the homecoming season.

Research is on-going on that and not every expert agrees with Mr Brocklebank's contention. However, the chessmen certainly marched out of the sea and landed at Uig, and that is where they should be.

Objects that are on loan to the national collections are subject to specific loan agreements between the owners and the national collections. Although that is an operational matter for the national collections, the Scottish Government provides annual funding for the collections' acquisition programme and considers requests for additional funding for major acquisitions.

The member is right that many major artworks and artefacts have been saved for the nation in recent years, including Botticelli's Virgin, Titian's Venus, the John Murray archive and the Kelvingrove Spitfire. We must always ensure that we retain the arm's-length relationship with our galleries and museums, but I see no reason why we cannot enter into dialogue on the issue, to provide clarity for the people who are obviously concerned about it.

I am considering a paper from the joint board of the Scottish Arts Council and Scottish Screen on potential transition costs. The costs of establishing creative Scotland will be made public when they are submitted to the Parliament through the proposed public services reform bill's financial memorandum.

Creative Scotland will be the coming together of the Scottish Arts Council and Scottish Screen, which is Scotland's film agency. The joint board is discussing all those issues. Right at the forefront of its intention is to give maximum benefit to artists and creators in Scotland. I have faith that that is what the joint board will do.

As was reported to the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee when the issue was discussed previously, the Scottish Arts Council and Scottish Screen have set aside about £1 million from their combined grant-in-aid towards the costs of transition. We have said that, if the costs are greater, the Government will look at that.

No, I foresee no difficulties. I will identify a new chair for the company shortly and, when it is established and the chair and board of directors are in place, I will of course ask them to discuss with me their plans for the appointment of a chief executive.

Two committees of the Parliament agreed to the bill coming before Parliament, and although the general principles of the bill were agreed to, the financial memorandum was not. I am aware of that, but I am also aware of what I see as confusion among the Opposition parties.

I do not think so—the member should look at the record. There is a precedent, which is why I do not foresee the problems that Bill Aitken foresees. The previous Administration set up Bòrd na Gàidhlig as a company limited by guarantee. In December 2002, it appointed a chair, and in January 2003 it established the company. It did not introduce the Gaelic Language (Scotland) Bill until 2004.

It was obvious that the parliamentary programme was full. The previous Administration started talking about the issue as far back as 2004, with its Cultural Commission. We owed it to the sector to act quickly, and that is what we have done. The issue will come before Parliament in the public services reform bill to be introduced at the beginning of next year.

I did not see the Liberals jumping up and down when their partners in coalition did the same thing with Bòrd na Gàidhlig.

We have increased our budget for culture by 14 per cent in cash terms over three years, from £238 million in 2007-08 to £272 million. That is an extra £34 million for cultural activity, including artists. It includes £6 million over three years to deliver our manifesto commitment to the Edinburgh festival expo fund, which promotes Scottish productions and talent, and £1.8 million for culture through cashback for communities, which comes from the proceeds of crime. We will shortly make a further announcement on cashback for communities.

Our manifesto included pledges to broaden the range of funding options available to artists and a grant scheme equivalent to a tax exemption. We are now working with the creative Scotland transition team to develop firm proposals. The innovation fund of £5 million, which I announced in June, will be available in creative Scotland's first two years to support new ideas. In his budget response to the United Kingdom Chancellor of the Exchequer in May this year, John Swinney, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth, asked for the Scottish Parliament to be passed additional competence so that we can, through the income tax system, achieve a limited exemption for artists resident and working in Scotland.

I have no doubt that if the Scottish Government had full financial powers, we would be able to offer greater support to our artistic community. However, that does not alter the Scottish Government's view that support for young artists and arts businesses is an extremely important aspect of funding. I have asked the creative Scotland transition team to include such support in its broader examination of future funding models for the sector.

We believe that the management of all the world heritage sites in Scotland complies with the requirements of the world heritage convention. We will, nevertheless, consider carefully any comments that the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization makes following the forthcoming mission.

As Mr Harper says, the applications are currently before ministers for consideration, so it would be inappropriate for me to comment on the merits or details of the proposals or to meet anyone who has a particular locus in the matter.

We should be very proud of our world heritage sites, such as those in Orkney, New Lanark and Edinburgh's old and new towns. They have a great role to play in the year of homecoming next year. The Antonine wall is the most recent site to gain world heritage site status, and many people in the Parliament and in local authorities worked very hard to secure that status. We should celebrate those sites, and I can think of no better time to celebrate them in than the year of homecoming.

Ministers and the City of Edinburgh Council invited UNESCO to arrange the mission and visit here. Historic Scotland, on behalf of ministers, will take the lead and work closely with all key stakeholders. It is worth saying that monitoring missions are routine for UNESCO when there is a question about possible threats to a world heritage site. They are aimed at helping the management of the site. Bath also has a mission this year, and Liverpool and London have recently been visited by UNESCO and experts from the International Council on Monuments and Sites.  Planning applications must be determined by taking account of all the relevant issues, including, where appropriate, any potential impact on a world heritage site. We are always aware of those issues because, as I said, our world heritage sites are precious to us and we wish to both celebrate and maintain them.

The Scottish Arts Council has informed me that it held a number of discussions earlier this year with traditional and other arts organisations that have been affected by the council's flexible funding decisions, including informal discussions with the Scottish Traditions of Dance Trust in May. I met some of those organisations earlier this month. I understand from the Scottish Arts Council that it plans to write next week to all organisations that were affected by the flexible funding decisions and to meet them after the next board meeting on 25 September. I also understand that the SAC met the traditional music forum to begin to explore the wider strategic questions around the support and development of the traditional music sector in Scotland.

The Government is committed to the retention and promotion of our traditional arts and languages in Scotland. That is one reason why I commissioned the first ever audit of Scots language provision. We should get the results next month. Arts development managers at the Scottish Arts Council have drafted for submission to the joint board meeting on 25 September a paper that reports on all the outstanding strategic issues following the fallout from the flexible funding decisions and offers possible solutions to the strategic issues. In previous years, the Scottish Arts Council budget contained ring-fenced funding for the traditional arts. That stopped in 2006, when funding for the sector was mainstreamed. I have undertaken to consider the matter and to work with the Scottish Arts Council and creative Scotland to ensure that we protect our traditional arts. It  should not be taken from my exchange with Cathy Peattie today that no traditional arts are funded in Scotland. That is not the case. Some organisations were disappointed by the flexible funding decisions, but the Scottish Arts Council has undertaken to meet them and discuss the matter further. We have a vibrant traditional arts scene in Scotland and we want to maintain, enhance and promote it. I am sure that members of all parties in the Parliament will work together to do that.

The Government's approach to international development has been consensual from the start. We have always said that we want to build on what happened before, to review what happened before, and to move things forward in the spirit of consensus. In general, that has been taken on board by everyone, even though there are naturally some issues on which we will disagree. The European and External Relations Committee's report is valuable, as are our review of the previous Government's policy and our listening to the relevant organisations and the  public about how to formulate our forward approach to international development. Many points were made in the debate and I ask members to excuse me for not mentioning everyone who spoke. However, I want to mention Lord George Foulkes, because within the misguided rant that we heard from him was a little kernel of truth. DFID is indeed a huge player in international development, and that is why everything that we do is done in consultation with DFID. As I have said, the issue is far too important for people to run away on their own with it. When I went to Malawi, I visited the DFID representative, and my officers have constant contact with officials at DFID to ensure that what we do is complementary. Let us recognise that the Scottish Government's contribution to international development is additional to what the Scottish people contribute within the UK set-up. Scotland makes a huge contribution. That brings me to the recurrent theme of whether the Scottish Government intends to establish a Scottish representative in Malawi. The Scottish Government's interests in Malawi are represented by the British High Commission in Malawi, and we pay our share towards that office. We are certainly keen to expand capacity in Malawi as far as governance is concerned, and we want to ensure that civil society in Malawi can look after the issues that arise and take an overview in conjunction with the Government of Malawi. That is why, in partnership with the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations, we fund the civil society organisation CONGOMA—the Council For Non-Governmental Organisations In Malawi. We have also funded the Scotland Malawi Partnership to investigate whether there is a need for a corresponding presence in Malawi to support the development of civil society links. I will let the committee and the Parliament know the outcome of that work when the results are available. Another recurring theme in the debate was the expansion of our focus to include Zambia, Tanzania, Rwanda and the Darfur region of Sudan. Let me be clear about that. As I told the committee when I gave evidence to it, we have not expanded our focus in sub-Saharan Africa. In fact, we are narrowing the focus of our policy from the whole of sub-Saharan Africa, which was covered by the original policy that was launched in 2005.

Absolutely. I am just about to move on to that. However, it has been said that we are expanding in sub-Saharan Africa and that we should keep everything focused on Malawi. In fact, we are focusing in on sub-Saharan Africa. For the first time, there is a ring-fenced fund of a minimum of £3 million for Malawi. That fund recognises the special relationship that we have. The Indian subcontinent was selected to recognise its links with Scotland, to build a strong, fair and inclusive national identity, and to express solidarity with communities that are represented in Scottish society. Members agreed that it was right for the previous Government to put in place a humanitarian response to the awful events in Sri Lanka, so the inclusion of the Indian subcontinent in the international development policy is not completely new. Des McNulty raised the issue of humanitarian assistance. It is clear that we will respond to humanitarian crises through the Disasters Emergency Committee. During the Burmese crisis, I had meetings with the committee, which made it clear that we could contribute if the committee believed that we could add value to what it was doing. The transportation of goods to Malawi was raised. It is very tempting to say that people in Malawi could do with this or that, but we must focus on what we are funding. The new policy adopts a focused approach. Where the transportation of specific equipment is an essential and proportionate part of the activities of a specific programme, and where there is evidence that the equipment cannot be sourced in the country or in other parts of Africa, we will consider funding it as part of the programme allocation. However, we will not consider applications for funding solely for the transportation of equipment. The Scottish Government's resources should be used to fund its priorities, which are additional to the work that DFID is doing.

No—I do not have time. The issue of international education was raised. In the recent debate on international education that Maureen Watt brought to the chamber, in which I made the closing speech, we set out a holistic approach to the issue. I am working closely with colleagues in education, health and climate change to ensure that cross-cutting themes are addressed. A holistic approach is important, but targeted and focused work must be at the centre of what we do. The International Development Education Association of Scotland already receives funding for development education from DFID.  Robin Harper mentioned human rights, which is an extremely important issue. When the joint commission on Malawi met recently, it welcomed the inclusion of the following cross-cutting themes: vocational education and training; gender issues and equality, which are part of human rights; enterprise development; and strengthening the context for enhanced human rights and the development of civil society. The last of those themes has been included because we deem human rights to be extremely important. Ted Brocklebank and Michael Matheson mentioned the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, which is hugely important in addressing the issues that Robin Harper raised. Michael Matheson also spoke about the importance of developing relations between departments in Malawi, Scotland and some of the other countries with which we will start to work more closely. Civic society has a great role to play—it is not all about Government. Organisations throughout Scotland—charities, aid agencies, schools, education departments, local authorities and professional organisations—are playing their part. We can get too bogged down in saying that Government must lead. I believe firmly that Government should add value to initiatives to which people are committed. We should not pretend that we are the experts. That is why everything that we do is led by people in the field, who have the necessary knowledge and experience. Fair trade is hugely important. The UK is the member state, but there have been discussions between my officials, officials in the procurement directorate and officials responsible for procurement at UK level. At First Minister's question time, the First Minister has stated that we are committed to those discussions. There seems to be cross-party support for upping the ante on the issue. I am happy to take up the matter with Jim Murphy, the Minister for Europe, and with the European Commission, which has a representative here in Edinburgh. I will press Jim Murphy to raise the issue with Peter Mandelson, as has been suggested. I will also have dialogue with Douglas Alexander—when he gets back to me—on how we can move the agenda forward. We are committed to fair trade and to the international development work that the Parliament does, in conjunction with its other partners. We are listening and will move forward.

I take on board everything that Mrs Eadie has said. However, given that that campaign happened three years ago, can she tell me what the previous Government did about the situation so that I can perhaps build on it?

I congratulate the committee on securing the debate. The depth and breadth of the committee's inquiry was extensive and like the Scottish Government's public review—given the holistic approach that the Government takes in all that it does—it has engaged many sectors of the international development community in Scotland. Without a doubt, there are many views on what we should and should not be doing, but there is one genuine aim: the fight against world poverty. We all share that desire and many of the committee's recommendations have been addressed in our new policy and our revised funding approach. International development is a complex issue. There are no quick fixes or easy answers because conditions and circumstances vary from country to country, from region to region and from community to community. That is why we took time to ensure that our policy focuses on the priorities of the people who are in greatest need and that it is supported by a robust and transparent funding process. Without that, we cannot deliver the measurable and sustainable outcomes for which we all strive.  The sector has recognised and acknowledged that the Scottish Government has listened through each stage of our policy development. A number of inputs have informed our new policy. Those include consideration of the responses to the public review of the existing policy; the experience to date of the Scottish Government in operating the previous international development policy; the intelligence that has been gained from an independent review of Scottish Government funded activity in Malawi; and, of course, on-going discussions with the Government of Malawi. The independent review that I mentioned was undertaken by LTS International. Its purpose was twofold: to look at Scottish Government funded activity in Malawi and to consider our related procedures and processes. We will publish information on the findings of that review shortly. That is an important piece of work, which is informing on-going programme implementation. I want to take time to ensure that the final document is useful for a wide range of stakeholders and that it can assist in the development of best practice in the international development sector in Scotland. We look forward to continuing to work closely with the Network of International Development Organisations in Scotland and the Scotland Malawi Partnership. Members will recall that when I gave evidence to the committee in May, I stressed that the new policy adopted a very different approach—an approach that has been welcomed by NIDOS, the Scotland Malawi Partnership and the Government of Malawi. The process has been challenging, but necessary. Having considered all the evidence, we were clear on what we needed to do to build on progress to date and strengthen the approach. In that respect, I commend the sector not only for rising to and meeting this challenge but for its collaborative approach. Our international development policy forms part of the wider international framework and illustrates the Scottish Government's commitment to Scotland's place as a responsible nation in the world, ready to play its part in tackling the global issue of poverty and facilitating economic growth for all. Since my appearance before the European and External Relations Committee in May, much has been done. We have undertaken a funding round for the Malawi development programme, launched a funding round for the sub-Saharan Africa development programme and participated in a joint permanent commission for co-operation official review meeting in Malawi. Our policy reflects our desire to listen and to ensure that the recipient country's needs and priorities are paramount and form the basis for Scottish Government engagement.  As I said, in August officials attended the joint permanent commission for co-operation official review meeting, which built on the discussions of my visit to Malawi in February. Our new funding approach and focus, which were outlined by officials, were warmly welcomed by Government of Malawi representatives. There was a particular welcome for the inclusion of the cross-cutting themes of vocational education and training, gender issues and equality, enterprise development and strengthening the context for enhanced human rights and civil society development. Those themes reflect the priorities in the Malawi growth and development strategy, and help us to focus activities within the strands of the co-operation agreement and develop a stronger programme. The Government of Malawi welcomed our commitment to continuing to work closely with it and, as a reflection of that ethos, colleagues in Malawi are commenting on short-listed proposals. We have implemented a new requirement for applicants to provide evidence of consultation with the Government of Malawi—an approach that that Government has strongly supported. In July, we opened a funding round for the Malawi development programme. Although I appreciate that some of the changes to the application process were challenging, I believe that the increased rigour was necessary and has already led to an increase in quality. The sector has certainly risen admirably to the challenge. We received 65 applications for work in Malawi, which is more than in any other funding round. Moreover, the quality of applications was noticeably higher than in previous rounds, which suggests that the new process did not present a significant barrier to the majority of the sector. Members will recall that during my appearance before the European and External Relations Committee I announced that I had agreed a three-year contribution to the core funding of NIDOS and the Scotland Malawi Partnership. That funding is now in place and both organisations have received their funding allocations for this financial year, which fulfils our policy commitment to supporting networking and information exchange in Scotland. We have made good progress on the sub-Saharan Africa development programme. After a call for concept notes in June, we received 26 such notes, covering the four countries that had been identified. Again, applicants have risen to the challenge: the quality of the concept notes was very high. We have invited 15 organisations to submit full applications, which will be considered by our independent assessors and reviewed by the Scottish Government. We will announce the results later this year.  The newest element of our policy is the Indian subcontinent development programme, which is being developed. Decisions on the funding process will be informed by discussions with the relevant communities in Scotland to assess the focus, to inform us where Scotland can add value and to examine the mechanism for operating that aspect of the policy. On fair trade, I was pleased that the Scottish Fair Trade Forum had the opportunity to contribute to the evidence sessions during the committee's inquiry. Much of the work in establishing the forum has been done and it is now carrying forward the fair trade nation campaign. The forum also continues to build strong ties with many high-profile stakeholders. Fair trade is a complex issue, particularly with regard to public sector procurement, so I will continue to pursue ways in which we can strengthen the guidance to encourage the use of fair trade goods where appropriate. As many members do, I care about the issue and I remain committed to keeping it on the agenda. The Scottish Government is committed to Scotland achieving fair trade nation status and will continue to work with the Scottish Fair Trade Forum on that. It is essential that when Scotland receives fair trade nation status, that status is meaningful. It should not be a matter of paying lip service to it. In a debate that we had on fair trade in March last year, I said to the then Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport, Patricia Ferguson—who is also committed to Scotland having fair trade nation status—that the issue is far too important to argue over, that we ought to work together to get things sorted, and that we ought to take the appropriate advice from where we can get it. I stand by what I said. I think that we are all committed to achieving fair trade nation status for Scotland and can work together to achieve it. I know that the chair of the Scottish Fair Trade Forum, John McAllion, has been dealing with Patricia Ferguson to get a cross-party group on fair trade issues up and running. I hope that we have constructive dialogue on moving that forward. I look forward to hearing what colleagues have to say on the report. Whatever our differences in approach, we all have a common aim in our international development work: the eradication of global poverty. I look forward to continuing to work with the committee and Parliament and, of course, I look forward to continuing to work with Pauline McNeill who will, I understand, have a central role on international development issues for the Labour group, because we all care about ensuring that our international development work supports those who are in greatest need to help themselves and to contribute to the long-term aim of establishing sustainable and vibrant communities.

John Park hit the nail on  the head when he said that this is a subject on which we should all declare an interest. As someone who comes from Glasgow, the curry capital of Scotland, I certainly have an interest to declare. The Scottish Government has been aware of the issue for some time. In fact, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice wrote to the Home Secretary in January this year to raise the industry's concerns. Our economic strategy recognises the links between population and economic growth—that is why we have set ambitious targets to match the average EU 15 population growth by 2017. The Government believes that we should have more powers over immigration to allow us to meet Scotland's distinct needs. The national conversation explores those issues. We feel strongly that greater control over immigration would enable the Scottish Government to boost Scotland's population and meet the skills needs of the Scottish economy. Flexibilities can work: the fresh talent working in Scotland scheme has been a Scottish success story. I pay tribute to Jack McConnell for starting it some years ago. Around 8,500 international graduates have stayed on in Scotland.

I will come on to that. We have discussed the issues in question with the MAC because they are extremely important to Scotland, and we will continue to do so in the country's best interests. I recognise the terms of Brian Adam's motion and am glad that the subject is being well aired. I am not entirely convinced that it would be feasible to have a scheme specifically for the restaurant trade, but the motion asks merely that the idea be considered. All ideas on how to meet the needs of such a vital industry are considered. We must ensure that the migration system is fit for purpose for all industries in Scotland, including the agriculture, oil and information technology industries. Sufficient flexibility needs to be built into the new points-based system to allow employers to bring in the skills that they need when those skills cannot be found locally. We are pressing the Home Office for further flexibilities in the UK's managed migration system, so that we can continue to attract and retain people in key areas of economic activity. We should not forget the economic activity that is generated by catering in general and by the specific form of catering that we are discussing this evening. Tonight's  discussions will help us to shape those discussions with the Home Office. I have noted members' concerns. For example, Richard Baker expressed concerns about training, and I am happy to discuss those with the industry. As members know, the Scottish shortage occupation list came out yesterday, so this is a timely discussion. The lists were compiled by the Migration Advisory Committee using, in part, evidence from employers on where shortages in the labour market might effectively be filled by migration. As well as the Government and its officials being in contact with the MAC throughout the process of collecting evidence, representatives of the south Asian restaurant industry fed in their views and I understand that they also attended discussions in Glasgow earlier this year. Skilled chefs are included in the UK list and, to clarify what members have said, it is only skilled chefs who are, as we have heard, earning at least £8.10 per hour after deductions for accommodation, meals and so on. Those who are at national vocational qualification level 3, as discussed by Brian Adam, are not on the shortage occupation list. Restaurateurs also have a responsibility to ensure that local people are given the necessary opportunities and skills to become contributing members of society—many restaurateurs do that. Nanette Milne, in particular, picked up on that point. I understand where she is coming from. I am particularly fascinated by the idea of a balti academy; it would be a good place to go to test the skills of those who were in training.

I am sure that the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning will be very interested to read the contributions to this debate. Of course, People 1st, the sector skills council for the hospitality industry, has identified and highlighted issues with the training of chefs. It is working with key bodies including Skills Development Scotland, colleges and universities to explore ways in which that can be addressed. Again, a lot of what has been said in the chamber this evening taps in to that. As John Park said, it is interesting that such a scheme is already under way at Thames Valley University.  Training is important, but we would also like Scotland to have more powers to allow our Government to reflect Scotland's needs and experiences by doing more to boost our population and add to the richness of our society. We are determined to create opportunities so that fewer Scots feel the need to leave, more Scots are encouraged to return, and other people are attracted to come and be part of Scotland. We remain supportive of the industry, which is extremely important economically and culturally. It was good to hear Bashir Ahmad talking about his experiences in the industry—I will be interested to hear from him about the discussions that he has with people in the industry that he knows so well.  Asian food is a firm favourite in Scotland. We have always welcomed workers from the Indian subcontinent, and we in the Government and, as has been made clear tonight, across Parliament, will continue to work with the restaurant industry to ensure that that remains the case.  Meeting closed at 17:34.

The Scottish Arts Council is, of course, the main national funding source for the arts. Its current funding system was launched in 2006.

Absolutely. I disagree with nothing that Sarah Boyack said. Later today, I will meet representatives of the Traditional Music and Song Association of Scotland, the Scots Music Group and the Scottish Traditions of Dance Trust. We have talked about the issues before. Since the Parliament was reconvened in 1999, members of various parties have expressed concern that there is no guarantee of funding for Scotland's unique indigenous arts and traditional culture. It is  essential that we discuss how we can guarantee that uniqueness in our communities in future. The Government, with the care that it has for the traditional arts, will have that discussion.

The Scottish Arts Council is having discussions with those who were not successful in that flexible two-year funding round. The Government wants to promote the very best of Scotland and the uniqueness of its traditional culture. I am not convinced that the national company model that we have for other forms of art in Scotland would be appropriate or would celebrate the diversity and the wonderful traditions of our culture. However, it is the Government's responsibility to protect our traditional cultures and we are very willing to have that discussion.

It is bizarre that it is only now, nine years after the Scottish Parliament was reconvened, that we have for the first time a Government that is listening and recognising the problems and willing to do something about them.

We continue to believe that the common fisheries policy does not serve Scotland well. We welcome the fact that the rejection of the Lisbon treaty by the Irish people presents another opportunity to prevent the extension of exclusive EU competence over the conservation of marine biological resources, which entrenches the discredited policy. At the joint ministerial committee on Europe on 17 June, I urged the United Kingdom Government to make that competence a red line issue in any renegotiation of the treaty. In the meantime, we shall, as always, take every opportunity to increase national control over fisheries policy, as we did successfully at the December agriculture and fisheries council with the new conservation credits scheme. An independent Scotland would, of course, be far better placed to conduct such negotiations.

It is entirely competent for a Government always to let people know what is best for the country that it is governing. It is clear that Scottish opt-outs from the CFP should be  possible, because member states of a similar size to Scotland—nation states with the right to determine their own futures in Europe—have successfully managed to negotiate opt-outs from particular elements of the European treaties. I suggest Denmark as a good example, as it has four opt-outs.

The sad thing for Scotland is that the UK Government does not stand up for Scottish fishing interests. Indeed, it tried to entrench the position even further by refusing to negotiate the exclusive competence out of the Lisbon treaty—on which it refused even to have a referendum.

Yes, I agree—it is ridiculous that that is the case. Let me also put it on record that the Scottish Government objected to Scotland's representation in Europe being reduced by one MEP.

Sorry—I did not catch the entire question. Could the member repeat it?

We will continue to press the Government of the United Kingdom, which is currently the member state, to withdraw from the common fisheries policy in the interests of Scotland, which has the vast majority of the UK's fisheries.

Sustainable economic development is of course an important element in tackling the underlying causes of global poverty, which we recently discussed in detail at a European and External Relations Committee meeting. We recognise the important role that the wider Scottish business community can play and is ready to play in achieving that aim. For example, the Scottish Government has supported the Scotland Malawi Business Group to facilitate links between the business community in Scotland and Malawi. Our new international development policy and the funding guidance that will be published shortly encourage inclusion of the private sector.

We want to make best use of the broad spectrum of specific skills and expertise that the business community offers. The new funding guidance will proactively encourage applications from the private sector that demonstrate relevant expertise and which will enable the sharing of expertise. Of course, that will not be for a private company's profit. I do not have time to go into the many examples of how we are proactively encouraging such activity. A natural progression in an international development policy is to move from engagement with schools, colleges, universities, churches and other  institutions to the business community. We have excellent examples of that.

An independent country that has the identity and strength that independence brings is naturally better placed to link with any initiatives in the world.

We are studying Professor King's report to the BBC trust and we strongly support the report's recommendations. It is clear that the BBC needs to do much more to serve its viewers in Scotland. The Scottish Broadcasting Commission is also studying the report. It has already highlighted in its interim report on the democratic phase of its work the importance that Scots attach to television news and the fact that a majority are confused about whether items in network news programmes apply to Scotland.

I refute the idea that that notion is outdated, but I agree that support is building for a Scottish digital channel. Evidence on that was given to the Broadcasting Commission and I look forward to reading its report, which will be issued in the next few months and which will address such questions. However, that does not take away from the central point that the BBC should be fair to licence payers throughout the network. Terrestrial TV still  has its place in ensuring democracy and fairness for Scotland.

The Scottish Government's international framework, which was published in April, sets out our objectives for contacts with other countries. Those objectives make it clear that, in representing Scotland overseas, the efforts of ministers, the Scottish Government and the wider public sector will focus on maximising the contribution to fulfilling the Government's purpose of increasing sustainable economic growth.

The promotion of the year of homecoming has, until now, not specifically targeted Parliaments and parliamentarians in other countries, but Andrew Welsh's idea is excellent. One way in which I would like to promote the year of homecoming is through alerting the consular corps in Scotland to the fantastic array of homecoming events that will take place in 2009. The year of homecoming is being woven into all VisitScotland's marketing; it started with the Scotland week marketing in the United States and Canada in April earlier this year and it will continue until autumn 2009. Networks such as the globalscot network and Caledonian societies worldwide are also being targeted, of course. I thank Andrew Welsh for the work that he has always done on promoting Scotland, and I thank Angus Council, which has promoted Scotland for many years. The year of homecoming is important to us all and it is good to know that everyone in the country wants it to be a success.

The Scottish Government has noted the proposal to create a union for the Mediterranean, which would be open to all EU member states and 12 southern Mediterranean and middle eastern partners, as agreed by the European Council on 13 and 14 March this year. We recognise that there have been disagreements between Chancellor Merkel and President Sarkozy on how the proposal should be progressed.

Regional interests are, of course, extremely important to the Government. That is shown in the international framework that we published earlier this year. That framework mentions the Nordic regions and the arc of prosperity, for example, quite a lot. I recently informally discussed the proposed union for the Mediterranean with a representative of the French Government during a visit to Paris, but I have not yet had an opportunity to discuss it with a representative of the German Government.

Under our draft action plan on European engagement, which I launched in April, the Scottish Government is actively seeking to work with our European partners in policy areas in which there is scope to benefit from collaborative working and to learn from and share past policy experiences. We are also willing to engage with  European partners who are keen to learn from Scotland's experiences and policies—as an aspiring nation we should be doing that. There will be a focus on closer engagement with the arc of prosperity countries—Norway, Finland, Iceland, Ireland and Denmark—particularly in relation to economic development. We can learn from the Scandinavian countries on a range of issues—indeed, we have a range of cultural links.

I am delighted by what I heard about the AGM of the Parliament's Burns club this lunchtime. The homecoming Scotland 2009 programme will formally begin on the weekend of Robert Burns's 250 th anniversary. The programme, which was launched by the First Minister on 16 June, will begin with six Burns events in key locations throughout Scotland. There will be a further 13 Burns-related events in the homecoming programme and the total projected spend during 2009 will be £789,000. The programme overall contains a significant cultural element and key events will celebrate the best of our traditional heritage, arts and language.

We commissioned an audit on Scots—the first ever such audit—and I have committed to considering its results and developing a way forward for our Scots traditional heritage. The Scottish Arts Council is in discussion with Scots language groups about the way forward. Members might be interested to know that VisitScotland told me that it received 55 applications for traditional arts events, of which 27 were granted funding.

The public subsidy expected to be paid to Scottish Opera during the financial year 2008-09 is £8,782,427.

There are two aspects to the member's question. Scottish Opera's new production of Smetana's opera, "The Two Widows" is a beneficiary of the new expo fund, through which Edinburgh International Festival bid for moneys and received £277,000 to enable it to fund the performance. Scottish Opera operates on a scale that is very different from the scale on which Opera North operates and in a very different context, so it is not appropriate to compare directly the funding that the two companies receive. I am delighted and impressed by the range and quality of the work that Scottish Opera delivers to audiences throughout Scotland and I look forward, as I know John Wilson does, to the company's continued success with its strong artistic programme, which I understand includes an exciting co-production with Opera North.

I thank the members who have contributed to the debate. A number of specific points were raised. I will not mention every individual who made a point, but I will try in the short time available to address all the general themes. We are legislating to establish creative Scotland, because it will be a new body with new functions. We could have dissolved the Scottish Arts Council through the Privy Council but, with the agreement of the Privy Council, we decided to take the opportunity to combine the abolition of the Scottish Arts Council with the legislation to establish creative Scotland. Ted Brocklebank and others raised the issue of the ministerial power of direction. We listened to what consultees said in their responses to the draft culture (Scotland) bill and the Creative Scotland Bill says that creative Scotland will have an arm's-length relationship with Government. For the first time, legislation will state that the Scottish ministers may not give creative Scotland any direction as to who or which cultural practices it can or cannot fund. I have heard Labour members say that that was always the case, but that position has never been stated in legislation before. It is now clearly established. I find it quite amusing that one Labour member after another said that there had always been a hands-off approach and then condemned me for not interfering in the Scottish Arts Council's decisions on flexible funding. They should all have been as sensible as Jamie Stone was on that point. Ted Brocklebank was concerned about the power of direction. However, the power that is available to ministers is to ensure the good governance and financial propriety of creative Scotland, which is fully in line with the approach to all non-departmental public bodies. Some members mentioned that our approach should not be solely concerned with economic benefits and Cathy Peattie said that there was too much of an economic emphasis in the bill. However, we amended the draft culture (Scotland) bill in order to remove its emphasis on the  economic benefits of arts and culture. The relevant section of the Creative Scotland Bill now tasks creative Scotland with pursuing a range of benefits without attaching priority to any one in particular. Various members mentioned the financial memorandum. As I explained to the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee and the Finance Committee, we introduced the bill before the budget for the transformation of the two organisations was settled because we wanted to establish the new organisation as soon as possible. As Aileen Campbell noted, the 2003 speech by the then First Minister was inspiring, but it was followed by consultation after consultation, a commission and then a draft bill. We felt that we owed it to the sector to get on with creating creative Scotland, because that was what the overwhelming majority of respondents wanted. James Kelly mentioned the estimates. We are working to improve them and will offer the remaining detail before stage 2, after the detailed transition planning has been done.

I am coming to that.

Quite clearly, what is being transferred is the £100,000 for the cultural enterprise office, which is there to help people find the right way forward—using the route map that will be drawn by the creative industries forum—and to ensure that they get the best advice. At the heart of this process are creators and artists who must get good advice.

No, I have given up enough time already; I have quite a lot to get through. People are asking for clarification of creative Scotland's role in relation to the creative industries. As well as being the lead advocate for the creative industries, creative Scotland will support creative enterprises in the first stages of  their business development. It will do that through the creative industries forum. The way forward must involve those with the necessary expertise working together to ensure that the best route map possible is provided for creative businesses. It should not duplicate effort and it must ensure an integrated package of support.

I will repeat what I said in my opening speech: "Creative Scotland will continue to evolve complementary specialist advice and information services for creative enterprises. In order for it to do that, I can confirm today that the resources that are devoted to that purpose by Scottish Enterprise will, from the beginning of the next financial year, transfer to creative Scotland." The cultural enterprise office will provide those services, the budget for which comes to £100,000. That budget has been provided by Government since 2004. In addition, I announced the creative Scotland innovation fund, for which £5 million will be given to creative Scotland in its first two years, in addition to the already announced grant in aid. That shows that this Government is committed to making a success of creative Scotland and to investing in Scotland's culture. Members have asked what creative Scotland's relationship will be with the voluntary sector. The Scottish Arts Council has already begun a review of its overall relationship with the voluntary sector, and creative Scotland will build on that work.

No, I would like to address other points that were made. Members asked for clarification of creative Scotland's role in working with the further and higher education sector. We continue to recognise the importance of the role of culture in schools and in the delivery of the curriculum for excellence. That was reflected in the expressive arts guidelines for the school curriculum, which were published in draft form recently. Creative Scotland will have an important strategic role to play in working with local authorities in the spirit of the concordat and the single outcome agreements. It will facilitate the development of appropriate networks and help  build connections between the public and private sectors. I am talking regularly with those who are involved in local authorities and in the voluntary arts to ensure that all voices are heard.

Mr Brocklebank has hit the nail on the head. That is what we have to achieve. It has been achieved in some measure by Highlands and Islands Enterprise, but we must ensure that the service is uniform for people throughout the country. Through the creative industries forum, we will reach that point. People will know exactly where to go and it will be well signposted.

Yes. I will close by addressing some of the points that Jamie McGrigor made. He had the courtesy to speak to me earlier and I know that there is concern in the publishing sector. I will undertake to meet Jamie McGrigor and representatives from publishers in Edinburgh, as he asked, along with representatives from the Scottish Arts Council. I will give the same courtesy to Publishing Scotland. The bill offers the kind of opportunity that does not come along often. We have to seize it with both hands, which is why I encourage every member to support the bill.

That was terribly nice of you, Presiding Officer. I am glad to be here this afternoon to ask the Parliament to agree to the general principles of the Creative Scotland Bill. I reiterate why the Government is promoting the bill, and promoting it now. In Scotland we have a dynamic, successful and internationally renowned cultural life. Our artists, writers, film makers, musicians and practitioners of all kinds are celebrated across the world. Our festivals, including the Edinburgh international film festival, which begins tonight, are world class in every sense of the word. In every part of Scotland, communities celebrate their identity through culture. Local authorities, volunteers and many others bring enjoyment and fulfilment through cultural activities. Our creative enterprises are breaking into new markets across the world. They now support 60,000 jobs and contribute over £4 billion to the wealth of Scotland. Because of those successes and our ambitions for the future, we think that the time is right for the bill. We want Scotland to be recognised as Europe's most creative nation—a nation that attracts and retains talent and in which the arts and our creative community are supported and celebrated and their contribution to the economy is maximised. It would not have been sufficient for us to pursue our aims through a reform of one or other of the existing bodies, or through a merger. Make do and mend will not do for our ambitions—we want a new body with modern functions and new objectives. We want creative Scotland to inspire an excellence that is the leading, confident edge of an aspirant nation. I turn to the bill and to what creative Scotland will do, how it will innovate and with whom it will work in partnership. I record my thanks to the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee, the Finance Committee and the Subordinate Legislation Committee for their consideration of the bill. In my comments, I will try to offer the clarification that colleagues have sought. Creative Scotland will be our national development body for the arts and culture, working with partners to support the creative industries. Its remit will encompass all the present functions and  activities of the Scottish Arts Council and Scottish Screen, including the promotion of the arts, culture, film and screen. We envisage four roles for creative Scotland. First, it will promote an increasingly wide understanding, appreciation and enjoyment of the arts and culture. Secondly, it will identify, support and develop talent and excellence in the arts and culture. Thirdly, it will seek to realise all the benefits of the arts and culture. Fourthly, it will work with partners to support the creative industries. Creative Scotland will promote the enjoyment of the arts and culture. Much good work is already under way in that area. Scottish Screen has promoted and invested in the innovative use of digital technologies to make cinema accessible to audiences across Scotland. The Scottish Arts Council has supported groundbreaking work; creative Scotland will build on those successes and will work closely with local authorities and the voluntary sector. Local authorities have the primary responsibility for making available adequate provision of cultural activities in their area, but creative Scotland and the Scottish Government will add value through the dissemination of good practice from across Scotland and other countries and the provision of financial support for the excellent work of creative organisations. The acting chief executive of the Scottish Arts Council is working with the Scottish Government and representatives of local government to develop guidance notes for community planning partnerships that aim to widen access to culture locally. Creative Scotland will build on and widen those links. Creative Scotland will continue to make capital investments in Scotland's cultural infrastructure and will work closely with the voluntary sector. It will build on the work that is under way to promote wider cultural access through volunteering and partner organisations in the third sector.

Culture is embedded in everything that the Government stands for. Local authorities already have statutory responsibility for the promotion of culture and arts in their areas. That will be enhanced by the work that we will do in partnership with local authorities through the single outcome agreements. I expect creative Scotland's role in relation to creative talent and excellence to be the body's special contribution to Scotland's success. As I said in my statement to Parliament last year,  creative Scotland will be free to take risks in identifying, supporting and developing talent and excellence in the arts and culture. The choice of individuals, groups or organisations that creative Scotland supports will be entirely a matter for its artistic and cultural judgement. The bill gives statutory protection to the arms-length principle, while, as the lead committee concluded, retaining an appropriate degree of accountability that allows the public interest to be safeguarded. Creative Scotland will add to the range of funding sources that is available to artists and creative practitioners. As well as grants, it will develop a wider portfolio of funding methods, including loans and other investments. It will play a critical role in supporting Scotland's creative industries. When I gave evidence to the committee, I had just received the report of the creative industries working group. I have now considered that report and confirm that the Government has accepted each of its recommendations, which envisage exactly the ambitious and creative partnership working that will be crucial to creative Scotland's success. That partnership will be represented in a creative industries forum convened by creative Scotland. The forum will act as a catalyst, bringing together the public bodies that are involved in supporting the creative industries to ensure that services are effectively co-ordinated, and to share intelligence in a way that will stimulate innovation. Its first task will be to develop a route map for creative entrepreneurs that shows how to access services easily and make the best of them. I am pleased to say that all the national bodies that are involved are committed to the forum, and I will extend an invitation to the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities to take part, too. Creative Scotland will continue to evolve complementary specialist advice and information services for creative enterprises. In order for it to do that, I can confirm today that the resources that are devoted to that purpose by Scottish Enterprise will, from the beginning of the next financial year, transfer to creative Scotland. I hope that what I have said has helped colleagues to better understand the role that we envisage for creative Scotland. Although I have offered some of the greater detail that was sought by the committee, I should be clear that the Government believes strongly that the legislation that establishes the new body should not be loaded down with limiting prescriptive operational details.

No. I have to get on.  The legislation is intended to provide a framework within which creative Scotland can work with partners to fulfil its potential and give creativity in Scotland the support and inspiration that it demands. The arts, culture and the creative industries in Scotland will be best served if the Parliament sets creative Scotland ambitious objectives, while giving it freedom to tackle those objectives as creatively as possible. The creative Scotland transition team is working with the Government and many other partners to devise new approaches to supporting practitioners and organisations, encouraging participation and realising the benefits of the arts and culture. I look forward to those streams of inventive work coming to fruition. When they do, I assure the Parliament that creative Scotland will have the Government's support to realise its ambitions. In closing, I announce that, if the Parliament approves its establishment, the Government will make new money available to creative Scotland to pursue new ideas. The Government has already confirmed that creative Scotland will inherit the annual £50 million grant in aid that is awarded to the Scottish Arts Council and Scottish Screen. However, we will also make available to creative Scotland over its first two years an extra £5 million. We will make that new money available in a creative Scotland innovation fund. As ideas emerge and are agreed for new ways for creative Scotland to pursue its ambitions, the Government will make available resources from the fund to invest in Scotland's creativity and success.

I am just about finished, Presiding Officer.

I can clarify that it is separate. I will probably come back to that point, because I imagine that there will be questions in the course of the debate. Creative Scotland will get the boost that it needs at its establishment to realise our ambitions. It will nurture and celebrate new streams of talent, inspire creativity, and play its role in the success and happiness of a healthier and wealthier Scotland. For all those possibilities and many  more that are yet undiscovered, I commend the bill to the Parliament. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Creative Scotland Bill.

It is anticipated that the audit of the Scots language will be complete by the end of October this year.

I am aware of the views of the committee of experts. I hope that those on this side of the chamber are also aware of them and that they share my concerns on the matter. This Government of Scotland has given a firm commitment to raise the profile and encourage the use of Scots in a variety of settings in public life. The audit that we are undertaking is the first of its kind; no such audit has been done by any Administration in Scotland. It will provide the necessary baseline data to assist the Government in formulating a cohesive policy for Scots, particularly with a view to ensuring that our European charter obligations for Scots—and, of course, our manifesto commitments on the matter—are fulfilled.

As I have said on previous occasions in the chamber, when our audit of Scots  is complete, we will discuss the future of all Scots, whether language or culture, with the Scottish Arts Council, which has agreed to have those discussions. I reconfirm our commitment to Scots. I also reconfirm that the committee of experts spoke about the lack of a clearly defined language strategy for Scots and said that that has led to difficulties and the erosion of the language. This Government in Scotland is committed to the promotion of the Scots language.

Under the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) (Scotland) Act 1997, Scottish ministers have a statutory duty to consider for protection buildings of special architectural and historical interest. That duty is, of course, carried out by Historic Scotland on Scottish ministers' behalf. Historic Scotland policy is that listing will not normally be advanced when a live application exists for a proposal that would affect the character of the property. An application has been lodged with East Lothian Council for demolition of the Coeval building and development of the site. In that context, listing is not currently a matter for Historic Scotland's consideration. However, as Historic Scotland was in the process of assessing the merits of listing the building before the application was submitted, it completed the process. After careful consideration, it reached the view that the Coeval  building in Prestonpans does not have the necessary special architectural or historical interest to satisfy the criteria for listing.

The building in question was first considered for listing in 1996, during the review of the list for the burgh, when it was not found to satisfy the criteria for inclusion on the statutory lists. The listing of the building was considered again, following a further request in October 2006. The same conclusion was reached. The most recent review concluded in May 2008, when Historic Scotland once again found that the case for listing was insufficient, even were the council not considering a planning application for the site.

I thank Ian McKee for bringing to the Parliament's attention the wonderful work of the National Association of Youth Orchestras and the tremendous support it provides to young musicians throughout Scotland  and the United Kingdom. Every member who has spoken is concerned and agrees that there would be some loss to Edinburgh if the NAYO office were to move. Like Ian McKee and Malcolm Chisholm, I would like it if the confusion surrounding the issue could be cleared up. I wish the City of Edinburgh Council success in its talks with NAYO, in the hope that accommodation will be found to allow it to remain in Edinburgh, and whole-heartedly applaud the organisation's work to support our brightest young talent and recognise its contribution to Scotland's cultural life. Edinburgh is a fantastic base for artistic organisations and NAYO has provided many opportunities for young people to participate in and experience orchestral music over the years, as have our Scotland-based youth orchestras. NAYO represents youth orchestras throughout Scotland and provides encouragement, advice and access to key opportunities. The annual festival of British youth orchestras is a fantastic example of the contribution that NAYO makes to the development of young musical talent; it is NAYO's largest and most exciting annual event and it takes place during three weeks in August as part of the Edinburgh festival fringe. What an opportunity it presents! Last year's festival involved 43 concerts over 21 days in Glasgow and Edinburgh. The participants came from far and wide and included the Fife Youth Jazz Orchestra, the West of Scotland Schools Ensemble, Moray Concert Brass Band, Perth Youth Big Band, an orchestra from Kent, and Darlington and Dales Youth Orchestra. This year, we will have the orchestra from Kent, an orchestra from Shropshire and the National Youth Wind Ensemble. Although NAYO has committed to continuing the festival of British youth orchestras in Edinburgh for 2008 and 2009, we all urge it to make a further commitment, regardless of the outcome of its consultation. After all, where would such a festival be better held in the UK than in Edinburgh, which has the world's biggest cultural festival? Where else could be deemed better? There is a wealth of outstanding orchestral and instrumental opportunities for young musicians in Scotland. I will continue to work with them all and with colleagues in the sector to ensure that the musical landscape in Scotland flourishes. The Scottish Arts Council supports a vast range of youth orchestras. The RSAMD, which Mr Chisholm mentioned, and our national performing companies continue to provide a range of opportunities for young amateur and budding professional musicians. The Scottish Arts Council has funded various NAYO projects over the past 10 years. In 2004, the lottery money that the Scottish Arts Council  distributed was provided to the new festival of youth choirs, which was integrated with the festival of British youth orchestras. Under the youth music initiative, NAYO has had support, along with the National Youth Orchestra of Scotland and the National Youth Choir of Scotland. I know that NAYO is ambitious for its future and the future of its members throughout the UK. Whatever the outcome of the consultation process, it must continue to work with our young people and organisations in Edinburgh and throughout Scotland in supporting that talent and inspiration and the determination of our young musicians to make great music. Of course we would prefer NAYO to choose to stay in Edinburgh. I, like Ian McKee, Malcolm Chisholm, Ted Brocklebank, Aileen Campbell and the City of Edinburgh Council, urge NAYO to consider just what a fantastic base Edinburgh is for an orchestra organisation. I would not like to close the debate without mentioning the National Youth Orchestra of Scotland, the National Youth Choir of Scotland, the national youth pipe band of Scotland and the National Youth Brass Band of Scotland. The Scottish Arts Council has been having a hard time lately, in the chamber and beyond, but I have to say that those organisations—our youth organisations—are all well supported by the Scottish Arts Council and they are going from strength to strength. They will continue to do so, because underpinning everything they do is an absolute love for and celebration of the music they produce. The people who work with them, some of whom are volunteers, have an absolute commitment to seeing that flourish. It will continue to flourish. We would prefer that it continued to flourish with the presence of the National Association of Youth Orchestras here in Edinburgh, which is a natural place for it to be. Moving away from Edinburgh would involve a sad decision, but it is a decision that only it can take.  Meeting closed at 17:34.

In October, I was delighted to speak at the 19 th Commonwealth parliamentary seminar for representatives of CPA branches from around the world. That event was, of course, hosted here in the Parliament. At the time, I also attended a dinner hosted by the First Minister in his role as vice president of the CPA Scotland branch. We were pleased that Dr William Shija, the secretary-general of the CPA was present. When I visited Malawi earlier this year, three representatives of the CPA Scotland branch travelled too, as part of a CPA-funded programme. We attended a number of joint events and visits.

Of course. CPA Scotland, funded by the CPA worldwide organisation, does sterling work on civic governance issues. I know that Alasdair Morgan, Karen Gillon and Sarah Boyack carried out such work when they were in Malawi, and that it was warmly welcomed by counterparts there. We maintain contact with Scottish Parliament officials and CPA representatives to keep one another in touch with our respective programmes of work in Malawi. That is the way to move forward because international development in general is very much a focus of both the Government and Parliament in Scotland. The CPA is not eligible to apply for funds from the Government's international development fund, as parliamentary exchanges are the responsibility of the Scottish Parliament. It is for the Parliament to support any such activity.

I am sure that the First Minister would be delighted to welcome that development, as am I. It is another great example of the devolved legislatures working together for the greater benefit, bringing their respective skills and strengths. In the north of Ireland, there are particular skills and strengths that can be brought to bear throughout the world.

During this spending review period, £10 million per year has been allocated to continue to support the national youth music initiative, which ensures access to a range of music opportunities for children and young people throughout Scotland. Opportunities are also made available through Scotland's national performing companies.

I make it clear that funding for the youth music initiative is separate—it is guaranteed for this spending review period. The fèisean movement takes part in the youth music initiative, which involves a wide range of musical genres. Some people have been very disappointed by the Scottish Arts Council's recent announcements on flexible funding. I understand that completely but, as always, the Government takes a hands-off approach to the Arts Council. As members know, I have commissioned an audit of Scots language provision, which we expect to receive by October. Because of the SNP  Government's commitment to the Scots language and culture, we will use the results of that audit to work out how we go forward to ensure that the Scots language and culture are deemed to be an important part of Scottish culture.

The Scottish Arts Council recently published the year 4 report of the youth music initiative, which contains details on allocations up to 2007. That report gives a full breakdown of the styles and genres of music that were available as part of the primary 6 target provision. Although the report confirms that all 32 local authorities and Jordanhill school sustained the primary 6 target in 2006-07, it says that, in the wide range of activity throughout Scotland, some authorities offer more innovative and exciting combinations of activity than do others. I encourage Mr Gibson to read that report and to make representations to the Arts Council, as many members do when they feel passionately about aspects of Scottish culture.

It is interesting that I am being asked all those questions when I am the first minister with responsibility for culture and the arts in Scotland to try to map the provision of music in outreach, education and other activity throughout the country. That has never been done before. Provision has been piecemeal. For the first time, our national companies are letting us know what work they do, so that we can see how to use them to best advantage.

I attended the most recent meeting of the joint ministerial committee on Europe on 3 March, when the discussions centred on preparation for the forthcoming European Council—the spring council—and on United Kingdom and devolved Administration co-ordination in relation to European Union affairs.

I could talk for an hour about the marked difference the SNP Government has made to European relations. We find that UK ministers often do not wish us to attend council meetings. Sitting beside me is Mr Maxwell, whose UK counterpart has refused his taking part in delegations to council. This Government stands up for Scotland at every turn. In recognition of that, perhaps Ms Oldfather should discuss with UK Labour the issue of ensuring that we are able to do so.

As I said in my evidence last week to the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee, creative Scotland will be the leading public body in advocating for the creative industries. At the request of the agencies involved, and as outlined in the report of the short-term working group, a creative economy forum will be established to ensure that the key public bodies work together to maximise the success of our creative businesses. I have sent the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee the report of the creative industries working group that I discussed with it last week.

Had Mr Purvis been able to attend last week's meeting of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee, he would have heard all of that being discussed in great detail. Creative Scotland will indeed be the leading public body advocating for the creative industries, and it will be an arts development agency. Its main contribution to the creative economy will be to lead the transition team's forum. The forum is not a public body but a group of professionals who are committed to the creative economy and who have chosen to come together. Their job will be to inform what the public sector does and to accelerate growth in the creative industries. The creative industries are one of our key industry sectors, and we must all work together to ensure that the sector is the success that it can be for Scotland.

Those issues are under discussion with all the agencies involved, including the local authorities. The creative industries are vital to Scotland's future, and it is extremely important that everybody works together with the team Scotland approach. That means that we will get it right. We are determined to get it right, and everyone in the field is committed to getting it right. This Government listens to those with the expertise, who will come to us and discuss getting it right.

We are making progress  towards establishing creative Scotland. The Parliament is considering our legislation and the Government is taking forward parallel work to transform the existing bodies into creative Scotland.

I understand the frustration felt by the Finance Committee. We want to get on and establish creative Scotland as quickly as possible, after years of inaction by the previous Administration. Consultation fatigue has set in right across the sector. We want to give the cultural sector the certainty for which it has waited so long. That means that we are introducing legislation and, in parallel, building the plan for the new body. I have provided the Finance Committee with more detail about the one-off costs of establishing creative Scotland, which it has shared with the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee, which is the lead committee on the bill. As I confirmed last week at the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee, I have undertaken to give further detailed information on financing before stage 2 of the bill process.

The Scottish Arts Council supports a wide range of traditional arts activity and voluntary arts organisations.

Just for clarification, the two-year flexible funding that was brought in lasts until the end of March next year. The Scottish Arts Council is already in discussion with voluntary arts organisations about the overall relationship between the voluntary sector and the council—and creative Scotland, when it comes into being. I have already discussed today the position of our particularly wonderful Scottish traditional arts. The Scots language audit is on-going and will be completed. In tandem, we are discussing how Scotland's unique cultural tradition can be taken forward. For clarification, it is worth saying that the Scottish Arts Council is continuing to fund other organisations that relate very much to Scottish culture and language.

The Scottish Government is committed to widening access to culture for everyone in Scotland, including those who live in our most deprived communities. Several initiatives are being supported that relate to that commitment. For example, our match-funded cultural pathfinder programme targets communities that tend not to take part in culture and includes projects in areas of multiple deprivation. The fairer Scotland fund and the cashback for communities arts and business match fund represent substantial potential resources for those seeking to use the arts in working together to tackle deprivation and poverty. Local authorities also make a substantial contribution, and the Scottish Government is working in partnership with local  government to advance the agenda to widen cultural access for all communities in Scotland.

I draw members' attention to another thing that Mr James McAvoy mentioned: the 16 years of chronic underfunding of RSAMD drama courses. Fiona Hyslop, as Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, has taken firm action this week in relation to that. Under her settlement, she has already issued more money to the RSAMD than was previously issued, and discussions with the RSAMD and the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council are on-going.

I am quite relaxed about the amendment, but I think that it is superfluous because we state clearly in the international framework our responsibility for international development. The separate policy on international development follows from the framework. I am worried that there is a lack of understanding on Labour's behalf about what a framework is and how action plans work.

Will the member give way?

I make it plain that in the international framework—I emphasise that it is a framework—international development is a priority. From that, we have the international development plan, which details all the policy and matches our increased resources. I also make it clear that the Indian sub-continent is mentioned in the international development policy.

Does Mr Chisholm, or do his colleagues, understand the concept of a framework or of Government ministers right across  the board working together for what is best for Scotland without needing to tick boxes and have directions every step of the way?

Will the member give way?

It is good to have the opportunity today to discuss the Scottish Government's international framework. The debate gives the chamber the opportunity to discuss the principles that underpin the Government's approach to its international activities. I want to address, right at the start of the debate, the important question of international development policy and the amendment in the name of Malcolm Chisholm. As I discussed with the European and External Relations Committee last week, the Government's international framework is exactly that—the framework from which fall detailed action plans and specific policies. I am pleased to have published the international development policy today, which reflects the commitment made in the framework for an increased international development fund. The policy document is available at the back of the chamber and I look forward to discussing it in detail with the European and External Relations Committee at our forthcoming session. Although I recognise absolutely the sentiment and commitment behind the Labour amendment, I ask that Mr Chisholm consider withdrawing it in the spirit of the framework and the international development policy. I was happy to discuss the framework and the accompanying draft action plan on European engagement with the European and External Relations Committee on Tuesday last week. It seems there is consensus about much of the work that is undertaken at international level. The committee is due thanks for its work in convening evidence-taking sessions on the Scottish Government's approach to international activities. Those sessions were extremely valuable to us in finalising our strategy. The sessions that the Government held on our international framework and our China plan were also extremely valuable. I am pleased to announce that the refreshed China plan has been published today. It shows how aspirations can become concrete actions by developing joint opportunities in education, trade, science, tourism and culture. I expect that members have picked up a copy from the back of the chamber. I look forward to discussing the plan with the cross-party  group on China, as I confirmed to my colleague, Gil Paterson, at the European and External Relations Committee last week. I am clear that the objectives that I have set for the Scottish Government's international activities are tied to the Government economic strategy. The objectives are: to create the conditions for talented people to live, learn, work, visit and remain in Scotland so that Scottish population growth matches the European Union average; to bring a sharp economic growth focus to the promotion of Scotland abroad so that the Scottish gross domestic product growth rate matches that of the United Kingdom by 2011; and to manage Scotland's reputation as a distinctive global identity—an independent-minded and responsible nation at home and abroad that is confident of its place in the world. Although there is alignment of our resources around the GES targets, our activity has a fresh emphasis. We will develop closer relations on international work between the Scottish Government, Scottish Development International, VisitScotland, EventScotland and creative Scotland. The recent strategic, better-targeted, more business-focused, efficient and cost-effective Scotland week in North America is an early example of that strategy. We are willing to challenge the UK line to ensure that Scotland's voice is heard, while being proactive in using the UK resources that are at our disposal. We will recognise where Scotland's excellence lies and focus on those areas. We are confident about focusing on Scotland's reputation as a nation, not a region. The pursuit of trade, tourism and inward investment remains at the heart of our work and persists as a reason for having Scottish affairs offices in North America and China. That, in turn, entails positioning Scotland as a great place to live, learn, visit, work and remain in. The framework document does not seek to list all the international work across the Scottish Government. We agree with the Scots who have told us that Government and the public sector should be agile and fleet of foot. We will monitor and evaluate the activities that we undertake, although we will take a strategic viewpoint and get involved when there is good reason. Activity for its own sake is not productive; the work of Government is to provide the conditions for exchange, not to risk hindering others as they seek to make the civic, Scottish, UK, EU or global partnerships that are the platform for their success. We will focus Government intervention on areas that will pay dividends, such as the work that I kicked off last week with the consular corps in Scotland. I made a commitment that the Scottish  Government will work with the corps in a structured and professional way—and to our mutual advantage—to ensure effective communication of our aspirations with regard to Scotland's place in the world. Although our scope for taking part in international affairs is constrained by the current devolution settlement, we have offices in Brussels and officials who work solely on Scottish affairs in the UK embassies in Beijing and Washington. Alongside them, around 80 staff work in offices abroad for Scottish Development International, the arm of Government that promotes international trade and inward investment. However, that still means that fewer than 100 people work professionally for us furth of Scotland. The key message, therefore, is the need for a flexible pragmatism. Scotland looks to the Scottish Government to provide strategic direction, to be able to identify key points of leverage and to respond swiftly. The framework focuses the actions and policies of the Scottish Government and other public sector players to maximise their impact on the performance of team Scotland. As I have said, last month's Scotland week in North America delivered the most ambitious programme of events around tartan day ever undertaken by Scottish ministers—and at around half the cost of previous years' celebrations. Adopting a fleet-footed, agile approach does not mean that we will cease to work closely with our existing partners. However, I am convinced that the targeted memorandum of understanding for education purposes that the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning signed last month with the Chinese Ministry of Education delivers mutual benefits more effectively than wide-ranging co-operation agreements. We will continue to work on projects of benefit with regions where we have previously had such agreements. However, we will be led by benefit and opportunity. Under this Government, exchanges between Scotland and Shandong, Victoria, Catalonia and other areas have continued. A more responsive approach requires the Scottish Government to work in an integrated way across the public sector and to find new, agile ways of reaching out more widely to civic society in order to share information. Of course, the action plans and policies that fall from the international framework will set out our detailed aims and targets for our key policies. However, people with experience have told us repeatedly that, instead of focusing on a multiplicity of targets, we must put our energy into taking a more responsive and coherent approach. That brings me to the Conservative amendment in the name of Mr Brocklebank. By quoting back to us from our framework document, Mr Brocklebank  and his colleagues seem to have recognised the value of this Government's strategic approach and our commitment to working with all relevant partners to achieve the best for Scotland. I am therefore pleased to accept the amendment. I am sorry, but I cannot say the same about the Liberal Democrat amendment in the name of Mr Smith. Let me make it plain: this Government for Scotland has a vision and aspirations for our nation that are explicit in their clarity, truthfulness and direction. Scotland expects no less from the Scottish National Party, the First Minister and his Government. No less should be expected from Government in any democracy—I would have thought that liberal-minded politicians of any party would take that as a given. For members to suggest that ministers in this Government would flip-flop around, change their minds on a daily basis and hide things from Scots shows that they have no understanding whatever of the deeply-held beliefs in conviction and honesty that are at the heart of this Government. I ask members not to play that silly Lib Dem game but to keep watch on today's main target—an international framework that we all agree can increase Scotland's competitive edge by supporting the conditions for talented people to live, learn, work, visit and remain in Scotland. I am sure that members will want to feed into the framework and I look forward to hearing from them about how we can work together towards that end. I move, That the Parliament recognises the importance of ensuring that Scotland is competitive in an increasingly globalised society; agrees that creating the conditions for talented people to live, learn, visit, work and remain in Scotland is crucial to helping to deliver the goals of growing Scotland's population and economy in a sustainable way, and welcomes the Scottish Government's International Framework as a means to extend, focus and align the actions and policies of the government and public sector partners to these ends.

The Scottish Government's process of planning appropriate diamond jubilee celebrations in Scotland for 2012 has not yet started. The Scottish Government will liaise with Buckingham Palace on the content and timing of any such celebrations.

We will, of course, liaise with Buckingham Palace on the content and timing of any such celebrations. We would wish to involve a representative cross-section of the population of Scotland in the planning for any such celebration. I am more than happy to outline such details to the chamber at the appropriate time.

Any change would have implications across a wide range of areas, including road safety, climate change and agriculture, and would require careful consideration and analysis. No representations have been made to the UK Government on the issue at this stage.

As Mr Peacock said, many issues must be considered. Research on road safety is being undertaken by the UK Government and the Scottish Government, and research is also being carried out in relation to climate change. We will, of course, consider examples and listen to the debate. Members who are old enough will remember the approach being tried out—I think it was around about the late 1960s. I remember going to school in a transparent vest—[ Laughter. ] Excuse the memory—

Oh!

I wonder whether my remark could be struck from the Official Report .

I was talking about those shiny vests that shone in the dark. [ Laughter. ] The experiment was stopped after three years—that had nothing at all to do with my attire—because it was not thought to be advantageous to Scotland.

I thank Aileen Campbell for bringing us all back down to earth. The Scottish Government's engagement with Zambia has primarily focused on health, particularly concerning issues around HIV/AIDS awareness and prevention.

Yes. Of course we should use Scotland's historic links with countries such as Zambia to try to inform us, where possible, about what we can best do to contribute to the international development agenda. One thing that we can do is take on board the advice and experience of agencies such as Oxfam and SCIAF, which have worked on the issues for many years. I think that all members understand that our international development policy, which is in addition to the Department for International  Development's policy, to which Scotland contributes, is focused and targeted on what we can achieve. We must be realistic about our goals. I will publish our international development plan shortly and I hope that we can reach broad agreement that Scotland is moving in the right direction.

I am delighted to reconfirm that, for the first time, international development funding for Malawi of at least £3 million a year for the next three years has been confirmed and ring fenced. Malawi has the comfort of knowing that a pot of money is there for the unique partnership that exists between Scotland and Malawi.

Scotland's diverse and vibrant cultural life is a defining feature of our successful and confident nation. In music and drama, and across all art forms, our artists are recognised across the world, and we are committed to providing support to help develop our international reputation for cultural excellence.

Decisions on staffing issues at Scottish higher education institutions are the responsibility of their management teams, and the RSAMD is no different. As a fully autonomous body that is independent of Government, the academy alone must judge the best decisions to take if it is to achieve its strategic objectives. That said, I expect it to discuss its restructuring plans in full consultation with staff and the unions that represent staff. My colleague, the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, is assured that it is doing that.

One of the steps that we have taken is the establishment of the new expo fund, from which £2 million a year will be used during the next three years to promote the Scottish excellence that we all care so much about. That funding will enable Scotland-based productions to flourish through the Edinburgh festivals and then to tour overseas. I hope that that injection of new funding will bring Scotland many benefits.

We respect and value the work of the Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama and its contribution to the arts in Scotland. However, I can only reiterate that decisions on the strategic direction of individual institutions are the responsibility of the management of those institutions. Of course, as I said earlier, we expect management to consult both staff and unions. I must put on the record the fact that there was a 4.8 per cent uplift in the funding of the RSAMD this year.

We have two national orchestras: the Royal Scottish National Orchestra and the Scottish Chamber Orchestra, whose work is indeed world class. That is proved over and over again by the touring that they do and the  reception that they get worldwide. The national orchestras are funded directly by the Government, and this year they have had a settlement that will enable them to carry on their very good work.

As has already been stated, the issue is one for the funding council. My colleague the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning wrote to the funding council to lay out her priorities for the university sector, one of which was: "growth in undergraduate and taught post-graduate numbers (for excellence in the performing arts, including dance)". This Government cares about the culture of this country.

Over the next three years, creative Scotland and the bodies that we propose will replace it have been allocated nearly £150 million to invest in Scotland's culture.

I have undertaken to write to the Finance Committee about the detail of the financial memorandum and the Creative Scotland Bill. I will do so by 30 April.

I am absolutely convinced that creative Scotland will be a successful body and that we will all see the benefits of that in the years to come.

I do not accept that the budget lines are declining.

The Scottish Government has no current plans to establish cultural or other links with Cuba. We would, however, be glad to consider opportunities to engage with Cuba where those are in line with the objectives that are set out in the Scottish Government's international framework, which I published on 22 April 2008.

Everyone is aware of the cultural links between Scotland and Cuba. Indeed, Glasgow was twinned with the city of Havana in 2002, and there have been several trade missions to Cuba since then, with representation from the Scottish business community. The Royal Society of Edinburgh has an informal agreement with the Academy of Sciences of Cuba. Many links exist between Scotland and Cuba, and many people in Scotland care deeply about Cuba and wish that United Nations resolutions were properly upheld.

Our support for community music festivals in rural areas across Scotland is provided mainly through the Scottish Arts Council and EventScotland, with additional assistance from bodies such as Bòrd Na Gàidhlig.

I understand the disappointment of many people at the demise of the Isle of Skye music festival. However, the Scottish Arts Council did not receive an application for funding for the 2007 festival, and it has confirmed that it has not had a funding relationship with the festival in the past. The SAC held informal discussions with the festival but advised the organisers that it was not able to underwrite the deficit.

I have been asked that question before by Malcolm Chisholm. He talked about £3 million being earmarked, and now Rhona Brankin is asking me about £3 million that was "promised". I am afraid that I can find no such promise of capital funding in any of the grant offer letters that were issued by the previous Administration. Indeed, the previous Administration's limited-term revenue funding made it difficult for those museums to attract capital investment. As part of our 2007 spending review, ministers, for the first time, made budgetary provision to allow consideration of the capital needs of non-national museums. I will meet the chairs and chief executives of the three industrial museums during May to discuss their business cases.

Will the previous Administration admit that it made no promises and earmarked no money for the three industrial museums? None of those museums received grant offer letters beyond those for 2007-08. I repeat: the first time that such funds were provisionally allocated to the non-national museums budget was as part of the 2007 spending review, under current ministers.

As part of our undertakings for Scots under the European charter for regional or minority languages, this month the Scottish Government will write to local authorities and public bodies to remind them of their responsibilities and to ask what activities and initiatives have been introduced and are taking place in their area of operation. We are also in the  process of commissioning an audit of Scots language provision in Scotland, which will take account of current provision in the context of the charter. I am looking forward to the outcome of the audit, and our future plans for Scots will be guided by its findings.

I will shortly announce who will carry out the audit, which I hope will be completed round about October. I will consider the findings, which will largely dictate what we will do next. I reiterate the Government's commitment to valuing the Scots language.

We sat here for eight years waiting for concrete proposals. There have been far more in the past year than anyone expected. This morning we have discussed how essential it is in today's world that our young people develop an international outlook. We have heard about how the Government is taking forward international education through the curriculum for excellence, by simplifying the landscape and promoting partnership working. We have also heard about excellent examples—too many to mention—of international education throughout the country. Frank McAveety, in his usual style, beat us all by ensuring that there were some school pupils in the gallery during his speech. In addition to ensuring that our young people have an international education and outlook, the Government is determined to be outward looking in everything that it does. We regularly look at the rest of the world to see what is excellent out  there—ideas that could be good for us too, and for the aspirations that we have for modern Scotland. Elizabeth Smith has obviously been doing a bit of that as well, when she considered the Scandinavian models of education. In doing that, we are determined to take the opportunity to promote what we are good at to others. We want to promote our vision of a smarter Scotland—as a place to learn as well as to live, visit, work, do business and invest. Telling Scotland's story and letting people know what we are good at is central to delivering the Government's economic strategy. That is why the international framework that the Scottish Government published on Tuesday identifies how our activities contribute to meeting targets on population growth and closing the gross domestic product gap by attracting inward investment and promoting international business. Working in partnership is crucial. Building links and exchanges is a key part of delivering our policies. For example, the Scottish Qualifications Authority promotes Scottish qualifications and products and supports Scottish universities and colleges to attract overseas students to our excellent institutions. Learning and Teaching Scotland's approach to Confucius classrooms was promoted to Hanban, which described the initiative as world leading and a model for others to follow. The Chinese authorities will be visiting Scotland next month to learn more about those developments. I am sure that the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning will be delighted to hear that Mr Jeremy Purvis and Mr Murdo Fraser are looking forward to hearing all about her recent trip to China.

"With photographs," says Mr Hugh O'Donnell. The cabinet secretary will be even more pleased now. In the next few days, the Government will be publishing the China plan, as part of the strategic international framework, and it has been very much informed by the cabinet secretary's experiences in China. There has been discussion of language education, which is the subject of Hugh O'Donnell's amendment. An understanding of linguistic diversity is an integral part of what we mean by international education. It is not just about learning modern languages in the traditional sense—although, as our commitment to introducing a Scottish baccalaureate in languages demonstrates, we want Scottish young people to be ambitious in that regard. That ties in with what Bashir Ahmad was saying about how few pupils over the years have been able to go on to work in Europe—and indeed further afield—and to benefit from the advantages of being part of the European Union. Such ambitions are important to us, and we  are moving ahead in that regard. Mr Ahmad was absolutely right in what he said. Understandably, there has been a lot of discussion about the Labour amendment, in the name of Mr Ken Macintosh, and about how important Holocaust education is. I do not believe that anyone in the chamber doubts that. It forms part of European and world history. Elizabeth Smith emphasised Scottish history, which she was keen for us not to leave out of the equation, referring to the Scottish enlightenment in particular, but pupils can have many experiences to inform them about all those things and to give them a greater understanding, and Holocaust education is one of those. The fact is that the £152,000 came over as a Barnett consequential in 2006-07, when the Labour Party and the Liberal Democrats were in power. I point out to Mr Macintosh that they did not hand that money over to any trust. They simply said that the money went into the Scottish block. It is for Scottish ministers to decide how to spend Barnett consequentials.

No. Just like it wants to be prescriptive and to ring fence everything going to local authorities, the Labour Party seems to think that Westminster should ring fence and be prescriptive about everything that comes to us. That will not happen under this Government. It is the responsibility of each local authority and school to consider the contribution that study opportunities, such as visits to Auschwitz, might make to meeting the agreed national outcomes. That is as it should be.

Presiding Officer—

Exactly: it is up to us to make the decisions, and we have faith in our education authorities and teachers to make the best decisions for our pupils. Presiding Officer, the world in which our young people are growing up is very different from the one when you and I were at school. As Des McNulty suggested, it is essential that we  recognise, learn from and capitalise on the opportunities that are brought by the diversity of cultures in our schools now. It is essential for education to contain an international perspective to inform every aspect of life. We strongly believe that the curriculum for excellence is the ideal vehicle to enable teachers to use international education to enrich young people's learning. As we have all seen on school visits in our constituencies, pupils are inspired by and interested in international issues, which can be enjoyable, different and stimulating. If pupils are engaged in international education, they are more likely to prosper and to become effective and confident. I will finish by responding to some comments that were made earlier about nationalism and internationalism. I leave members with this: how on earth can someone be an internationalist without first being a nationalist? One is part of the other.

The most sensible thing that I have heard Malcolm Chisholm say today is that I will not have enough time. He is right: in the eight  minutes that are available to me, I will not have enough time to respond to everything that has been said. It is clear from the debate how much our historic environment and our heritage mean to everyone. Examples have been given across the chamber. There is competition. Liam McArthur spoke about the beauty of Orkney, and Malcolm Chisholm spoke about his constituency having the most listed buildings. Rutherglen town hall, Mackintosh buildings in the west of Scotland, the urban and the rural have been mentioned. Christopher Harvie gave a history lesson on the importance of preservation and how we previously nearly lost so much. He talked about the world heritage site at New Lanark, which is a fine example of the fact that our heritage is about more than buildings—it is about our identity, culture and sense of community, which New Lanark has had and continues to have. Many members mentioned particular Historic Scotland cases. I would like to put things in context. Between 2005 and 2008, Historic Scotland received 798 applications for scheduled monument consent, of which 797 were approved; only one was refused. In the same period, 7,094 applications for listed building consent were made, of which 99.84 per cent were approved; only 11 cases were called in. There will always be a few cases that concern people, and some of those cases were mentioned in the debate. I do not have enough time to respond to all the concerns that were expressed, but I would like to say where matters lie with Castle Tioram. Ministers refused an application relating to Castle Tioram following a public inquiry. Since then, the owner has stated his intention to submit a fresh proposal. No new proposal has been lodged yet, although I understand that Historic Scotland would be happy to consider one. If members want further information on other cases, I am happy to provide that. Malcolm Chisholm commented that I previously said in response to the HEACS report that the balance between local authorities and Historic Scotland was about right. It is indeed about right in respect of basic legal duties, but our joint working agreement is about day-to-day administrative working. No extra work is involved in the new arrangement. Historic Scotland is happy to provide support throughout the country to assist authorities, but the aim is to prevent duplication. Willie Coffey mentioned the audit of local authority resources. I did not see the point in holding up work on moving forward to clear duplication. I am conducting the audit as a pilot rather than undertaking it in all local authorities, as John Farquhar Munro said, because I believe that it is worth seeing how it works initially without  going into it wholesale. The idea has been welcomed by local authorities generally and in particular by the three local authorities in which we are piloting it. The work that will be subject to delegation is already being done, so it will have a limited impact on resources. It could even have a positive impact. I am pleased to confirm that, of course, an effective monitoring regime will be an important part of that work. It is important that I address Helen Eadie's point that there is a feeling that Historic Scotland is not taking disability issues seriously. I assure her that it is. Historic Scotland has been working hard to make its properties as accessible as possible to the widest range of people. Nevertheless, as she recognised, many of the monuments are difficult to access even for the fittest of us, so there is a fine balance to be struck. Historic Scotland has conducted audits of access to its sites and has a programme of work to deliver better access. She will be pleased to hear that Historic Scotland is drafting its equality policy, which builds on the Scottish Government's policy and will cover disability issues. As is required by law, that work will involve stakeholders. Malcolm Chisholm asked about battlefields. A SHEP on historic battlefields is due to be issued for public consultation on 30 April. We look forward to receiving contributions on that. Skills training is hugely important. Christopher Harvie talked about the necessity of training up people with specialist skills to ensure that we preserve our built heritage properly. Recently, I was happy to launch the national progression award scheme, which includes Scottish vocational qualifications in building craft skills. Stonemasons are hugely important in the work that needs to be done to preserve our built heritage, and Historic Scotland will have apprentices on the first scheme, which starts on 28 April. Another issue that was raised concerns the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland. I assure members that I am considering carefully the future of RCAHMS. However, I feel strongly that the issue requires more time, as it is absolutely critical that we get it right. Members will know—some have mentioned this—that, as part of a concordat that is doing the rounds, we are discussing the new single outcome agreements with local authorities. Our discussions with individual councils are at a relatively early stage, so it would not be appropriate for me to say any more about the matter right now. Nevertheless, I welcome the positive way in which local government has engaged with the whole process to date, recognising the opportunity that it offers to reshape completely relations between central Government and local government.  Historic Scotland, as a Government agency, is part of that process, and I am pleased to say that officials from Historic Scotland are working closely with their colleagues across the Scottish Government in that regard. A big concern that is addressed by Iain Smith's amendment, which I have said that I am happy to accept, boils down to a communication issue—how well Historic Scotland communicates with its partners and the wider public. I am happy to schedule a meeting with Historic Scotland on that point and to take input from parliamentary colleagues on how I should move the discussion forward. That is vital because our heritage affects every one of us, and every one of us has the right to contribute to anything that is going on around our place.

I am pleased to open the debate, which allows me to highlight the many ways in which central and local government are working together to deliver a sustainable future for Scotland's historic environment. That historic environment is hugely significant to Scotland, not as a museum piece, but as a dynamic evolving resource whose future relies on carefully managed change that is based on an understanding of its specialist qualities. We recognise its importance as heritage in its own right and for tourism, but it also contributes to sustainability, place making, community identity, local distinctiveness and, of course, employment. It can be sustained only by a broad partnership of owners, government and business working together to secure its future. Central to that partnership is the relationship between Historic Scotland, as the national agency that is responsible for the historic environment, and local authorities, which have a broader role in relation to development planning, economic development, culture and education. That close relationship is exemplified in many ways throughout the country, in particular by one of Historic Scotland's major recent initiatives: the creation of the conservation area regeneration scheme. Under the previous Administration, £8 million was allocated for that scheme, with moneys to be released between 2007 and 2012. That fund provides financial assistance for the area-based regeneration and conservation initiatives that local authorities undertake, principally in the historic centres of towns and burghs. There was heavy demand for the scheme when it was launched, and 37 separate bids were made that totalled around £19 million. Historic Scotland is currently supporting 18 projects, including those in Stornoway, Kilmarnock, Bo'ness and Banff. The scheme has been a major success and many local authorities have said that they want it to continue. I am sure that colleagues from all parties will be delighted that I am able to announce that Historic Scotland has allocated up to £8 million for a further round of that very popular scheme, which will again be spent over five years. That funding will be targeted at councils that have not yet benefited, and at areas in which existing  conservation projects can be enhanced with additional resources. I am pleased to outline a number of other measures that will improve partnership working and benefit management of our historic environment, in response to points that were made by—among others—the Historic Environment Advisory Council for Scotland, in its 2006 report on the role of local government in the historic environment. We have concluded, as part of our commitment to streamlining the public sector, that HEACS does not need to be retained beyond its agreed work plan, which continues. However, the hard work of the council's individual members and the quality of its contribution to debates such as this is hugely appreciated, and I want to record my gratitude for its professionalism across the board. Much of the joint working between local authorities and Historic Scotland flows from the agency's role in development planning and management. Local authorities have the opportunity to tap into the wealth of knowledge and experience within the agency, adding value to the wealth of knowledge and experience of their own specialist staff. However, as has been noted many times, there is scope for confusion about roles and overlap of activities. Our historic environment is rich and varied. Rightly, we recognise the need to distinguish between what is best managed locally and what needs an element of national protection. Local authorities identify and manage a range of local designations, including heritage areas, archaeology sites and conservation areas, which are areas of local value that have a distinctive character that is important to the community. Historic Scotland is responsible on behalf of ministers for identifying parts of our historic environment that are of particular value at national level—notably for scheduling monuments such as the stone circle at Brodgar on Orkney and the listing of buildings such as Castlemilk stables in Glasgow, the recent renovation of which was partly funded by Historic Scotland. Such designations are intended to help to manage change, not to prevent it. The management of change is largely administered by local authorities in their role as planning authorities. I am sure that Parliament will be pleased to learn that the agency's approach is developing rapidly. It aims to enable all partners to maximise their particular contributions. We must protect our heritage while promoting growth and development. Central to that are the new joint working agreements that are being developed in response to demand from local authorities. The agreements will set out what is expected of each partner in relation to management of change in the historic  environment. They are intended to allow issues to be dealt with as locally as possible and to ensure that Historic Scotland is involved only when it can add value: it should not replicate work that local authorities have already done. Initial discussions have been held between my officials and a number of local authorities, and the joint working agreements will be launched in May. Local authorities will be invited to sign up during the remainder of the year. I am pleased to confirm that, when local authorities sign up to the joint working agreements, we will also be able to offer them the opportunity to acquire delegated powers to deal with listed-building casework, as is permitted under planning legislation. That approach has the potential to streamline the current process significantly without any threat to the historic environment. We plan to pilot such schemes with a small number of local authorities this year—the City of Edinburgh Council, Glasgow City Council and Perth and Kinross Council. I hope that the experience of those early enthusiasts will energise others to follow suit. To support all that work and ensure efficient handling, Historic Scotland was included in the wider e-planning programme that the Government is promoting to allow much more to be done online. I am pleased that, this year, Historic Scotland will become fully integrated with the e-planning programme. If local authorities wish, they will be able to consult the agency more quickly and cheaply than previously, which will help to ensure that more planning applications meet the targets that ministers have set. In that context, I announce that I have agreed with Historic Scotland a new key performance target for dealing with planning consultation—70 per cent within 14 days this year, rising to 90 per cent in 2009-10. The agency already has a target of clearing 97 per cent of listed building consent notifications within 28 days. This year, it exceeded that. The new target shows that Historic Scotland is contributing to the Government's wider agenda through its continuing commitment to the development of a modern, streamlined planning system for Scotland. The efficiencies that are created by those modernising initiatives will not be wasted. Instead, they will enable Historic Scotland to give strategic support to local authorities throughout Scotland in ways that are simply not possible at present. I firmly believe that the initiatives will contribute significantly to an even stronger relationship between Historic Scotland and local government. Of course, there are many other ways in which local government and Historic Scotland work together, including management of properties in care. The agency has properties in care in every  local authority area except East Renfrewshire. Its work therefore brings it into contact with local authorities in many ways, such as through formal partnerships, local liaison groups and other initiatives. There is also partnership work with groups that aim to improve access and develop tourism. For example, current initiatives include working to improve the Edinburgh castle tattoo and delivering interpretation in Kilmartin Glen in Argyll and Bute, and at Whithorn priory in Dumfries and Galloway, to name just a couple. Partnership working happens on the world stage, too. Historic Scotland and Orkney Islands Council are co-signatories to the statement of intent for the heart of Neolithic Orkney world heritage site. The partners work closely to implement the management plan and arrange access to, and interpretation of, the sites. I have outlined new initiatives today: an additional £8 million will go to the conservation area regeneration scheme; there will be a joint working agreement to detail the roles and responsibilities of Historic Scotland and local authorities; there is potential for delegated powers in listed building casework; and there are e-planning integration and the key performance targets. I hope that colleagues throughout the chamber will welcome those initiatives. I will use my final minute to say a word about the amendments to the motion. I am pleased to accept the amendment in the name of Malcolm Chisholm. What it proposes will complement what everyone is trying to do to protect our heritage assets. The skills that are required to maintain historic buildings are hugely important. Work is continuing in that regard. In addition, we should take proper account of disability rights and climate change objectives. Likewise, I am happy to accept the amendment that Iain Smith lodged on behalf of the Liberal Democrats. There are perceptions that Historic Scotland and local authorities sometimes do not work well enough together to ensure that everyone is informed of the work that they do. I am more than happy to consider that in order to try to improve consultation of local communities, where it is required, on designation of listed buildings and scheduled monuments. Unfortunately, much as I would like to accept the amendment in the name of Ted Brocklebank, I am unable to do so. I understand that cases must often be considered on an individual basis, but I feel that what the second part of the amendment proposes would not be particularly helpful for the overall role of all who are concerned to protect our heritage.  I commend the motion to Parliament, and I am happy to accept the amendments in the name of Malcolm Chisholm and Iain Smith. I move, That the Parliament recognises the unique relationship between Historic Scotland and local authorities in the protection of the nation's historic environment and welcomes initiatives to modernise and simplify that relationship to the benefit of local authorities, Historic Scotland and stakeholders.

The First Minister is currently in discussion with the United Kingdom Government and the other devolved Administrations about what issues should be discussed at the joint ministerial committee. Of course, at this stage the main priority for us is to ensure its successful reinstatement, so that we can build on the good work that the Government has carried out in the joint ministerial committee on Europe.

There is great concern throughout Scotland about what is happening at the passport office, and I am glad that our colleagues at Westminster are raising the issue directly. At the JMC, there are many issues that can be discussed to the benefit of Scotland, which is what this Government is always most concerned about. The First Minister will give consideration to which items he will request should be examined at the first plenary session of the JMC.

Discussions with the UK Government are, of course, on-going. However, the most important thing just now is to get the JMC set up properly. After all, it will be the first JMC plenary meeting since 2002. Our desire to get the JMC set up shows the importance that this Government places on looking after the interests of Scotland.

The Scottish Government has not raised the matter with the United Kingdom Government, because it is primarily a matter for the Office of Communications, the communications regulator. My officials are in regular discussion with Ofcom on this and many other matters.

I understand that for some, in particular those who live closer to Edinburgh than Carlisle, the service of Border Television is distant. It may be that Border Television can develop services that meet needs across its region. I am happy to await the report of the Scottish Broadcasting Commission for advice on this issue. Likewise, we will consider how to respond to Ofcom's consultation review as and when appropriate and taking into consideration the work of the Broadcasting Commission.

I understand that Historic Scotland expects to meet all 10 of the key performance targets set for it by the Government for 2007-08.

As Mr Neil knows, the case is currently the subject of a public inquiry. Therefore, I am constrained in responding to the particular issues. However, I will make a general point. In the period from 2005 to 2008, Historic Scotland received 798 applications for scheduled monument consent and approved all but one of those applications. Therefore, it approved almost 100 per cent of such applications.

One thing that I learned very quickly as a minister was that I can always rely on Mr Ted Brocklebank to come up with something that is not in my briefing notes. I am more than happy to admit to having no idea about the particulars of that case, and I will ensure that it is discussed in detail at my next scheduled meeting with the chief executive of Historic Scotland.

I, too, thank Patricia Ferguson for securing this debate on a very important subject. She spoke about the bad perception of fair trade products. Iain Gray gave us more detail of that from his long memory—or perhaps it is his long life. In the first debate that we had in the Parliament on fair trade, which was probably in 2000, members talked about the products being perceived as not that good. It is a mark of how far we have come in such a short time that fair trade products are now regarded as mainstream. Someone—I cannot remember who—mentioned that Tate & Lyle is starting to use fair trade sugar. That, too, is a mark of how far we have come. Since the first debate in the Parliament, we have seen the growth of Fairtrade towns, Fairtrade villages, Fairtrade universities and Fairtrade schools. I am sorry that George Foulkes is not in the chamber, as this is a subject that is close to his heart. When he was one of the international development ministers at Westminster, he helped me greatly in the move to make Strathaven one of Scotland's first Fairtrade towns, and I thank him for that. Since then, we have had the Fairtrade school movement. I get a buzz every time I think of Sandford school being the first Fairtrade school in the United Kingdom. We now have many Fairtrade schools. Young people are very important in taking the movement forward. Members have mentioned too many schools for me to address them all in seven minutes, but I will mention three that I was fortunate enough to visit during Fairtrade fortnight. At Whitelees primary school in Cumbernauld, pupils made their own CD from start to finish—they wrote and performed the song, and they are now distributing it. Marvellous stuff. St Elizabeth's primary school in Hamilton managed an amazing fusion of Scottish Highland dancing and Caribbean music, which was a joy to behold. I also thank Lianne, from Thornlie primary school in Wishaw. It takes an 11-year-old to go on the Lesley Riddoch show and give short shrift to the man from the Adam Smith Institute, which Mary Mulligan mentioned, when he was trying to say that fair trade is not a particularly valuable thing. Of course, it is. The fact that trade is fair does not mean that it is not free—the two are not mutually exclusive. Surely anyone with a social conscience or who cares about the world—as, I believe, the vast majority of people do—can help fair trade to move forward.  Although Fairtrade fortnight has passed, now is an apt time for members to discuss what events we attended. As Shirley-Anne Somerville, among others, said, there are people who keep the movement going throughout the year. It is no longer the case that we have to convince stores to stock Fairtrade products just for Fairtrade fortnight; people keep it going all year round. Indeed, even before it became popular, there were people plugging away in the churches, especially through Traidcraft, for many years. It is those folk who have kept the movement going and who have enabled Fairtrade fortnight now to be the focus for moving on for the next year. As Iain Gray said, the Fairtrade mark can now be found on 3,000-plus products. We have also heard about the Fairtrade Foundation and the fact that the fair trade market in the UK is now worth £500 million. Indeed, it is estimated that 90 per cent of people now recognise the Fairtrade mark on products. Since 2005, the number of African producer organisations that sell to the UK market has almost doubled, to 152. Each of those organisations represents thousands of farmers and workers. Aileen Campbell mentioned the social premium. Fair trade is not just about the producers; it is also about the schools that are built and the co-ops that are formed in other countries to give a fair deal to workers. Of course, there is still a lot of work to be done. The Scottish Government is absolutely committed to making Scotland one of the world's Fairtrade nations. To drive forward the campaign that the previous Administration started, the Scottish Fair Trade Forum receives from the international development fund core funding of £60,000 per year for three years. In October last year, at the formal launch of the forum, I was delighted to announce further funding of up to £40,000 for this financial year to assist it with more awareness-raising activities, a lot of which took place during Fairtrade fortnight. Real progress has been made since the forum elected its interim board—I hope to have the opportunity to meet its members soon—and I look forward to increased collaboration with the forum and its chair, John McAllion, with a view to building capacity. I acknowledge that the Fairtrade nation criteria are ambitious, but Fairtrade nation status has to be meaningful. Becoming a Fairtrade nation cannot happen overnight. It is not about being first, or even one of the first; it is about taking on trade justice issues, looking at how procurement can be fairer within government and challenging preconceptions by looking at overseas examples. We are currently considering the findings of the select committee that Malcolm Chisholm mentioned.  I will conclude, although we could all say much more. We have achieved quite a lot, but the fight goes on. As James Kelly said, the battle continues, because this is a wide issue. I know that members of this Parliament and people all over Scotland will continue to support and promote fair trade, as they have done for many years, in Parliament, in the Government, in all our institutions and right across the country, to the benefit of people here and people overseas. Fair trade is all about ending the unfair poverty that producers in developing countries face.  Meeting closed at 17:47.

That is not hard.

At one point in the debate it suddenly hit me that, five years along the line, here we are yet again debating the war in Iraq. I turned to my colleague Jamie Hepburn and said, "Isn't this so depressing? This country has been at war for five years." I thank Aileen Campbell for bringing the debate to the Parliament and I thank all the members who have spoken. We have heard from members of the Labour Party, the SNP and the Conservatives, and I know that Patrick Harvie would have stayed if he could have done to speak on behalf of the Greens. Although we might not all agree on everything that has been said, one point that has come across clearly is the heartfelt conviction that everyone has that the war should be over and that the actions that took us into the war should be investigated properly. Aileen Campbell's debate is on a sombre topic and is, as she said, tinged by the sadness and personal loss of many individuals throughout the country. Elaine Smith referred to the first debate in the Parliament on Iraq, with speeches from John McAllion and many others. It was clear from that debate that the Parliament felt that, no matter what powers are reserved from Scotland's Parliament and Government and held at Westminster, morality, humanity and common decency certainly are not and never can be reserved. In 2003, there was a big sense that people power could change the course of world events but, as I said, here we are five years later still debating an on-going conflict. At that time, we marched and said that the war was not in our name, but it was in our name that we were taken into an illegal war by the then Prime Minister. The conflict is in our name and it is the responsibility of each and every one of us—I know that many people in Scotland are deeply ashamed of that. Many service personnel have died in those five years, including 18 Scots and four others from Scottish regiments. Each of those deaths is an individual tragedy. It is important and appropriate to note the contribution that our soldiers, sailors and flyers make to the preservation of our peace, as well as the contribution that Scots have made to peacekeeping and peacemaking throughout the world, often under the auspices of the United Nations. That should always be remembered. They have ended up in Iraq in an illegal war, which is a difficult situation for service personnel to be in.  Whatever the rights and wrongs of the conflict, there is absolutely no doubt that our servicemen and women deserve our support. Likewise, I am absolutely sure that every single member wishes the Iraqi people well. I know that every member will offer a hope that Iraqis can finally live in peace, control their country and be free to use their nation's obvious wealth—which many members have mentioned—to benefit their people. In the 1950s, Dag Hammarskjöld and Ralph Bunche changed the United Nations into an active peace-seeking organisation and developed the principles of peacekeeping—disinterest, parity, permission and negotiation. We should all cherish that legacy and we should expect our political leaders to cherish it and to act on it on our behalf. Scotland believes fundamentally in peace and prosperity and in the rule of international law. We have heard this week about citizenship and that we should all swear oaths of allegiance to the country. People in this country and in England and Wales and the north of Ireland all show their patriotism in how they care for their countries and those about them. They want and deserve a Government in which they can trust. If people feel that the leader of that Government told lies to take them into an illegal conflict, it is a bit rich of those who were involved to demand that we show them that we care about our country. It would be far better if those who are in power showed the people whom they supposedly serve that they care about their country and the people in it. Members have used previous debates in the Parliament to question the legality and morality of the conflict in Iraq and of wider international policy. Tonight, Bill Wilson gave a bit of a history of the so-called ethical foreign policy that has been perpetrated in our name for many years. Scotland's voice must be heard. There is anger that soldiers were sent into combat with equipment that appeared to be unfit for purpose, and concern that the troops are still on duty in Iraq. It is in that larger court of public opinion that morality and decency are judged, and each of us here has a say in that judgment. I wish the people well who march on Saturday for peace. I hope that it is as big a march as previous ones. Sadly, five years down the line from when the war began, people are getting a bit dejected. They think, "What's the point? Those who are in power and supposedly represent us, aren't doing so," and that turns to apathy. I urge as many people as possible to turn out at the march, to show clearly that it is still our opinion that this is a war that should never have been, that it is a war that should be stopped and that we need solutions to bring our Scottish troops home. Many other countries have pulled out of Iraq.  There was a lot of talk about hearts and minds when the war was entered into. What is in the hearts and minds of the people of Scotland is that we should not be in Iraq and that there should be proper reparation by those who took us into the war. What is in the hearts and minds of the people of Scotland is that we should support the Iraqi people for peace and prosperity in future—and that we need some truth.  Meeting closed at 17:46.

The Scottish Government is preparing a Gaelic language plan and will promote the Gaelic language by taking forward a range of vital initiatives, which include encouraging the preparation of Gaelic plans by authorities and public bodies, expecting Bòrd na Gàidhlig to implement the national plan, seeking to expand Gaelic education at all levels, supporting the development of the Gaelic digital service, and promoting the Gaelic arts at home and abroad. We have provided new funding for initiatives to help to enhance the status of Gaelic.

I am delighted to hear that we will have a fair trade Mod. I am sure that all members will welcome that news. I am also pleased that the First Minister will formally open the Mod in Falkirk on 10 October. The Royal National Mod receives funding from Bòrd na Gàidhlig and other bodies, such as enterprise companies, EventScotland and local authorities, as well as from the private sector— Caledonian MacBrayne and the Royal Bank of Scotland. I was interested to see the fringe programme for last year's Mod. It made me realise the good work that the organisers of the Mod fringe want to develop. The Scottish Arts Council disburses funding on the Government's behalf and decides how it is allocated. I do not doubt its commitment to promoting Gaelic language and culture, and I am sure that it will consider the Mod fringe carefully.

Funding for the performing arts in Scotland is disbursed by the Scottish Arts Council. Once I have set the overall budget, it is for the Scottish Arts Council to determine how it will be allocated to the various arts fields. The Scottish Government provides direct funding only to the national performing companies, which play their part in taking their art to the regions of Scotland. The Scottish Arts Council supports regional performing arts in a variety of ways, to ensure that high-quality arts can be produced, and enjoyed by audiences, throughout Scotland.

I apologise to the member, because I found it difficult to hear some of what he said. I think that it was about how the thriving arts scene in Aberdeen can be helped and supported. I am more than happy to write to him.

I had an absolutely super time last Friday in Port Glasgow at "Transform Inverclyde: Bolt", which was put together by the National Theatre in conjunction with Port Glasgow's two high schools and the rest of the community. The story of the community was written, produced and performed by the community. It was a fantastic project and the participants should be extremely proud of what they achieved. It was a wonderful way of making people recognise and celebrate their identity and sense of place and—yes—it was much more valuable than any oath of allegiance out of Westminster.

In past years, both the City of Edinburgh Council and Glasgow City Council have funded the national companies with the exception of the National Theatre. I do not think that the City of Edinburgh Council's decision has come out yet, but I await it with interest. It is for the council to make its own decisions and for the national companies to make representations to the Government and local government. Discussions will be on-going.

I will not talk about a decision that the City of Edinburgh Council has not yet taken. When we hear what the decision is, we will consider it. I have no concerns about the quality of the arts in Scotland or the ability of the national companies, creative Scotland and our local authorities to ensure that everyone in Scotland has access to high-quality arts and culture.

Reinforcing Scotland's distinctive global image is a key part of our strategy. The Scottish Government and its partners have a range of activity in place to ensure that we position Scotland as a great place to live, learn, visit, work, do business and invest. The winter festival, which runs from St Andrew's day until Burns night, is an important vehicle for our international and domestic promotion of Scotland. Summary research today confirms that Scottish Government-led events for St Andrew's day 2007 were an overwhelming success. That is why I am pleased to be able to confirm that we will follow the lead set by the Parliament, which in November 2006 passed the St Andrew's Day Bank Holiday (Scotland) Bill, and make St Andrew's day a public holiday for Scottish Government staff. That will give Government staff the opportunity to participate in the various events that will take place across Scotland on or around St Andrew's day. We encourage other organisations to follow the lead set by the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Government.

I am sure that Mr Brownlee's initial comment referred to previous Governments, rather than this one. I agree with his comments about our ambassadors internationally. The Government is  keen to ensure that we enhance Scotland's reputation overseas. Business is a vital part of that, which is why we intend to be much more focused in our international dealings. In April, I will appear before the European and External Relations Committee to outline our action plan for international work. It is incredibly important that we promote Scotland in that way, through business, education and culture. That is what the Government intends to do.

I am aware of the Bullwood project, which is very imaginative. There is no need for me to meet Ms Lamont, because at the moment direct discussion is taking place between the Bullwood project and the First Minister's office. I will be happy to bring the member up to date after question time.

The week-long programme of events that will take place in North America is aimed at building on the celebration of Scotland that is tartan day, which takes place in the United States and Canada on 6 April. Scotland week 2008 will have events that are much more focused and targeted than in previous years, with the aim of promoting this Government's strategic policy objectives, which are to showcase modern Scotland, to promote business opportunities, to promote tourism and, of course, to promote homecoming Scotland in 2009.

This Government has made it clear on numerous occasions, including in this chamber, that the UK Government should have honoured its manifesto commitment to hold a referendum on the Lisbon treaty.

Of course I agree—it is completely out of order that the trust of the electorate in Scotland and the UK was broken by the current UK Government and some of its supporters.

As I already stated in answer to an earlier question, funding for the performing arts in Scotland is disbursed by the Scottish Arts Council. I understand that the Scottish Arts Council has been in close discussions about safeguarding the Lemon Tree building for cultural use under new management, and that it has received an application for funding, which it will consider in due course.

I agree with the member that it is extremely important that Aberdeen Performing Arts is able to provide the same level of service to the people of Aberdeen as previously. However, I am not willing in the public arena to go into the details of what happened to the Lemon Tree venue or into the current discussions with the Scottish Arts Council. I am sure that there is good will all round to ensure that, if possible, the venue can be best utilised for Aberdeen.

I welcome the fact that the Lemon Tree is operating at the moment, but it is for those partners who are currently discussing its financial future to come to their decisions.

The National Theatre of Scotland will receive core revenue grant of £4,377,000 in 2008-09, which is an increase of 6.77 per cent on the 2007-08 allocation. The national performing companies are all required by the terms of their funding agreements to operate on a scale that is international, national and local. We have allocated £350,000 to the Scottish Government's international touring fund for 2008-09. All the national performing companies, including the National Theatre of Scotland, can apply to the fund for help with the costs of touring outwith Scotland.

Of course, Mr Tolson is right in what he says. On promoting Scotland, we have a tremendous resource in our artists of all types. The National Theatre of Scotland has undertaken tours of "Black Watch", which we all know about, and "The Wolves in the Walls". Such touring is also undertaken by many other theatre companies. Of course, one of the ways that the Government will help to boost such work is through our Edinburgh festival expo fund. I hope to make an announcement on this year's fund fairly shortly.

Since we announced our decision to phase out ring-fenced funding for the cultural co-ordinators in schools programme by 2010-11, we have received written representations from 18 individuals: four representatives of cultural organisations; four members of the Scottish Parliament; representatives of seven local authorities; and three private individuals.

This minister is not easily embarrassed. It is a bit rich of members of the previous Administration to talk about leaving decisions to the Scottish Arts Council, when the previous Administration thought it necessary to be prescriptive and to introduce restricted and ring-fenced funding for cultural co-ordinators because it did not trust the arts bodies, artists or local authorities to do what they are accountable for doing.  I tell members what I understand about the cultural co-ordinators scheme. Because the previous Administration did not put the scheme in place properly, there is no way of measuring output and there is no record of additional staff or cultural benefit, as there should be in a proper accountable breakdown. I have faith in the ability of our arts bodies, our artists and our local authorities to carry out what is best for cultural provision in all areas of Scotland.

As Iain Smith said, it is difficult to cover everything that members have spoken about, so I make my excuses in advance in case I do not cover some of the points that were made. However, I will pick up on some specific issues. As always when we discuss Malawi and international development, I have been struck by the consensus in the Parliament about the way in which we are headed and about our moral obligation to and friendship with Malawi, which Karen Gillon talked about. Another issue that many members have spoken about is Malawi's potential. As we have heard, it is a beautiful country. Last week was a nice time of year to go there, with beautiful verdant scenery around us when we travelled, very like that in Scotland. I have seen Malawi looking very dry and different, but the beauty is there. Aileen Campbell touched on a feature of Malawi that has huge potential but which has never been made the most of—the peace. It is a small African nation in a region of Africa that, sadly, suffers from a lot of turmoil. Within that, there is the oasis of Malawi, with friendship and peace. Individuals  going there from Scotland feel a sense of security. That has huge potential. Alasdair Morgan talked about infrastructure and tourism. The capacity for tourism has not yet been truly tapped, but I hope that it will be. Through a programme that was started by Patricia Ferguson and continued by the present Government—despite our review, we have been meeting all the previous commitments—the Malawi Institute of Tourism has undergone capacity building. That is an economically sustainable developmental approach, which is important. On commitments from the Scottish Executive, I assure Malcolm Chisholm that the £4.5 million that was agreed previously has now been expended or allocated in this financial year. I will attend the European and External Relations Committee fairly soon to discuss such matters in more detail. One important point is that the money has been allocated with the agreement of the Malawian Government. It has always been crucial in the partnership that we have that it is for Malawians to decide what is best for them. We work in partnership and in discussion and come to joint agreement—it is not for us to impose anything. I can confirm that, over the next two years, we have doubled the previous baseline budget of £3 million a year for international development and that, in year 3 of the spending review period, the budget of £4.5 million will be doubled to £9 million. As many members have said, within that, a minimum of £3 million is ring fenced for Malawi. That has given clarity about the funding for Malawi, which the Malawian Government has welcomed. The time was right to consider our agreement and to make changes as appropriate, which is what I wanted to do. Karen Gillon summed up the matter well when she said that we have a partnership with Malawi. When I spoke to people in Malawi last week, I was keen to stress that we do not consider that we are aid donors to Malawi; instead, we are friends who are working together after a long history of shared interest. It is important that we do not set ourselves up as an aid donor to Malawi—the relationship is about friendship and partnership, not aid. We have often heard about the brain drain in all sorts of professions from countries such as Malawi. When we consider that, we must ask who is aiding who. We must be careful and specific in the language that we use. Part of the added value from the partnership with Malawi and from the additional money that comes from Scotland to projects in Malawi can be about mobilising other partnerships. For example, we funded a project last March with Opportunity International. The opportunity bank in Malawi is about microfinance and about  people being able, for the first time, to open bank accounts and gain the self-respect that can come from seeing their money rising. Our Government funding for that was matched by two different Scottish entrepreneurs, so the money was tripled right away. That then unlocked more than £400 million from the European Union for the same project, so the small amount that went in from Scotland had great potential to open up much more funding. On the issue of sustainability, we have the Scotland-Malawi business group. There is a board here in Scotland of respected Scottish businesspeople, and there is a board in Malawi of respected Malawian businesspeople. They are working together to ensure that young entrepreneurs have the mentorship that they require and can access loans that allow them to build up their businesses. That then allows them to sustain themselves, their immediate family and their extended family—and kinship is very important to people to Malawi; it sustains the way people live in the absence of any welfare state. Such sustainable ways of working are building the country up. Many people have spoken about added value and capacity building within the different professions. They are crucial. Also important is the strong commitment that we see here, right across the chamber and right across civic society in Scotland. I agree with Jack McConnell and others about that. Government cannot do everything and we should not pretend that we can. However, we can spearhead a message of friendship and partnership that can continue into the future. We can celebrate the wonderful relationship that we have had historically with Malawi, have currently with Malawi and, I believe, will have with Malawi far into the future, way beyond when Karen Gillon's children have grown up.

I point out that Scotland contributes to DFID's contribution in proportion to our population. The important thing is to ensure that the additional funding from Scotland is targeted where we can best add value.

Despite newspaper reports to the contrary, I am fit and well and managed to do a lot of work in Malawi. I am just looking round the chamber to check that my MSP colleagues who were also in Malawi are fit and well and back at work. Yes they are. Good. We are all fine, and we all had a highly constructive visit. I am pleased that we are having a subject debate on Malawi following my first ministerial trip there. The relationship between Scotland and Malawi transcends politics and is, because of the history of our two nations, supported by all MSPs and the whole of civic Scotland. I had always been supportive of Scotland's partnership with Malawi and the agreement of the Parliament and the previous Scottish Executive to an international development budget, but when I took up the post of Minister for Europe, External Affairs and Culture last year, I was keen to take stock of progress on all our international development work—the time was right for me to do so. I also wanted to give everyone in Scotland who is involved in international development work the opportunity to comment on the Scottish Government's broad objectives in that area and, most important, on the mechanisms that we use for allocating funding. We approached the process with careful thought and consideration because we must ensure that when we design an international development policy, we take on board a wide range of views and remain clear about our objectives. Most important of all, we must take on board the views of the Government and people of Malawi. I was determined not to rush the process, but instead to take time to ensure that we got it right. I wanted to draw on performance to date and to look forward to our future aspirations and priorities. The refreshed international development policy will include a section specifically on Malawi and will confirm our commitment to continue to work closely with the Malawian Government in identifying future funding priorities. As everyone knows, the programmes between Scotland and Malawi were originally set within the framework of the four strands of the co-operation agreement: health, education, civil society and governance, and sustainable economic development. Those four areas are still at the  forefront of our policy delivery, and many initiatives that fit into the co-operation agreement are still being undertaken and supported by the Scottish Government through the international development fund. We will continue to operate in those broad areas although during my visit I agreed with my counterparts in the Government of Malawi to develop a much stronger focus within those areas. I will say more about that later. Members will be aware of the recent announcement of the remainder of this year's international development budget and will recognise that we have focused heavily on the strands that the Malawian Government felt were hugely important. I awarded £5,000 assistance to emergency relief for the flooding in the Chikwawa district and to address the severe health implications in the area. That assistance was match-funded by the University of Strathclyde and the Lord Provost of Glasgow. It is important to acknowledge the many organisations in Scotland that care about and contribute to Scotland's partnership with Malawi. While in Malawi, I visited Bwalia Hospital and the University College of Nursing and College of Medicine. I was very pleased to see the work that is being done between Scotland and Malawi. Government and institutions are trying to build capacity there. The same is true in education. We are now focusing resources on encouraging the development of the vocational education and skills training sector. In order to tackle that at source in Malawi, I recently announced funding of £250,000 to Adam Smith College in Kirkcaldy to develop a programme of capacity building with the staff of every Government-funded further education college in Malawi, which will work with a group of about eight colleges in Scotland. I am pleased to say that progress is looking good. I am very keen to ensure that everything that we do is joined up and that nothing is done in isolation. One example of that approach is the Chisomo Children's Club, which is a day centre for rescued street children. The club is not only about feeding children during the day and giving them some education—it is also about trying to re-integrate them into their families and villages and, where possible, helping them to complete their education. The club is now also funded to provide the children with vocational education and skills training to get them onto the path of employment so that they can work themselves out of poverty. I also saw the work of Mary's Meals, which provides likhuni phala to children who receive one meal a day from local volunteers. That one meal a day ensures that many children do not starve, but it also encourages them to attend school, which  increases educational attainment. The other aspect of the project's work that is so important is that it works with communities. The whole community is involved in collecting, cooking and distributing the food or, as we saw, helping with the pre-school children. It is essential to get communities completely involved so that good work such as that is sustainable. I turn to governance and civil society development, which is a strand that needs a good bit more work. I am not sure whether David Stewart is in the chamber, but he asked me the week before last about civic governance in Malawi and stressed its importance. I am delighted that we are funding a new relationship between the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations and the Council for Non-Government Organisations in Malawi to strengthen its capacity to support the non-governmental organisation sector in Malawi. We had a very positive meeting with CONGOMA and Government representatives. I was very heartened to see the support that the Malawian Government is giving to the strengthening of civil society in Malawi. That is very important. Institutional linking is also important. Government cannot do everything—this is not about Governments deciding what is best. Institutional linking between Scotland and Malawi is hugely important. One of our Deputy Presiding Officers, Alasdair Morgan, visited the Office of the Ombudsman in Malawi last week. Civil society development can gain from linking strong institutions in this country that have had—let us face it—many more years of democracy than Malawi has had. The benefit that can come from working together is hugely important.

That is hugely important. It was a mark of the members of the Scottish Parliament who were in Malawi last week that they focused on some of those issues. I am sure that more will be said about that. Sustainable economic development is an important strand and the Government of Malawi is hugely keen that we get involved in that. We must work from the bottom up and fund people so that  they can provide sustainable livelihoods for themselves, their families and their communities. In a place such as Malawi we should, further down the line, aim to be able to walk away and leave a viable and successful state that has in place all the appropriate institutions. We have started to consider that with the Government of Malawi and have provided £240,000 for work on that. Part of the funding is for the Malawi enterprise programme, which helps women attain microcredit and promotes youth business in Malawi. When I was there, I saw examples of that work that impressed me hugely. That is an important way forward. Opportunity International is extremely important, as it allows microfinance and enables people to get bank accounts and to save. That is an excellent example of where Scotland can add value. Scotland is good at this. We should make our relationship with Malawi one that is very special.

The planned Shanghai expo will be a huge event and it is important that there is a strong Scottish presence there. Obviously, we expect Scotland to be represented and promoted by the United Kingdom bodies as part of their UK-wide remit, just as they would be expected to represent Scottish interests at other events. On that basis, and on reviewing the commitments that we inherited, we do not see a rationale for an additional contribution from Scotland on the scale that was envisaged. I have offered UK ministers and ministers from the Northern Ireland Assembly and Welsh Assembly Governments a meeting to discuss the matter further.

I am glad that Mr McCabe recognises that Scotland contributes more. That is all the more reason for the UK to play its proper part in the promotion of Scotland, given that it is a UK-wide event and Scotland will be represented by UK bodies. As far as business is concerned, I am looking at refreshing the China plan, which will outline the Scottish Government's aspirations for engagement with China. It will focus on the areas that are relevant to China in which Scotland has a true competitive edge.

The Solicitor General attended the European Union justice and home affairs council in Brussels on 8 and 9 November 2007, at which the council conclusions on the trafficking of human beings were discussed. Representatives of the new EU member states were also present.

There are quite a lot of issues in Ms White's questions. I am pleased to let all members in the chamber know—in case not everyone has realised—that the Home Secretary announced in January that the United Kingdom intends to ratify the Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings by the end of the year. The Scottish Government will work closely with the Home Office to ensure that every possible initiative is taken to protect people who come from the EU countries. There have been some fairly high-level meetings with the Cabinet Secretary for Justice, the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency and Strathclyde Police to ensure that all the work that is identified in the action plans will be considered and that specific steps will be taken to ensure not only that we fully comply with the convention when it is ratified but that, at a local level, we do the best for cities in Scotland. Many concerns have been expressed by many members and we have to  ensure that the needs of the immigrant communities are well looked after.

I know that Ms Godman has long been campaigning on these important issues. Discussions about them are going on all the time at official and ministerial level. There was a lot of publicity during that football tournament. I undertake to pass the concerns that have been expressed today to the cabinet secretaries who have responsibility for such issues; at the moment, I am not able to give details of the discussions that have taken place.

I have a sense of déjà vu, given last night's members' business debate on traditional music, festivals and arts. As Mr McArthur will know, funding for the arts in Scotland is currently disbursed by the Scottish Arts Council. Once I have set the overall budget, it determines which events and organisations it will award funding to. I am pleased to say that the Scottish Arts Council recognises the importance of local festivals in providing access to the arts, bringing communities together and, as has been apparent in Orkney and Shetland during recent years, providing opportunities for the development of artistic talent and the promotion of local tourism. In 2007, the Scottish Arts Council awarded more than £1 million in support of festivals across Scotland.

I am always happy to be hugely impressed, although I cannot make a commitment to attend this year's St Magnus festival at the moment, much as I would like to. As I said in last night's debate, I intend to visit Orkney and Shetland sooner rather than later. I know that the Scottish Arts Council is considering some of the events that are going on in Orkney, and it will probably write to the organisers soon. I recognise the importance of the cultural events that take place all around the country, particularly in rural and remote areas. The Pier arts centre is a mark of that. I also take this opportunity to say that if the Lewis chessmen were back in their rightful home, that is something else that could be used for the promotion of rural Scotland.

It is absolutely true that we must recognise the cultural and economic benefits of the things that we do, and that it is not always necessary to grant them equal importance. I will relay Mr Gibson's concerns to the Scottish Arts Council and ask it to respond to me.

If I were able to accept every invitation that I got, my life would be one long holiday—it would be great. I recognise the concerns that the member has raised and will put them, along with those of Mr Gibson, to the Arts Council and ask for a response.

The culture budget will increase by 16 per cent over the spending review period.

The Scottish Government has no plans to commemorate or celebrate the life of Voytek, the soldier bear.

However, I am aware that there is a campaign to ask the Parliament to commemorate and celebrate the life of Voytek. That is not something over which the Government has any say. Along with the rest of Scotland, we fully recognise the contribution that Polish land forces—including Voytek, who was an enlisted solider—made to the defence of our nation and its democracy, and we are indebted to all of them for their courage and valour.

Any application that is made to the Scottish Government will be looked at as one of the many applications that we consider.

I thank Christine Grahame for her question, because it raises an issue that is of concern to many people. The Scottish Government does not use Border TV because such use can be bought only as an ITV macro package, which means broadcasting to northern England—80 per cent of the population in the Border TV transmission area are in England. Therefore, we use Channel 4 Scotland and Channel 5 Scotland. The digital switchover programme is a responsibility of HM Government and is being implemented by Digital UK. Scottish Government officials are involved in an interdepartmental working group, through which we are alerted to any emerging difficulties. I have met the managers of Digital UK to discuss potential concerns.

As I have said, I know that people in the Border TV area have strong feelings about the changes that ITV plc plans to make to news provision. I worry that Border TV will be merged with Tyne Tees Television. As yet, ITV has not made an application to the Office of Communications to merge those services. If it does, I will encourage Ofcom to consider the views of local people extremely carefully. The Scottish Broadcasting Commission has already raised the matter with ITV, and ITV has made it clear that it views it as a commercial issue.  The Broadcasting Commission is moving on to the culture and democratic stages of its work, which will include consideration of current arrangements for the provision of network news programmes, whether those arrangements are right for and relevant to Scottish audiences, and whether changes are needed to the structure and funding of ITV licences in Scotland. During a parliamentary debate on the matter, I encouraged members to raise their concerns with the commission. I do so again now.

I absolutely hope that, generally, the views of the consumer are taken into account. I am encouraging as many people as possible to make their views known because notice has to be taken of those views. Although I hope that digitalisation will have the capacity to work better for consumers, consumers must make their voices strongly heard, as must those who represent them.

The call for comments on the international development policy review closed on 31 October 2007. It has taken a bit of time to analyse the responses because a broad range of views was expressed. I am now considering the outcomes in relation to our international development policy. An announcement will be made soon, along with the publication of the refreshed policy.

I am delighted to say that I am going to Malawi this Saturday. Among the many  things that I will be looking at is one of the strands that were previously put in place, which is exactly the issue to which the member referred. I think that the member will be quite pleased by the announcement that will be made later today about how we are spending the rest of the money in this year's international development budget. The SCVO does a very good job. One of the ways forward for Malawi is for the country to have an organisation that is able to carry out a similar function.

As I outlined to Mr Stewart, the results of the policy review will shortly be made public. I want to build on progress to date and to focus future resources on those in the greatest need, so that we can achieve positive, measurable and sustainable outcomes. One of the reasons why I am going to Malawi on Saturday is to ensure that we take on board what the people of Malawi see as the best options for their country, so that we have a true partnership between Malawi and Scotland.

It is an awful situation. Everyone in the world who is more fortunate should be trying to assist. There are huge issues related to the high prevalence of HIV/AIDS. For example, it is estimated that in Malawi, 1 million of the 11 million population are orphans. The United Kingdom Department for International Development does good work in that regard. We should all work together to try to tackle those issues. As I said, some of the issues are huge, and no one should tackle them alone. Therefore, we have continuing dialogue with DFID about how Scotland's contribution can best enhance that work and make a difference where it is necessary.

I came to the chamber without any notes because I knew that I would have been writing all day if I had tried to express how I feel about traditional music. What I had intended to say has all gone out of my head, now that I am wondering how to wangle a visit to Bob's bothy in the Highlands—that would be great.

I congratulate Rob Gibson on his motion, which is great. The wording of the motion shows much of the spirit that is shared by those of us who feel passionate about our traditional music. Like other members, I congratulate Simon Thoumire on the huge amount of work that he has done in spearheading Hands Up for Trad. I also thank him hugely for a wonderful night in Fort William at the Scots trad music awards. I was privileged to attend in my role as minister—when I have gone along in the past, it has been off my own bat. I had missed the event for a couple of years and I was amazed at how big it has become. It is massive. Some 900 people had come to watch 130 musicians of world-class calibre. We should not forget that world-class musicians play traditional music. Far too often, people try to pigeonhole traditional music as being not quite up there with other genres. Rob Gibson referred to our indigenous contemporary culture, part of the charm of which is that it is a living tradition—to borrow the title of Pete Heywood's magazine—which moves on and is contemporary. There is world-class, fabulous musicianship and we should celebrate traditional music more. Over the years, I have lost track of the number of people who said, after being taken to hear traditional music, "I did not know it could be like that. How exciting! How wonderful! How great!" Rob Gibson talked about Celtic Connections. It is astounding how that festival has grown over the years—this was its 15 th year. He also talked about Phil Cunningham's series about Scotland's music, which was seen by 250,000 viewers, as did Malcolm Chisholm and others. It was wonderful, riveting television and it is a shame that it was not networked throughout the UK, as Jamie McGrigor said. We are potentially missing out on economic benefits—members talked about that, too. People all over the country, the continent and the world are fascinated by Scotland's indigenous music. Cathy Peattie, who is an aficionado, used great language, as she always does, to talk about the celebration of our unique culture. As she rightly said, if we do not celebrate our culture, who will? Rob Gibson talked about the promotion of  Scotland overseas; we must also promote Scotland internally. Let us learn how to celebrate what we do that is truly unique and wonderful. Cathy Peattie and Aileen Campbell mentioned Burns. Having announced a fairly small audit into the Scots language, I am raging at commentators who have accused me of trying to promote slang among our children. How dare they say that the language that has been used by many of our artists and poets over the years, including the great Robert Burns, is slang? They ought to get real—there, I have said it.

I absolutely agree. It is about not just Burns's wonderful writing, but the service that he did to our great nation by collecting and preserving our songs. What an exponent of Scottish culture he was. We should always celebrate him along with our culture. Liam McArthur, from Orkney, and Tavish Scott, from Shetland, spoke in the debate. I am ashamed that, in all my years of going to folk festivals throughout mainland Scotland and in some of the islands, I have never yet made it to the Orkney or Shetland folk festivals. At some point, I would like to go along and dance an eightsome reel in the company of both members.

I would be delighted to attend. I am sure that it is going from strength to strength, as is Celtic Connections, which has had the biggest ticket sales ever. I was privileged to take part in the judging of one of Danny Kyle's open stage events at Celtic Connections last Friday. I was then hugely privileged to attend the showcase event on Sunday night and to present prizes to the six acts that had come through from a group of 80. There is a wee lass from Shetland, called Maggie Adamson, who fiddles wonderfully—Aly Bain should look out. There is so much that I still want to say. I had better get to the meat of my speech. On broadcasting and television, it is absolutely beyond me why our broadcasters do not see the potential and wonder of our events in the traditional music sphere and why they do not broadcast them. The event in Fort William on which the motion is based was an awards ceremony with wonderful live music. I have no  doubt that anybody who watched that, in Scotland or throughout the rest of the UK, would have been in awe. It was mentioned that Julie Fowlis won the BBC Radio 2 folk awards, just on Monday. Lau, a band that was nominated up at Fort William, also won the best group award in the BBC Radio 2 folk awards, which are UK wide. I believe that broadcasters are missing a trick. Our musicians are being celebrated, but we should celebrate them more. As the Scottish Broadcasting Commission goes into the phase of considering cultural issues, I encourage all members to make their views known. I will ensure that the Official Report of the debate is sent to the commission. I encourage everyone to let the Scottish Broadcasting Commission and our broadcasters know how strongly we feel about the issue.  Meeting closed at 17:41.

The conference was a particularly good opportunity to hear a range of academic and expert opinions on how Scotland might approach what is nowadays sometimes called public diplomacy. I am finding those opinions useful in drawing up the Government's international strategic framework, which will set out how we will pursue sustainable economic  growth by promoting Scotland as a great place to live, learn, visit, work, do business and invest.

First, relative to Stavanger and Liverpool, the organisers of Stavanger 2008 have initiated an exchange project with Scotland called the North Sea project. It includes a variety of cultural activities and has some support from the Scottish Arts Council, which is also supporting Scottish dance groups to appear at Liverpool 2008. It is crucial that we take maximum advantage of our wonderful culture in our promotion of Scotland overseas. One example of that, which I attended recently, was the showcasing event at Celtic Connections, which has grown over the years into a week of events for promoters and others from throughout the world to come and see Scottish music at its best. That is something that we should be proud of and build upon.

I look forward to the day when Scotland can take its true place in the world. That is what I am working towards.

Unfortunately, I was unable to attend the presentation, which I think was from Professor Merrill. I heard that it was excellent. He talked about the role of cultural diplomacy in the promotion of Scotland and the huge advantage in that of Scotland's fantastic culture. Everyone knows how successful "Black Watch" has been. The establishment of the National Theatre of  Scotland was welcomed across the political board. Is it not fantastic that it is here? Everyone also knows that the Government will always support and promote its national companies, at home and overseas, for maximum advantage for this nation.

The debate has been extremely interesting and is timely. I thank Margo MacDonald for bringing the subject to the Parliament. It was great that every speaker, from all parties, welcomed migrants to our country and recognised the skills that they bring. Migrants are generally welcomed throughout the country, but sadly that is not reflected in some of the reporting in the press. I thank Christine Grahame for offering a realistic view of the situation. The general public probably lack knowledge about migration. Throughout recorded time, there have been waves of migration across Europe, and I am sure that they will continue. A couple of years ago, the Polish ambassador told me that the Poles were quite relaxed about their people moving away, because they knew that at some point they would come back and be joined by others—such is the history of Europe.  The Government's economic strategy, which was published in November 2007, sets out our ambitious targets for economic and population growth. We aim over the next 10 years to match the average population growth of the original European Union 15. Migration will play a key part in helping us to meet that target. Gavin Brown and Margo MacDonald mentioned that there is competition for migrants. Other countries also have skills gaps. Although I cannot confirm this figure, a representative of Denmark told me yesterday in Brussels that Denmark recently set the target of attracting 500,000 people to fill its skills gaps. There is big competition out there. Members have mentioned that we do not know the facts about migrants who are already here. We know from the worker registration scheme that more than 58,000 people from the accession 8 countries have registered to work in Scotland since 2004, that more than 70 per cent of them are from Poland and that around a fifth of them have registered in the Lothians. We also know that those figures give only a rough indication at best, because not everyone is obliged to register under the scheme.

That is absolutely true. Political parties, agencies and everyone else involved in public life must try to address that issue for the next election. Migrant workers are not found only in the Lothians or the cities. When I visited the Highlands recently, I found that they are making a huge contribution to the local economy and society, as Jamie Stone said. I heard at first hand about the experiences of a couple of lassies from Poland and the Czech Republic who are working with migrant workers. We need to do what we can to encourage many migrant workers to stay in Scotland in the longer term, although there is always room for those who do not want to do that and want to be part of the migratory pattern to which I referred. However, we must help those who want to stay here to build a new life to achieve their personal goals—after all, they are helping us to achieve our economic goals. Recently, we updated our Polish information guide, which has been distributed in hard copy to more than 25,000 people here and in Poland. Interestingly, our Polish website has had more than 100,000 visitors.

We should always work in partnership when we tackle such issues. Malcolm Chisholm also referred to that, and expressed concern about local government funding. I will ensure that he receives an update on the latest position. I am considering the help that we can provide through the relocation advisory service, which was launched in 2004 as a three-year pilot project. Recently, I extended the project so that it will run to October 2008, to allow us to thoroughly review it. We are contacting stakeholders, including employers, business representatives, the Scottish Trades Union Congress and local authorities, to seek their views on how we can develop the service to best meet the needs of employers and employees. We are working in partnership. We are also considering how we can develop the fresh talent policy framework. Like Margo MacDonald, I welcome the brave step that Jack McConnell took to establish the fresh talent scheme. It is a shame that the differential that we had has been lost. We must consider imaginative ways of making up for that loss.

I say again that partnership is important to us, which is why I extended the time for the crucial relocation advisory service pilot project. I will have to rush through the other things that I want to say. Qualifications have been discussed. There are services that help people to have their qualifications recognised in the United Kingdom. In that regard, I should mention the National Academic Recognition Information Centre for the United Kingdom—UK NARIC—which provides comparison information and advice. In response to demands from employer organisations, the Scottish Qualifications Authority has started to map Polish qualifications and the Polish education system against Scottish qualifications and the Scottish credit and qualifications framework. Information on that is now available on the SQA website. I agree that airports can be a prime location for informing people about Scotland, but I am not convinced of the cost effectiveness or, indeed, the  general effectiveness of a welcome portal at Edinburgh airport. Many migrant workers come through Edinburgh airport and other airports, but we know that many others come to Scotland by other modes of transport, directly or via England. However, as I have said, we will consider support for migrant workers in our review of the relocation advisory service. It is important that we do not forget the role of employers. The Government has a part to play in encouraging people to come here to help employers fill their vacancies, but employers also have a role in helping their employees to achieve their full potential. We should always ensure that we get as much information as possible, including anecdotal evidence, from stakeholders, including trade unions, on where there is potential for exploitation. Christine Grahame mentioned that.  I commend the role that the consular corps plays in supporting fellow citizens in Scotland. I agree that support for migrant workers needs to be provided, but we must work alongside all our partners in local government and other agencies, the consular corps and employers to achieve our goals. I think that we all have the same goals.  Meeting closed at 17:44.

Yes, they are. The Scottish Government believes that it is absolutely unacceptable that only 11 Lewis chessmen rest at  the national museum of Scotland while the other 82 remain in the British museum in London.

As I have said in the Parliament and as the Labour Government in London has said, such matters are for museums to consider, case by case. I will visit the British museum on Saturday morning and I will ask it to consider the case seriously. As far as the St Ninian's Isle treasure is concerned, I suggest that Mr Chisholm has a look at a map, because Shetland is part of Scotland.

The Government would want such a goal to be put into operation when the chessmen are returned to Scotland, because the exhibition of the Lewis chessmen in the islands would provide a significant cultural boost. I am sure that there would be an economic benefit. I hope that all members would like that to happen.

Burns night marks the end of Scotland's winter festival and will be celebrated across Scotland and around the world. The First Minister, cabinet secretaries and ministers will attend Burns events in Scotland and overseas during the coming days and will use those events to promote the year of homecoming in 2009. I will celebrate Burns night in London. I will be promoting the best of what Scotland has to offer to visitors at a luxury Burns night at Harvey Nichols, which has been developed by VisitScotland and supported by the Scottish Government. On Sunday 27 January, I will be honoured to be back home to attend the Robert Burns annual tribute at the national portrait gallery in Edinburgh.

Absolutely. Burns is a wonderful figurehead, is he not? It is interesting that a Burns supper that is to be held in Brussels promotes his internationalism. The supper is being held to celebrate the lives of Robert Burns and the national poet of Slovenia, France Prešeren. We have a wonderful literary tradition in Scotland. Edinburgh is the city of literature and hosts the international book festival every year. I am delighted to have been invited to the aye write book festival in Glasgow in March. Members will be interested to know that on Burns day—25 January—an Edwin Morgan event will be held in Glasgow. It will be a 24-hour Morganathon—

Morganathon. I am delighted to be taking part in it and perhaps other members will also take part. To celebrate our literature—current and past—three literary events will take place in Brussels during Burns season as part of the Scottish writers series.

I am sure that it will be a wonderful occasion. I understand that some people in the chamber will perform that evening.

I am delighted to confirm to the chamber that, after reviewing submissions from several correspondents, including the National Library of Scotland, the British Library, Congressman Mike McIntyre and many individuals, the cataloguing policy and support office of the Library of Congress will rescind the decision made regarding Scottish literature, Scottish poetry, and similar headings. [ Applause. ]

Well, yes. I agree.

The Scottish Government believes that the exploitation of any worker is unacceptable. Of course, the Scottish economy is benefiting from the many migrants who, through the fresh talent initiative and otherwise, have chosen to come and work in our country. We are working closely with partners, including the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the Health and Safety Executive, to increase knowledge of workers' rights and to ensure that migrant workers have the information that they need to avoid exploitation. The member may be interested to know that, when I visit the Highlands this weekend, I will visit the relocation advisory service in Inverness to hear at first hand from some of the workers there about the issues that are being faced in the Highland area.

I am aware of the reports of exploitative practice by unscrupulous employers. I very much commend the valuable work that has been carried out by such organisations as Citizens Advice Scotland, the Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service and the unions to help individuals to understand their rights. It is, of course, completely unacceptable that some employers choose not to comply with statutory requirements in respect of workers' employment rights. These matters are, of course, reserved, as Mr Doris said, but migrant workers have the same legal safeguards as workers from the indigenous population, and enforcement of the national minimum wage is the responsibility of HM Revenue and Customs, apart from in the agricultural sector, on which members have expressed concern regarding particular types of exploitation of migrant workers. In that sector, enforcement comes from the agricultural wages inspectors, and a helpline is available. A mechanism exists that could be used for working closely with the UK Government on such matters—the joint ministerial committees that were set up at the beginning of devolution. There is a sub-committee on poverty, which I feel would be an ideal vehicle to discuss matters and to ensure that people throughout the UK are not exploited. Sadly, it has met only three times, the last time being in 2002. I very much hope that the Prime Minister of the UK will shortly answer the First Minister's letter of August regarding the reinstatement of such a committee, so that matters can be fully discussed.

I will provide some background to this matter. The Scottish Government learned in early October that the Norwegian Government intended to downgrade its representation in Scotland's capital city from a consulate general, staffed by career diplomats, to an honorary consulate. The First Minister arranged immediately to speak to the Norwegian foreign minister and made clear to him this Government's disappointment and that Norway's decision went against the recent trend of more countries opening consulates in Scotland. He also spoke of the importance of having a career diplomat in  Scotland who was authorised to speak on behalf of the Norwegian authorities. The First Minister followed up his telephone conversation with a paper, which was sent on 4 November, detailing reasons for retaining the consulate general, including the changed political situation in Scotland. On 5 December, the Norwegian Parliament approved the plan that the new honorary representative in Edinburgh should have the rank of consul general and be supported by an official paid for by the Norwegian Government. That is an improvement on what was originally planned.

I agree with Mr McGrigor that what has happened is sad. I knew that, like other MSPs, he had written to the Norwegian Government, along with Norwegian nationals who live in Scotland and others who work in Scotland. There is a particular concern about visas, especially in relation to the oil industry, where people come from Norway to Scotland and then go elsewhere and vice versa—there is a particular problem with Nigeria in that regard. There are issues, because the United Kingdom is not a party to the Schengen agreement. What has happened is unfortunate. We will always wish for full consular representation of our fellow nations in Scotland and we will continue to discuss the matter.

Yes. I assure members that at every opportunity this Government will raise with the Norwegian Government issues that affect people living in Scotland.

Tartan day provides a useful platform to promote Scotland in North America. We are reviewing how we can improve the Scottish Government's contribution to this event to ensure that we maximise the impact. The United States celebration of tartan day will be just part of a wider programme of events—which is yet to be announced—for 2008. I hope to come to the chamber soon to make that announcement. The programme that is being planned will extend beyond events in New York city and will include other North American cities. In the longer term, our ambition is to develop a programme of engagement in North America that can be sustained throughout the year. Of course, cultural and sporting events will be part of that.

Of course. Not that long ago, Mr Welsh sponsored a members' business debate about the sterling work that is done by Angus Council, in particular, to promote tartan day, which other local authorities are picking up on. I restate what I said during that debate: as a Government, we are more than happy to provide advice and assistance and to share information and expertise with any local authority that, like us, seeks to promote the interests of Scotland overseas.

As I made clear in the debate on the EU reform treaty on 19 December, the Scottish Government cannot accept the treaty's statement of exclusive competence for the European Union over "the conservation of marine biological resources under the common fisheries policy".

I do not know how many times I must make the position clear or how many times Opposition members must hear my explanation before they understand the situation. The text of the reform treaty does not simply restate the current legal position, under which case law has established the conservation of marine biological resources as an exclusive competence. The UK Government has backtracked on the call for a referendum that the Labour Party made in its manifesto. We are asking the UK Government to fulfil that obligation, because for the first time there is a firm basis for dealing in primary law with a situation that currently hinges only on a contestable reading by the court of a particular article of the act of accession. That creates an anomaly, which I have explained in two parliamentary debates. I am more than happy to send Mr Finnie a letter that defines the position, which he can read over and over until he understands it.

I can confirm that there has been no correspondence from the UK Government  on that debate in the Parliament or on the Scottish people's wish that the UK Government should fulfil its commitment to hold a referendum. I suspect that there is a bit of shame there, in that the UK Government has backed off from its commitment and does not want to make it plain that Scotland wants the commitment to be honoured.

The moral case for a referendum is clear. The UK Government promised a referendum and it should deliver one. Scottish National Party members of Parliament at Westminster have made clear that they will back an amendment to the European Union (Amendment) Bill that would provide for a referendum.

The Scottish Government is aware of developments in other parts of Europe and beyond.

I think that all members hope that people in all communities in Europe and world wide can have peace, to which they are entitled. I am glad that the member mentioned the national conversation, which has been a great success and has captured the imagination of many people in Scotland. The national conversation is not just for Governments and politicians; it is for people the length and breadth of our country—and beyond, should folk want to contribute. The Government is pleased to have  instigated the national conversation and interest is immense. For that reason, I am more than happy to tell people throughout the world what the Scottish Government is doing for the interests of Scotland.

On 26 November we notified all 32 local authorities of our decision to phase out by 2010 direct government funding for the cultural co-ordinators in Scottish schools programme. We will continue to make significant funds available in the next two years and we have asked the Scottish Arts Council to consult widely, to agree steps that can be taken to sustain some of the good work that has been generated by the programme.

I have much more faith in our local authorities and their elected members and officers, and in the artists of this country, who can work with us towards 2010 to ascertain once and for all what we are already doing in this country. I have faith in the ability of our local authorities, artists and providers to ensure that access is widened. Instead of putting sticking-plaster initiatives everywhere, let us consider what is being done and what needs to be done. We have to know what we have got before we can know where the gaps are. Let us consider the great work that our national companies, national collections and heritage bodies are doing. In the past eight years, no one bothered to pull together and consider that work, but I am doing it now. It is astounding that it was not done in eight years of devolved government in Scotland.

I will not confirm the member's first point because I have not had a large number of representations on the issue. The Government believes in non-interference in the arts. Our artists are wonderful and capable. Not only did the previous two Administrations micromanage and ring fence funding to local authorities, they did it to the Scottish Arts Council. I am hearing about all the great work that is done by the cultural co-ordinators, but no one can tell me how those cultural co-ordinators were employed, or how many were new posts and how many were people who were already doing fantastic work in local authorities and who will continue to do fantastic work in local authorities. Without that information, there is no point in standing in the chamber and bemoaning the issue. The Government will strengthen the area. We will ensure that people have access to the arts, which will be provided by those who are best at providing it.

I congratulate my colleague Keith Brown on securing the debate. The topic obviously engages the interest of many members and many other people. Members will note that another important motion relating to football has been lodged by Jack McConnell. It relates to the tragic death of Motherwell captain Phil O'Donnell. I am sure that all members of the Parliament will wish to join me in conveying our sympathies to the O'Donnell family at this very sad time. I add my voice to all those that celebrated Scotland's very good performance in the qualifying campaign for the Euro 2008 finals. I do not know whether I was shocked that Aileen Campbell is so young that that was the best Scotland performance she can remember, or shocked that it  has been so long since we had a performance that we could all celebrate. As others have said, although we are all disappointed that we will not be in Austria and Switzerland later this year, our results in the qualifying games marked an important improvement in our position in international football. Congratulations should go to Alex McLeish, his predecessor Walter Smith, all the players picked for the squads and all those at the Scottish Football Association who worked so hard to put in place the groundwork for success. I turn now to the motion. Keith Brown quite rightly highlights the disappointment that was felt by many people that they were not able to watch all the qualifying matches on terrestrial television. I was interested in the examples given—particularly those given by Keith—of why people could not watch the matches. In some cases, there was no availability; in some cases, affordability was an issue; and in some cases, principle was an issue. Stuart McMillan spoke about disability issues, and Aileen Campbell raised an issue that I had not considered before. She said that young people are not always able to see matches because they do not have access to licensed premises. That is an extremely important point. If Scotland or one of the other home nations had made it to the finals of the tournament, its matches in the finals would have been broadcast live on terrestrial television. Unfortunately, none of the teams qualified. As we have heard, the regime for the coverage of sport on television and the designation of listed events is—as we all know—a responsibility of the United Kingdom Government. As Keith Brown explained, the effect of listing is to require full live terrestrial coverage of category A events, or the provision of terrestrial recorded highlights of category B events. As well as the world cup and European championship finals, category A events include the Scottish cup final, the Olympic games, the grand national and the Derby. Category B events include the six nations rugby tournament, the open golf championship and the Commonwealth games. As Jim Tolson pointed out, we should ensure in our discussions that sports other than football are considered. The arrangements for listing are provided for in the Broadcasting Act 1996. As we know, the list is the responsibility of the Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport and the regulations are enforced by Ofcom.

I am especially interested in what I have heard about what happens in other countries. The obvious and widespread interest among people in Scotland suggests to me that we should consider such issues. There was a national resonance about the football ties last year. Good arguments have been made for a review of the listings and of the criteria used. We should consider the experience in other places. This Government will consider carefully what representations to make to the UK Government, reflecting on the views of members, of the wider public and of stakeholders in the events. Government officials have already written to Gordon Smith, the chief executive of the Scottish Football Association, to seek the association's views about possible changes to the listing of events. It is understood that the sale of television broadcast rights for the national team's home matches is an important income stream for the association. I think that it was Ted Brocklebank who raised that issue. That income stream supports the SFA's many grass-roots events, although Keith Brown said that it is only 20 per cent of the SFA's income. I want to better understand the consequences of any change for the SFA, which can let us know how it views that issue when it responds to our letter.

I was interested to learn that Stuart McMillan's petition—which I had not known about—had been submitted to the Scottish Broadcasting Commission. The commission has been asked to consider the cultural and democratic importance of broadcasting as well as its economic impact. All the arguments tonight show that the terrestrial broadcast of sport is an issue that merits consideration, and I very much hope that people who feel strongly about the issue will approach the commission. I look forward to considering what the commission has to say on that aspect of broadcasting in Scotland. Tonight has highlighted an intense interest in broadcasting regulation and its impact on Scotland. I am delighted to hear that Blair Jenkins is attending the cross-party group on culture and media tonight.  I repeat my congratulations to Keith Brown on securing the debate. The Government will take his arguments and those of all members into account when making representations to James Purnell and the UK Government about the revision of the list. We will of course reflect also on the views of the sporting bodies. Members can be assured that while the regulation of broadcasting remains the responsibility of the UK Government, the Scottish Government will act to ensure that the interests of viewers in Scotland are always protected.   Meeting closed at 17:42.

Presiding Officer, I would never think that you could be anything but brilliant and everyone here agrees with me. The debate has been particularly interesting. I say that with real feeling because I did find it interesting and I have learned so much. The Borders is not an area of the country that I know particularly well.

If Mr Morgan had not been so presumptuous, I was about to say that, although I do not know the Borders particularly well, I know Galloway very well. I might as well include the Isle of Man because I have not been there yet, although I hope to visit quite early in the new year. I have learned a lot from what Elaine Murray and Jim Hume said about the history of their areas and the cross-border working that goes on. It is a different way of living from that of those of us who live in the central belt or the north of the country. I particularly welcome John Lamont's motion and delivery. I do not know whether this is his first members' business debate—I see by his nodding that it is—but his speech was excellent in its clarity and delivery, and it was worth listening to. I can tell that Christine Grahame felt the same. What has come out very strongly is the strength of feeling of those who represent the area and their differing views about the best future. That is interesting because it is a mark of how important an issue broadcasting is for Scotland. For those in the Border TV region who are concerned that they could be facing a future as a very small part of a  large English news area, the issue is even more important. Therefore, I can understand why people are lobbying to the degree that they are.

I am perfectly happy to take that on board. The changing state of the service is what worries and concerns people. What is interesting is the differing views of those who feel equally strongly about how, in the area that they represent, broadcasting could best be carried out to maximum advantage. The Communications Act 2003 sets out quotas in the ITV1 schedule for news and non-news programmes in the nations and regions. As we have heard, those quotas are regulated by Ofcom—I understand that members who represent the area have had a meeting with Ofcom—which would need to approve any action to change local news provision. However, as Jeremy Purvis said, that application has not yet been submitted. I can understand why ITV might consider changing its news services. As Alasdair Morgan and others pointed out, the way in which people consume the media—and news in particular—and the types of media that they use are changing because of the convergence of technologies. Of course, that can bring opportunities for new and varied means of communication. We all know that digital switch-over will begin in the Borders in November 2008. I think that Ofcom has anticipated many of the developments. Its research has shown—interestingly—that television news remains important. That is particularly true in Scotland, as Malcolm Chisholm mentioned, and in Wales and Northern Ireland. Local news is difficult to fund, especially for the commercial broadcasters. That point was made, from a background of great knowledge, by Ted Brocklebank. We all need to work together with the commercial broadcasters to consider how we can ensure that Scotland receives the service that it needs as Ofcom starts the next round of its public service broadcasting review. In that context, there is probably a need for new thinking on the provision of news services in Scotland. STV has already demonstrated its awareness of the situation by taking the decision to broadcast a full hour of Scottish news rather than the ITN network news. STV made that decision on 4 May because it believed that the outcome of the Scottish Parliament election was important to the Scottish people.

I am grateful to Mr Brocklebank for that clarification. The Scottish Broadcasting Commission has surely focused the minds of many interested parties in this country. The commission is considering the economic, cultural and democratic importance of broadcasting for Scotland. For the first time, we have the opportunity to examine ways in which Scottish broadcasting and television can be transformed. In its published work plan, the commission has stated that it will give consideration to what changes if any are required to the structure and funding of the ITV licences in Scotland. I am sure that that will include issues to do with the coverage of the Border TV region in Scotland. I hope that the commission will also look at how well current arrangements meet the wishes and aspirations of those in the south of Scotland, what the effect might be of the proposed merger—however that might come about—and what arrangements might best serve the Border TV region. Of course, I cannot pre-empt the findings of the commission, which will report next year. I hope that Parliament will have the opportunity to discuss the report when it becomes available. I urge all members to carry on inputting, as they have done, to Ofcom's review of public service broadcasting and news provision. As the responsible minister, I will consider today's debate. As I said, I have learned an awful lot today and I look forward to reading the contributions that have been made. Having considered the debate, I will raise any issues that I feel are particularly important in my next meeting with Ofcom. I am happy to take on board other issues that members want me to raise with Ofcom, so they should please e-mail me or write if they have anything else that they would like me to take on board. I hope that members will, as Christine Grahame has advised, consider submitting their concerns, either individually or collectively on behalf of constituents, to the Broadcasting Commission to ensure that it has the necessary evidence to recommend changes that will benefit the people of Scotland. I again congratulate John Lamont on securing an extremely interesting members' business debate.  Meeting closed at 17:55.

Is Mr Finnie aware that the report by the House of Commons European Scrutiny Committee, which is chaired by Michael Connarty, doubted whether the protocol on the charter of fundamental rights would prevent UK courts from being bound by European Court of Justice judgments? Is Mr Finnie content that the UK Government fully investigated these issues?

Does the member accept that the proposed wording of the reform treaty would entrench in primary law a proposition that has hitherto been a matter of judicial precedent in the interpretation of the UK accession treaty, and that that will make it much more difficult in future to renegotiate the common fisheries policy, which seriously needs renegotiation?

Will the member take an intervention?

No.

Would Iain Smith concede that what the UK Government was doing prior to the 2005 election was no more than window dressing?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

It is clear to the Government that the United Kingdom Government should, as we state in our motion, hold a referendum on the European Union reform treaty. There are weaknesses in its drafting that demand that, but the most immediate and powerful point is that the Labour Party promised in its manifesto for the 2005 UK general election to hold a referendum on the issue. The Scottish National Party welcomed that commitment to allow the people of Scotland a direct democratic voice on the matter. That should still be the case, so we call on the UK Government to meet its responsibilities and honour that commitment by holding a UK-wide referendum. One could argue at great length about whether the reform treaty is inherently the same as the constitutional treaty. The reality is simple: there are differences between the two, but there are also enormous similarities. There would be little difference in what would result from either for member states and for the European Union, so if we were committed to holding a referendum on one, we must remain committed to holding a referendum on the other. For this Government, a referendum on the reform treaty is logical and appropriate. I believe that many people in Scotland and the United Kingdom take a similar view. I also suspect that they feel that the UK Government's change of position is based merely on certain technical changes in the drafting of the treaty, that they consider it to be pedantic and mean-spirited, and that they feel that the UK Government is acting with a degree of contempt for public opinion.

I am not convinced about that because we are not a Eurosceptic party—indeed, the Scottish National Party forms a pro-European Scottish Government. However, it disappoints us that by denying people a proper public debate on a key issue, the UK Government is once again playing into the hands of those whose ambition is to wreck the European Union. That gives the European process a bad name and makes it  appear that there is something that people should fear when there is not. We would much prefer people to think that the EU is a worthwhile project, in which they are involved. People should feel that they have specific and concrete involvement in the EU's future.

That is for another debate, which I have no time to go into. We believe in an independent Scotland. I have no doubt that an independent Scotland would have at its core active and positive membership of the EU. The case for independence is greatly enhanced by the new opportunities that would be open to us as a member state of the EU. Scotland would retain all the advantages that we currently enjoy under UK membership: we would have free access to the world's largest market—a single market that brings together half a billion people and more than 20 million businesses across 27 member states. An independent Scotland would be able further to enhance its economic position and its sources of competitive advantage in the vast European market, which is married with admirable levels of social and environmental protection. Given the massive potential of our people, an independent Scotland would be well placed to succeed in Europe. We have established strengths in financial services, food and drink and tourism and, with its fair share of oil and gas resources, Scotland would immediately rise from being Europe's 10 th richest economy per capita to being the third richest. That is the Government's vision of a positive Scotland in a positive Europe, which we will strive to protect, enhance and make real.

No. Being positive about Europe does not mean that we have to agree to every EU development. It is responsible to question and, if appropriate, to disagree. I will consider the treaty's development. The European Council of December 2001 decided that fundamental reforms of the EU decision-making process were required. The convention on the future of Europe was established, with the aim of allowing a range of opinion on the new draft constitution. In a relatively rare moment in the history of European integration, the people of France and the Netherlands gave their political  leaders a reality check when they voiced their opinions directly, through referenda. Our people are similarly entitled to voice their opinions. The German presidency broke the deadlock that followed the referenda with an outline agreement at the European Council in June this year. It handed the task of finalising the details to an intergovernmental conference under the Portuguese presidency. The task was completed for agreement of a final text at the October European Council. Heads of member state Governments assembled in Lisbon on 13 December to sign the treaty. Prime Minister Gordon Brown arrived to sign on behalf of the UK later—I assume that he wanted to sign as surreptitiously as possible, but sign he did. The treaty has finally been agreed and signed even by Gordon Brown, who had previously called for a referendum. The 27 member states must now carry out their processes of ratification. Only Ireland is certain to have a referendum, but we will continue to press for one in the UK: SNP members at Westminster will actively press for a referendum as the UK ratification process continues. On the substance of the treaty, many provisions are helpful and positive. For example, the treaty provides for a mechanism whereby parliaments of member states will have the opportunity to be consulted on possible new proposals for legislation, in relation to subsidiarity. The treaty also for the first time gives parliaments a direct role in the EU decision-making process. Connecting to citizens through parliaments is an important step in ensuring the EU's continued credibility. Of course, the Scottish Parliament is not a parliament of an EU member state, although the Government's ambition is that it should become one. Until that point, we must ensure that this Parliament plays a full and effective role in working with the Westminster Parliament to discharge its responsibilities. General areas of improvement include the enhanced role of the European Parliament in decision making, which we welcome as a step towards improved democratic accountability of the EU. I have great respect for Scotland's members of the European Parliament from all four parties. In working tirelessly for Scotland's interests, they listen to the views of many individuals and organisations and often collaborate well across party lines. Enhancing their role is a further positive and pro-democratic step. However, there are negative aspects of the treaty—an area of continuing concern is fisheries. For the past few days, Richard Lochhead has worked flat out in Brussels, trying to get the most effective deal for Scotland's fishing industry. He did so in full knowledge of the limitations of  Scotland not being a member state and, of course, of the absurdity of aspects of the current common fisheries policy. I want to make it absolutely clear that the Scottish Government cannot accept the European Union's claim of exclusive competence over "the conservation of marine biological resources under the common fisheries policy", as the treaty now states explicitly and for the first time. I said that in a previous debate on the subject in the chamber. Of course, the Scottish Government is not alone in its concerns on the treaty. Michael Connarty, the highly respected chairman of the House of Commons European Scrutiny Committee, has highlighted a number of issues of concern. His cross-party committee published a significant report in advance of the signing of the treaty, in which members expressed significant concern on issues that the UK Government appears not to have recognised.

No, thank you. The issues of concern were not least that the intergovernmental conference process for drafting and agreeing the treaty went a long way towards further marginalising the role of national Parliaments and curtailing public debate. Again, damage is being done to democracy. Whatever one's view of the committee report is, it is very disappointing that the UK Government merely went ahead and signed the treaty without appearing to refute most of the concerns. It also now appears that the Government is set on going ahead with ratification without the full public debate that a referendum would entail.

I am sorry, but I have no time. With a referendum, we could engage constructively with citizens in the European Union; without one, we run the risk of further alienating citizens and confirming the view of many that the EU is run by a self-serving political elite. In the past, the Labour Party appeared to believe in the value of engaging citizens on the issue; indeed, it made a commitment to hold a referendum on an earlier draft of the treaty. The fundamental importance of the treaty and the lack of changes to most of its key provisions mean that there should also be no change in whether to hold a referendum. For all those reasons, the Scottish Government firmly believes that the UK Government should honour its commitment to hold a UK referendum on the reform treaty. In our motion, we state that clearly and simply.  I commend the motion to the chamber. A referendum is the only democratic way in which to proceed. I move, That the Parliament believes that the UK Government should hold a referendum on the EU reform treaty.

I would like to thank Bashir Ahmad for bringing this motion to the Parliament. I would also like to thank those who have contributed to the debate, during which there was not a lot of disagreement. Bill Aitken talked about an essential element of democracy that we all recognise: the need for government and judiciary to have a clear separation of powers. Hugh O'Donnell and Sandra White talked about the history of the Indian subcontinent and the turbulence that it has experienced over the centuries. Finally, Alasdair Allan brought us up to date by talking about the current regime and the turbulence that still exists. All members picked up on the revulsion that is felt in this chamber, in this country and beyond at the  events that we witness on our television screens and read about in our newspapers. As Margaret Curran said, the Government and the Parliament support the Pakistani community in Scotland regardless of who forms the Government. That is something precious about our country; we support the community's concerns about the imposition of the state of emergency in Pakistan, and the suspension of the constitution. It is difficult for us, who have the privilege of living in a generally peaceful place, to understand the awful helplessness that people who have moved here, and second and third-generation members of the community who were born here, feel when they watch such terrible events unfold. Although they now call Scotland their home—and it is—they still love and care about the place with which they have a shared history, and the people who live there. Many members of the Pakistani community in Scotland still have close connections with Pakistan and have family there. The situation is very difficult for them, as they are terrified about what is happening to people who are not just part of them, but members of their family for whom they have a deep love. That is an on-going, precious feature of the Pakistani community. Margaret Curran spoke about the work that leading representatives of the community, including Bashir Ahmad and Mohammad Sarwar, have been doing for years. This year, we have been celebrating the 60 th anniversary of the founding of Pakistan as a sovereign state. It is particularly regrettable that, at what should have been a happy anniversary time, a state of emergency has been imposed on the people of Pakistan. As well as the state of emergency, there is a new provisional constitutional order, a key feature of which is the suspension of constitutional articles guaranteeing security of the person; safeguards on arrest and detention; freedom of movement, assembly, association and speech; and equality of citizens. Another was the removal of the Supreme Court's authority to issue any order against, or to challenge in any way, the president, the prime minister or any person exercising powers or jurisdiction under their authority. Alasdair Allan referred to President Musharraf's actions. Separate ordinances have been issued to tighten up regulations for print and electronic media, forbidding them from criticising the head of state, military or judiciary. Those are fundamental rights that all democratic Governments should safeguard for their citizens. The Pakistan Government has robbed its citizens of those rights. The international community condemned the imposition of the state of emergency and requested that President Musharraf resign as  head of the Pakistan army. It said that media restrictions should be lifted, that political prisoners should be released, that basic constitutional order should be restored and that free and fair elections should take place. We have heard from Mr Ahmad and others that, when the Commonwealth ministerial action group met to discuss the situation, Pakistan ended up being suspended from the Commonwealth. The reason for that suspension was the Government of Pakistan's failure to implement the series of measures that the Commonwealth ministerial action group had requested. On 3 November, President Musharraf abrogated completely Pakistan's constitution. Some members think that what we call the west has been rather light in its criticism of the regime. Following his statement of 3 November, the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs made a statement in the House of Commons on Wednesday 7 November, in which he condemned the Pakistan Government's decision to impose a state of emergency and to suspend the constitution. He advised that he had spoken to the Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of Pakistan and to Opposition leaders, and that he had requested that the restrictions on the people of Pakistan be lifted. He also advised that he had spoken to the British high commission in Islamabad, to get a wider understanding of the situation.  We have heard that the situation in Pakistan seems to be changing and that the state of emergency is likely to be lifted this weekend. That has not happened yet, but we all hope that it will. The Pakistan Government has announced that elections will take place on 8 January 2008. On the surface, we welcome that. The people of Pakistan have a democratic right to take part in full and fair elections, but we have heard understandable concerns today, and previously, about whether those elections will be free and fair. We need Pakistan to move forward towards democracy and the rule of law, and to build on the work that has been done over the years. For more than half its existence, it has been under military rule. There is a unanimous view from the international community that democracy, human rights, political freedoms and constitutional rule are absolutely necessary for the security and future stability of Pakistan. I can say to Mr Ahmad that I am at one with his concerns. We will ensure that the strong feelings that have been expressed in the debate will be relayed without delay to the Foreign Secretary at Westminster.  Meeting closed at 18:20.

Someone—I cannot remember who—said that this has been a largely consensual debate, which is true. I am pleased about that because, as I have said repeatedly, St Andrew's day is for everyone in Scotland. In his opening speech, Malcolm Chisholm rightly made powerful statements about Scotland being a modern and diverse nation, and said that we must celebrate that diversity. I am sure that all members agree. One of the first events that I was privileged to attend as a minister was the our Scotland event at the Royal Lyceum Theatre, which I understand was funded by the previous Administration and the City of Edinburgh Council. I opened that marvellous event, which showcased Scotland's many cultures. Tomorrow, the First Minister will attend the closing event. Malcolm Chisholm and Bill Kidd spoke about the need to spread the message among the members of the diaspora. All members will agree that that is crucial to anything that we do for the promotion of our country. I was concerned when Malcolm Chisholm spoke about the possible promotion of what he regarded as a narrow definition of Scottish culture. We would fight against that all the way. There is  absolutely no definition of culture. We cannot put on culture the straitjacket of a definition, because that would not allow culture to flourish. As the minister responsible for culture, I have said all along that we must allow culture to flourish. We should not cram it into pigeonholes for the sake of ticking boxes. We have absolutely no desire to control Scotland's artists, musicians, dancers and actors, or to examine the narrow issue of "cultural entitlement". Let the arts flourish. Concerns have been expressed about this Government using the term "fairness" rather than "social justice". I cannot see what the difference is. We should be promoting fairness in absolutely everything that we do as a Government, we intend to do so. If things are fair, we achieve social justice. Let us start by considering what we have to do to achieve that end. Ted Brocklebank gave a very interesting speech. It was fascinating. When Ted stands up to speak, we are guaranteed to learn something, which is always useful.

Well, it is generally very useful—as was Jeremy Purvis's speech, which contained a lot of hints for a lot of people in the chamber. However, I hate to disappoint Ted Brocklebank, but I have absolutely no desire, and nor does the Government, to change Scotland's patron saint to St Kenneth—not even for Fife. And, in the interests of equality, I have to say that I was surprised and disappointed that Ted did not make a case for St Margaret, who also has a link to Fife. Ted Brocklebank also spoke of the importance of promoting the concept of the national holiday, which I agree is important. There were interesting links to Gavin Brown's speech. Promoting the idea in our schools and building up momentum will make the celebration of our national day become a desire and a template for a holiday. Yes, we have to build on everything that is being done, and that is the Government's intention. We very much have an eye on the year of homecoming in 2009. As Gavin Brown said, that is important. Ted Brocklebank and Murdo Fraser spoke about the religious significance of St Andrew's day. I spoke to Cardinal Keith O'Brien last night and I learned that St Mary's cathedral—which holds relics of St Andrew—has a special St Andrew's day mass, which John Swinney will attend to say a few words. My colleague Maureen Watt tells me that last Sunday, to celebrate St Andrew's day, she read the lessons in Doric in the kirk of St Nicholas in Aberdeen, which is great. There has been a lot of talk about the winter festival, but there is so much more to it than people think. We have to get that across. I am delighted that people are already coming to us and  asking whether they can be part of the winter festival. For example, we are going to have the first Gaelic Christmas concert in Glasgow, at St Andrew's in the square, which will be headed by Fiona Mackenzie, and the organisers have requested that the concert be part of the winter festival. Karen Whitefield mentioned hogmanay, and we also have Celtic Connections and Burns night. The Highland new year in the middle of January, up in Inverness, is also part of the winter festival, as is Shetland's Up-Helly-Aa. The difference is that we are trying very hard to unify everything under the winter festival theme. As Margo MacDonald said, we can build that up, and use this year as a springboard, which is absolutely what we intend to do. Sandra White was disappointed at the negativity that some members have shown. I am too, but I hope that we can all get over that negativity and celebrate our national day together. The Labour group made contributions about the previously proposed potential for a new year's day holiday. Anyone listening to them might have thought that the Labour group had pushed the case that the big shops should close on new year's day, and they might have thought that, had Labour won the election—which it did not—the proposal would have been immediately implemented and all the big shops would have closed on new year's day.

That is not the case. The Labour group backed a study of whether it would be appropriate to close the shops on new year's day.

The Labour members do not like hearing the reality, which is that the Labour group backed off from its commitment and did not try to push it through. Labour members are now saying that no matter the result of the investigation and research, they were going to pronounce that holiday. As usual, they were not going to listen. While we are at it, let us nail the myth about the SNP's position on the minimum wage. James Kelly made a spurious claim about what happened at Westminster. He was talking about a House of Lords vote on an amendment. Our own Alasdair Morgan took part in the committee that oversaw the National Minimum Wage Bill. Our MPs supported the bill and voted for it at its second reading. Our MPs supported Trades Union Congress-backed amendments to strengthen the bill. Our MPs voted on it more often than Tony  Blair and as often as Gordon Brown. Let us nail that myth right now. Having said all that, I am delighted that there is common ground in relation to our St Andrew's day proposals, as Robert Brown said. I am concerned about Robert Brown's concern about the identity that is being promoted. Robert Brown explained his antecedents, who are varied and treasured, as are my own and those of many people in the SNP group.

I also worry about the view that we are somehow appropriating symbols. We are not doing that. Of course we use Scotland's flag—we are proud to be Scots. While I am on that subject, I have often seen the Conservatives using the union flag. Does that mean that they are appropriating it for their advantage? Possibly.

I will finish now. Let us have a fantastic St Andrew's day. Let us forget our differences, join hands for our national day tomorrow and have a very good time.

I am not married.

I would be intrigued to learn where the notion that I have linked St Andrew's day to independence comes from. There is no doubt that St Andrew's day is for everyone in Scotland. The national conversation is also for everyone in Scotland. When I mentioned it, I said that we are receiving views from all sections of constitutional opinion.

indicated agreement  .

I want consensus in the debate, which is being held on the day before St Andrew's day. It is important that we celebrate Scotland together. Indeed, we should encourage the entire country to get involved. I had hoped that all the Opposition parties would find it in themselves to engage in a positive manner and focus on our national day, which is tomorrow, 30 November. I wanted to talk about an upbeat Scotland; that is what I intend to do, as soon as I have dealt with the Opposition amendments. Iain Smith may have thrown me out of my seat just before the debate got under way, but I assure him that we will meet our manifesto commitment on St Andrew's day. We will make it a day in which Scots are engaged and a day that benefits Scottish confidence and the Scottish economy. No Government—here or elsewhere—can force Scots to take a break. Unfortunately, we cannot decree a "full national holiday", under Scots law or United Kingdom law. Nor can we enforce jollity and happiness on the population, although, that said, people seem happier since May. I am only too pleased to accept the credit for that, on behalf of the Scottish National Party Government. We are leading by example and encouragement in making St Andrew's day a holiday across Scotland. We will continue to do that and we will encourage other employers to engage in this important day for Scotland. A colleague from previous sessions of the Parliament is sitting in the public gallery for the debate. I commend Dennis Canavan for the sterling work that he did on St Andrew's day. [ Applause. ] I know that my Labour Party colleagues want to celebrate all that is good in Scotland; all Scots want to do that. The Labour Party's acceptance of the winter festival in its amendment is a great step in the right direction. It is therefore a pity that the Labour Party then spoiled things by making a poor attack on the legislation on new year trading. As a member of the Parliament in the previous session, I was happy to support the overwhelming groundswell of public opinion in favour of a ban on shopping and trading on Christmas day, which is a day for families to be together. The question of  trading on new year's day was left for a later date. Parliament remained unconvinced of the case for a ban.

No. When the winter festival was launched at the beginning of the month, some Labour members said that sending supplies of the saltire to pre-schools and colleges was nationalist propaganda. As a nationalist, I have never thought of Scotland's flag as belonging to any one party. I am surprised that anyone else thought that, particularly when the coalition Administration sent out saltires to schools last year. A celebration of Scotland is not a party political event.

There is absolutely nothing to stop any Scottish political party handing out the saltire to Scots people. I welcome the amendment in Ted Brocklebank's name, despite the fact that he corrected my grammar. In the motion, I referred only to the six modern cities of Scotland. I apologise for that; I should have paid due respect to our ancient cities, too. I am happy to accept Ted Brocklebank's amendment. Obviously, he thought about the substantive issues and has made a considered contribution to the debate. St Andrew's day is Scotland's national day. In our manifesto and the 100-days document, we set out our commitment to mobilise Scotland's national day for the benefit of our economy and country, and to give a boost to our traditional and contemporary culture. Our aim is to raise awareness of the day as a cornerstone of Scotland's winter festival, building on our success in attracting visitors to join us for hogmanay. We also want to build on the global reputation of Scotland's national bard, the excellence of our summer festivals and our incredible scenery. We want to ensure that Scotland is seen as a year-round destination that is open for business and ready to engage with the world. The St Andrew's day programme involves events around the world and in all Scotland's cities—modern and ancient—and serves as a launch pad for  Scotland's winter festivals. Throughout the country, top visitor attractions are opening their doors for free, in celebration of our national day. Scotland's pre-schools, schools and universities are being encouraged to join the St Andrew's day celebrations. Some are hosting events and others have themed their activities on the day around the many cultures that make up Scotland's people. We are creating new events such as the St Andrew's day debate and we are working with new partners such as Edinburgh Leisure, Dance Base and the Scottish Storytelling Centre. The Government is spending £400,000 on St Andrew's day and a further £300,000 on the winter festival, giving sponsorship to Scotland's cities for their winter festival events. We are galvanising activity all across Scotland, sponsoring events in Aberdeen, Dundee, Inverness, Glasgow, Stirling and elsewhere and delivering the St Andrew's day celebrations in Edinburgh. We know of 60 schools events and 13 events in further and higher education institutions. For example, Banff and Buchan College is providing a free porridge breakfast for staff and students, and 87 second-year pupils from Waid academy in Fife are taking part in a sponsored walk along the old pilgrim route from Guardbridge to St Andrews cathedral to raise money for the Children's Hospice Association Scotland. We are raising the profile of St Andrew's day and Scotland internationally as well as at home. A new section of the www.scotland.org website, entitled celebrate Scotland, will provide a permanent on-line resource for the promotion of Scottish culture and festivals. The St Andrew's day section, which is live and promoting activity in Scotland and overseas on and around the national day, will build into a sustainable, international resource for the winter festivals. We are selling Scotland abroad. Tomorrow, we will launch a new website in Chinese—www.scotland.cn—which will be followed up with direct mail to appropriate Scottish stakeholders and Chinese media contacts. By celebrating St Andrew's day overseas and utilising Scotland's reputation, icons and traditions, we can reinforce Scotland's culture and place in today's world. The Scottish diaspora are proactive and very proud to celebrate their home country's national day. To date, we are aware of more than 100 St Andrew's day events around the world, and we are still counting. We are also doing more here. I hope that some members have already downloaded the Red Hot Chilli Pipers ringtone from the website. I am not technically minded enough to be able to do that, so I would be grateful if somehow could show me.  Our national conversation is up and running, and the public are engaging in their thousands to argue for and against constitutional change. The debate has shown how every aspect of life in Scotland has somehow been constrained by the current devolution settlement and, between this St Andrew's day and the next, the Scottish Government will make the case for constitutional change. I urge everyone who lives and works in Scotland and those throughout the world who have an interest in the country to join in that national conversation. Scotland has been shaped by the ebb and flow of migrants over centuries and the richness of our culture and tradition, our architecture and music, our art and education are testament to those influences. That diverse population helps Scotland to experience different ideas and values and helps to develop a culture of entrepreneurship and ambition. Scotland is growing in confidence, and becoming more dynamic, forward thinking and energetic. Of course, there are challenges that can shackle opportunities and our nation's potential. Yes, there are pockets of prejudice, bigotry, racism and discrimination. We will continue with a wide programme of work on those issues, and further develop the one Scotland campaign and the national statement and action plan on race equality. Moreover, following the announcement of the outcome of the spending review, we are considering the future funding of work and other projects that tackle racism and promote race equality, integration and community cohesion. St Andrew's day is Scotland's national day. It is the national day both for everyone who lives here and for anyone who wishes to visit us tomorrow. It is time for us to celebrate everything that is good about Scotland and challenge what needs to be challenged. Presiding Officer, I trust that you are pleased that I have given you some extra time. I move, That the Parliament believes in the importance of celebrating Scotland's national day; recognises the opportunity that it offers to both celebrate what it means to be Scottish in the 21st century and to promote a fair and inclusive society; notes the Scottish Government's proactive support of a programme of events throughout the country and all of Scotland's six cities; commends the work of schools and community groups across Scotland in teaching our young people about St Andrew's Day and promoting diversity through their celebrations, and furthermore thanks the St Andrew's societies, Caledonian societies, Scottish Development International, Globalscots, the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and all the other overseas organisations who have planned over 100 wide-ranging celebrations in countries around the world.

As the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth detailed in the Scottish budget on 14 November, the international development fund will rise to £6 million in 2008-09, will be the same in 2009-10 and will rise to £9 million in 2010-11. That is in line with our first 100 days commitment.

I do not remember the previous Administration's doubling of the international aid budget. I am happy to say that the end of October was the closing date for submissions to the small consultation on our website on how the international aid budget should be structured and what the strategy should be. The responses are being collated. Once I have seen them, we will produce a report that will be discussed with all stakeholders and relayed to the Parliament. I very much look forward to that.

I indicated to Karen Whitefield that we will look at the responses that we receive, so that we can target our budget to best effect. HIV and AIDS and other health issues in Africa and elsewhere concern everyone. One precious aspect of Scotland having committed a budget to international development is that there is cross-party consensus on the issue. We work with many other partners. For example, we work closely with the Department for International Development, as Scots contribute to international aid and to DFID funding through the United Kingdom taxes that they pay. We work closely with DFID to ensure that everything that we do here complements what DFID is doing and enables us to move forward on international development issues. It is hard to eradicate HIV and AIDS. Through the health element of our international aid budget, we will work with DFID and the many other  international players who are concerned about the issue to try to eradicate that terrible scourge, which affects far too many people in the world.

As we have stated a number of times, we are committed to establishing the Gaelic digital television service. The Scottish Government is aware of the BBC Trust's interim conclusions and is confident that the BBC, the Gaelic Media Service and the other key partners are working together and will be able to provide the necessary evidence to ensure the successful delivery of this essential service.

The current programme is that the new channel will be on digital TV by the end of March. It will not be available on Freeview from its launch, but it will be available on satellite, via Sky, Sky Freesat and BBC and ITV Freesat, whose launch is expected in March 2008. Soon after that, the channel will be available on cable. As John Farquhar Munro suggested, both the Gaelic Media Service and the BBC plan to develop online access to services and will discuss with TeleG the use of the space on the Freeview channel that is used for Gaelic programming. We are committed to the channel being available on Freeview as soon as possible. In the short term, we would like the Gaelic Media Service to work with the holder of the current Gaelic Freeview licence, so that before switchover at least some of the content of the new channel is available to everyone with Freeview. We are keen for the Gaelic Media Service and the BBC to make best use of all the methods of delivering the channel.

Jeremy Peat and the BBC Trust are concerned that the channel will not have enough educational output to increase the number of Gaelic speakers. As I said, I am confident that GMS and the BBC will be able to respond to the interim report, to ensure that the BBC Trust realises fully that education is an essential element of what we are trying to do. Education—increasing the number of Gaelic speakers—is great, but our Gaelic heritage is about so much more than that. It is our culture and our heritage, and that in itself brings joy to a lot of people who are not native Gaelic speakers and who might not even be learners when they start to engage with the wonderful Gaelic culture. I am worried that the service might be seen as a purely educational tool, when Gaelic is so much more than that.

Alasdair Allan is right, and his point leads on from what I said earlier. Gaelic—and the culture and heritage that it brings—goes way beyond native Gaelic speakers and those who wish to learn. I was annoyed by a comment made in a newspaper about our new points-of-entry campaign. The comment was that having Gaelic on our point-of-entry signs was for native Gaelic speakers who were coming home from their holidays. There was no recognition at all of the Gaelic diaspora throughout the world and of the fact that so many people from the Isle of Man, Wales, Ireland and other Celtic nations will tap into what we are doing in this country and will be delighted to see Gaelic reaching out to all those other parts of the world. That is hugely important. I will be going to the Isle of Man in the next few months, but in the interim I would be delighted to meet any representatives from there who are visiting this Parliament.

I also wish you well, Presiding Officer. I am sorry that I cannot be there to watch your glory. I understand from Jim Mather, who has responsibility for policy on better regulation, that in delivering our better regulation commitments his officials work closely with the United Kingdom Government as well as with the United Kingdom permanent representation to the European Union, Regleg counterparts, the European Policy Centre task force on better regulation and officials in the European Commission.

The Scottish Government is committed to implementing better regulation measures. For example, under primary UK legislation, we are exploring the scope for introducing business-friendly legislation at Westminster, such as that requested by the Scotch Whisky Association. We want to avoid gold plating EU legislation—either by rushing transposition or adding unnecessary hurdles for business. We are liaising closely with business on the transposition of EU regulations that are already in progress—for example, under the internal services directive. For existing regulations, we are using the regulatory reform group and other business stakeholder  groups to ensure that business views are addressed in major reviews that are already under way—for example, on waste management. We will increase the role and standing of the improving regulation in Scotland unit to allow it to work better with the industry-led group. We will roll out good practice on risk assessment, enforcement and sanctions to all arms of the Scottish Government and ask them to report on progress. I could go on.

Local authorities already make a huge contribution to local cultural provision. The Scottish Government continues to encourage them to build on that and to strive for continuous improvement and excellent outcomes for all the people of Scotland, with meaningful community engagement and practical approaches. That is consistent with our manifesto commitment to widen access to cultural opportunities through the community planning process. Recently, I met Councillor Harry McGuigan and representatives of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, who confirmed their commitment to work with us to promote cultural provision of the highest quality at local level. As in other many areas, the Government will work closely with local government and its community planning partners. I will also work with other key bodies, including creative Scotland, to progress our work in the area.

Mr Scott is quite right. We have wonderful resources in our national collections that are used for outreach work, part of which involves  a dispersal programme. As he described, there are issues about the best environment for pieces of work and the length of loans. Since taking up my post and trying to understand fully the widening access agenda and the best way to approach it, I have found it quite frustrating that no work has been done to state categorically the ways in which our national collections and national companies already do such work on widening access. I want to map what has already been done before we start to talk about plugging the gaps and introducing new initiatives. The mapping will involve our understanding what the national collections have already done and discussing with them how they can go that bit further. A basic part of that work will involve our making sure that we make the best use of our collections and that, in the right circumstances, we disperse them so that as many people as possible have access to them. Of course, Mr Scott's area in Ayrshire would benefit from that too. In the meantime, if Mr Scott wants me to look into a particular issue, I will be more than happy to do so.

As my colleagues and I have said so often lately, there is a new partnership going on in Scotland. We are moving forward and progressing, and part of that partnership involves working together and trust between national and local government. I do not believe, as the previous Administration did, that we have to micromanage absolutely everything that local authorities do. We have to trust that those who are elected to local authorities and those who work for local authorities have the best interests of the electorate and the population at heart. The Opposition parties keep talking about cultural entitlement, which was mentioned in the guidance that was put in the draft bill by the previous Administration. It did not really understand what "cultural entitlement" meant, so it did not have the confidence to put it in the bill. The previous Administration believed that that looked good, but  it actually had no teeth. What was the point of that? Why did that Administration not, in eight years, carry out a mapping exercise of what was already happening before it started to introduce further micromanagement? Let us find out what is going on, see what we are about and plug the gaps. That is what widening access really means.

I am working closely with the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning to ensure that all our young people have an international education. It is important that they grow up with a knowledge and understanding of the world and Scotland's place in it, and that they develop a special Scottish world view. I am terribly glad that Tricia Marwick had to pronounce "Pitteuchar" before I did. Fife has a wonderful culture, but I sometimes find the words quite difficult. I have been criticised for not speaking Gaelic, and I will now be criticised for not speaking Fife, but there you go.

Malawi has proved a particular focus for Scottish schools, and I am looking at that just now. We must develop those links and arrange visits and learning opportunities. The primary school link with Malawi is a hugely laudable example of what is being done. It is important that schools are able to develop meaningful and sustainable links with any country. An awful lot of those links have been established with Malawi and beyond.

I rather like "Per-chucker"—that is good. So many things are happening. Loads of primary schools are linking with Malawi, and I want a mapping exercise to be undertaken. Work is being carried out by the University of Edinburgh, which I hope will report back to me early next year, to produce a database of what communities in Scotland are doing to link with Malawi. Everywhere we go, we find some link between Scotland and Malawi—sometimes, in the most unlikely places. I think that it would be great for Scotland to know exactly what we are doing. That is important. I will look at the information when it comes back. If it needs to be improved, I will want to do that so that it shows the true extent of Scotland-Malawi twinning.

The debate has been interesting. I cannot address all the points that have been made, although I will say at the outset that some interesting contributions have been made. The debate is about the Government's EU priorities; I thank those who recognised that, and those who talked in a decent way about the European background and the benefits that Europe has brought. There seems to be some confusion about political objectives and the Government's priorities, so it might be helpful if I were to restate our position on the main EU political objectives. Those are the things that we believe are the most fundamental to Scotland's interests and the things for which we will work hardest to get the best outcomes for Scotland. This is the first time that a Government in Scotland has published and spoken about its key EU political objectives. The current positions on those objectives are not always positions that we would fully accept; that is one of the reasons why they are priorities. In being constructive about Europe, I emphasise that there are a number of issues on which we think that the EU has got it wrong; we are not afraid to say that,  nor are we afraid to work tirelessly for improvements. We believe that the EU, regrettably, has persistently got many major decisions on fisheries wrong, as others have said. Fisheries and fish farming are important elements of the Scottish economy. As a result, we will continue to push to take the UK lead in EU fisheries negotiations, to ensure that the UK position in those negotiations properly represents what our fishing communities need. We will continue strongly to oppose the inclusion of the conservation of marine biological resources under the common fisheries policy as an exclusive competence of the EU, as the text of the reform treaty now states.

No. The conservation of marine biological resources as an exclusive competence would be set out in the treaty for the first time. There is legal opinion that the current position depends only on case law, following a decision by the European Court of Justice based on a particular, and perhaps questionable, reading of one article of the UK accession treaty. Case law would be much easier to overturn than treaty text. For the first time, that exclusive competence will be written in a treaty.

We have worked closely with the UK Government to protect Scottish interests as the negotiations have progressed but, unfortunately, it has not pressed our case for the amendment of the wording on exclusive competence on the conservation of marine biological resources. There is still time for the UK Government to push for that wording to be changed. Unless or until it is changed, the Scottish Government will continue to believe that it is not in Scotland's best interests and will ask the UK Government to fulfil its own manifesto commitment to hold a referendum on a treaty that Michael Connarty—a member of the Government party and the chairman of the European Scrutiny Committee at Westminster—says has not changed substantively from the constitutional treaty. It is entirely disingenuous for some members to suggest that those who wish a referendum to be held on the reform treaty are anti-Europe and want to come out of the European Union. That is ridiculous. I turn to our changing priorities on Europe. There has been talk about how 21 priorities is too many and how that is three fewer priorities than the previous Administration had. Like the previous Administration, we consider what comes out of  Europe that is of importance to Scotland. That is how we will define our priorities. The previous Administration had 24 priorities, three of which are now complete, and we have picked up on the others. That is right; most members have Scotland's interests at heart, although we have different political means of meeting that objective. We will formally revise the priorities table every six months. However, I realise that EU issues can often become hot political topics almost overnight and I intend to be flexible with our list of priority issues. Should an EU issue suddenly arise that a stakeholder considers merits immediate attention, I will consider adding it to our table immediately. The aim of our European engagement will always be to protect Scottish interests, and I consider the table of priorities as one tool with which to achieve that aim. Indeed, Kenny MacAskill, my other ministerial colleagues and I have identified a further issue that has arisen since we initially agreed the list in August. We have agreed to add to the list the framework decision on the recognition and supervision of suspended sentences and alternative sanctions, which is being discussed at working group level in the European Council. The framework decision seeks to establish a system by which member states would recognise arrangements for post-custodial statutory supervision and certain non-custodial sentences that were made in one another's jurisdictions. In situations in which an offender was sentenced in an EU country other than his normal state of residence, that would allow him or her to return home and have the sentenced supervised by the home authorities. We support the general aims of the framework decision, largely because it makes successful rehabilitation more likely and can allow for better public protection. Therefore, it is important that we work closely with the UK Government to ensure that our concerns are taken into account in all the negotiations, which can have significant implications for the Scottish justice system. We will devote significant time and effort to achieving that in the coming months. Hence the framework decision's inclusion in our list of EU priorities. I hope that members will take that inclusion in the spirit in which it is intended: we are willing to listen to concerns about European legislation and to consider others' priorities. However, I say to Helen Eadie that she should not be under any illusion that the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing is not speaking to anyone in Europe. She is discussing with many small independent countries and other regions in Europe how best we can defend our health service. Helen Eadie must have a basic understanding of how the  system works before she comes to the Parliament and starts saying terrible things.

It is important for me to stress that I want the Government to move beyond the necessary degree of reaction and set out a wider vision of Europe from a Scottish perspective, looking into the future. We want to publish a proposed European strategy, which will set out our European ambitions for the Government and for Scotland. My intention is that, following a period of consultation, we will publish a European strategy document that sets out our ambitions for fulfilling our EU manifesto commitments. When we do so, we will always act in the best interests of Scotland.

I apologise to the chamber for having had to go to the toilet.

Yes.

I am happy to. As I explained at the end of my speech, the Deputy Presiding Officer did not allow me extra time to make up for the many interventions that I took in the interests of debate, so I had to cut a lot out of my speech. I presume that Mr Rumbles will not get any extra time for taking my lengthy intervention.

You keep going on about political objectives in relation to the EU. May I say to you—

Sorry, Presiding Officer. May I say to Helen Eadie that this is the first time that a Scottish Government has had EU political objectives.

Will the member give way?

We set out in our manifesto a commitment to make Scotland's voice louder in Europe. We are committed to achieving that for the benefit of the people of Scotland as a whole—to help Scottish businesses become wealthier for the good of all, and to allow our communities to live in a fairer society. I say unequivocally that this is a pro-European Scottish Government. Fundamentally, we are committed to ensuring that Scotland plays the fullest role, and a positive role, in developing an effective European Union. Yes, we want to secure from the EU opportunities for regional development funding, for research funding, for learning opportunities for our students, and for business opportunities for our entrepreneurs. However, we also want to contribute from our Scottish traditions and heritage of justice, equality, democracy, opportunity and acceptance to a European Union that also protects and cherishes those values and makes them integral to its internal workings and its dealings with the rest of the world.

Not yet, thank you. Yes, we acknowledge that there are some imperfections in the existing regulatory framework that are not helpful to Scottish interests. We will strive to improve those. And yes, we recognise that—in a very diverse EU of 27 member states and many more nations, regions, communities and identities—solutions have to be found that are inevitably compromises that cannot fully please everyone. However, we will do our utmost to ensure that Scotland is not disadvantaged by them in the areas that matter most to us. Our first step towards ensuring this, and towards securing our interests, has been to agree what really matters to us in the European Union. We cannot waste our resource by trying to fight every battle; we have to concentrate on the things that matter most. We have determined that our six most important political objectives are: fisheries and aquaculture; EU treaty reform; the EU budget review; justice and home affairs issues; EU energy policy; and agriculture.

I am disappointed, as I thought that Ms MacDonald was going to give me the chance to say—and I will say it anyway—how wonderfully small independent nations do in Europe. In some ways, the eventual size of the European Union is constrained by what Europe is. The European Union is dependent on the countries of Europe. The six objectives that I have set out are the Government's longer-term political goals. I hope that members can support them as representing the core of Scottish interests in Europe at present.

No. We shall focus a good deal of our efforts on ensuring that the developments in relation to our objectives are, at least, acceptable and, preferably, advantageous to us. In addition, we have compiled a table of 21 proposals that make up the Scottish Government's EU priorities. They include better regulation, energy, climate change and financial services, to name but a few. When addressing shortly forthcoming EU policies, the Government will focus its immediate attention on that table of priorities. I am keen that the priorities should be accessible to all and that everyone should have the opportunity to contribute to their development. That is why the table is available on our website and has been widely distributed to our stakeholders. In determining our EU priorities as the Scottish Government, we have taken decisions that we consider to be in the overall Scottish interest. However, we have tried to base those decisions on discussion and consultation with others.

Everyone knows that Scotland got a much less generous structural funds settlement in the 2007 to 2013 round. However, the decision to have a set-up that distinguishes between lowlands and uplands and Highlands and Islands was taken many months ago. I am sure that Mr Swinney, the cabinet secretary with responsibility for structural funds, will read Mr Purvis's comments with interest. The European and External Relations Committee of the Scottish Parliament is obviously a key player in European affairs in Scotland, tasked with scrutinising the Government's performance. As a former convener, I believe strongly in the role that the committee plays in parliamentary scrutiny and that its views are important in helping to inform the Government's policies. For that reason, I have committed myself not only to presenting our EU priorities to the committee on a six-monthly basis but to doing so ahead of official publication, ensuring that the committee has the opportunity to comment on the EU priorities that have been selected and to suggest others that it wishes to see included.

Go on then.

My role as minister with responsibility for Europe is to bring about co-ordination across portfolios, to ensure that Scotland's interests are looked after in the best possible way. The appropriate cabinet secretary will be extremely interested to read Mr Scott's comments. In addition, I am keen for EMILE, which stands for European elected members information liaison and exchange—the EU is very good at acronyms—to play a role in the process of identifying priorities. The network is very useful, as it brings together members of the Scottish Parliament, the European Parliament and local government, as well as Westminster. I shall ask for members' views at our meeting this evening. Each of the priorities relates to one or more of the Scottish Government's overall objectives, and I hope that the outcome of each will contribute to those objectives. For example, we have prioritised the European structural funds programmes in support of a wealthier and fairer Scotland. As I said in response to Jeremy Purvis's question, Scotland has fewer resources from those funds  than it has had in previous years, largely reflecting the fact that the enlarged European Union has many new areas in need of significant economic growth. We will continue to work to ensure that those funds are channelled appropriately and effectively into supporting projects in communities that will benefit economically from them. We are working to deliver a greener Scotland, and we have identified several EU issues as important in that regard. One that I will single out, partly because it does not always receive much attention, is the soil thematic strategy. Scotland has an extremely good record on soil protection that we are keen to continue and develop. We have carried out a formal three-month consultation on the implications of the proposed soil framework directive in Scotland. Ultimately, we need to ensure that the Scottish position is incorporated into negotiations, as Scotland's soils are different from those in the rest of the United Kingdom—they contain large amounts of carbon. The EU proposal for the exchange of information on criminal records should also assist our objective of a safer and stronger Scotland. We welcome that proposal, as information on the criminal behaviour of citizens from other member states who live and work in Scotland will assist Scottish police forces in their efforts to prevent or detect crime. Exchange of information will also ensure that criminal activity by people from Scotland who are elsewhere in the EU will come to the attention of the Scottish police service.

I have to move on—I am sorry. We are working closely with the UK Government in taking forward the implementation of the framework decision on that proposal. As part of our delivery of a healthier Scotland, we are carefully considering the EU white paper "A Strategy for Europe on Nutrition, Overweight and Obesity related health issues", which was published in May. We all know that that is an extremely important policy area. We already have strong strategic policies in place on physical activity and healthy eating, which jointly contribute to tackling obesity and overweight. We shall be happy to participate in the sharing of best practice, as recommended in the white paper. We hope to share our positive experiences with others and to learn from others to assist with continuously improving Scotland's health. There are many other initiatives on which I would be more than happy to give details.

No, thank you. I am running short of time. The list of our priorities contains both reserved and devolved issues. It is important to recognise that, although the Scottish Government does not have jurisdiction over certain areas, that does not mean that those areas do not affect Scotland. We will of course seek to work constructively with the UK Government to ensure that, when a proposal emerging from Brussels in a reserved area would potentially have an impact in Scotland, our interests are protected and appropriately represented by the UK Government.

Am I allowed longer, Presiding Officer, given the number of interventions that I have taken?

I apologise to the Parliament as I cannot share all the extremely interesting information that I have in front of me. In relation to all our priority issues, we acknowledge that, at present, the UK is the EU member state. Of course, we would rather it were different. However, we will work constructively with the UK Government to ensure that Scotland's interests are properly pursued through the existing mechanisms. In many cases, we find that what we want is in line with what the UK wants, and there is no difficulty. In cases in which that is less true, I assure members that we will press Scotland's case very firmly with UK ministers to ensure that their position reflects what Scotland needs, as far as that is possible under the existing system, which tends to constrain Scottish demands. We will also work closely with the other devolved Administrations, with which we very often share common EU interests, and with other member states, with which we can exchange experiences and best practice. I am happy—

I am always happy—and Lord Foulkes looks very happy too. I am happy to acknowledge that the Westminster Parliament has for many years undertaken excellent work on EU matters through the scrutiny committees of both its Houses. I recently met Michael Connarty, the chairman of the House of Commons European Scrutiny Committee, and I was very encouraged by that committee's approach to the devolved Administrations. I want to continue to work with him to ensure that that work becomes a reality, particularly in relation to our EU priorities.  Scotland needs a European Union that works for us, yet neither we nor any one other country or person sets the EU's agenda. Therefore, we will concentrate on ensuring that, as the European Union continues to evolve, it does so in a way that we can support, along with the people of Scotland. I am sorry that I have not been able to cover some of the other things that I know members are interested in, but I will be closing the debate and I will try to pick up on members' queries. I move, That the Parliament notes the importance of EU policies and legislation to the Parliament, its Committees and to Scotland and notes the priorities identified by the Scottish Government for particular attention.

The Scottish Government is in regular contact with the United Kingdom Government and has made a number of representations relating to immigration.

I am sure that all members have despaired at times at many newspapers' negative reporting about immigrant communities in the UK. Comments from certain politicians over the years have not helped the cause at all. Migrant workers make an important contribution to Scotland, because they help us to stem the projected decline in our population and grow our economy. We want Scotland to be wealthier and fairer, and we need to be able to attract the brightest and best from around the world, as well as nurture and retain our home-grown talent, which is important. Last night, I hosted a reception in Edinburgh castle for international students who have come here through the British Council's scholarship programme. It was marvellous to see the enthusiasm with which those masters students from around the world have come to Scotland and how much they already enjoy being here. It is important that we maintain such links for the benefit of us all.

In the years since Scotland got a devolved Administration, needs have been recognised across political parties. A lot of what has been done in Scotland for migrant workers and asylum seekers who have come to live in our communities could lead the way for other parts of the UK. Of course there are issues, and we actively try to address them all the time. To give Mr Brocklebank an example, the Polish information guide that was published in 2006 has recently been updated. The guide offers Polish-speaking migrant workers advice on employment issues, including their employment rights, health and safety legislation, the minimum wage and the role of trade unions. There is an issue of bad employers exploiting some of the communities that are coming to live with us.

The Scottish Government seeks to influence the work of relevant European Parliament committees. Our Brussels office is very useful in that regard but, for me, the most important way to exert that influence is by working closely with Scotland's seven MEPs.

The Scottish Government, with input from the Parliament's committees, tracks everything of importance to Scotland. With regard to the question, it is probably apposite that this evening I will chair a meeting of the European members information and liaison exchange—or EMILE—network, at which will be MEPs, MPs and MSPs, so it is an ideal forum in which to discuss issues that affect Scotland. I will raise the matters that Patrick Harvie has raised. I will also look further into how we are dealing with them and check which of our seven MEPs, if any, are on the committee that he mentioned. Even if the Scottish MEPs are not on the committee, our Brussels office has great input and puts Scotland's position to MEPs not just from the UK but from throughout the member states. I will check what is happening with that, too. Obviously, the relevant committee in the Scottish Parliament will be kept informed by the relevant minister.

We are supportive of the positive role that public art can play in regeneration. The Scottish Arts Council is developing a national strategy on public art, which will promote the use of such art in regeneration for the considerable benefit of communities in Scotland. I expect the Scottish Arts Council to publish the strategy early in 2008.

I enjoy hearing Cathy Jamieson waxing lyrical—I always have. The Scottish Arts Council is considering an artist-in-residence scheme and I expect it to come back to me with further details.

The Scottish Government has not been approached by the Cuban Government and has not sought to establish links.

I am aware of the friendship between Scots and Cubans and of the many links that have been set up. Lots of work is done by great agencies such as Scottish Medical Aid for Cuba. Many Scots are horrified by the trade embargo—the blockade—which is against UN resolutions. I will be happy to meet the Cuban MPs next week. In fact, only two weeks ago I met the Cuban ambassador—as did the First Minister—and his colleague Luis Marrón in Aviemore. I very much enjoyed the discussion with them, which I hope to be able to continue.

The Cuban health service is revered worldwide. It is fabulous that Cuba sends health professionals to developing countries to try to develop health services—Cuba is to be applauded for that. The member's idea about scholarships through the British Council is interesting, but of course it is a matter for the British Council to consider and then put to us. However, I am more than happy to raise the issue.

The Scottish Government does not generally disclose the legal advice that it might have taken on any particular matter. Any such advice would, in any case, be confidential.

Unlike on marine conservation competencies, for example, the Home Office and our Cabinet Secretary for Justice have worked closely on justice and home affairs issues. Dialogue has been co-operative. There are no specifically Scottish justice and home affairs issues that require special treatment in the treaty. Our approach is correct, in that our interests on justice and home affairs matters are, in essence, the same as those of the United Kingdom Government. We favour increased practical co-operation throughout the EU and we will support legally binding measures if they are necessary and in our best interests. That is our position and the approach that we and the UK Government have taken.

As the member knows, as Minister for Europe, External Affairs and Culture, my role is to ensure that there is co-operation across all departments, to ensure that Scottish interests are represented by our cabinet secretaries and ministers. If there is an issue of concern to Mr Chisholm, I will ensure that he receives a response from the Cabinet Secretary for Justice.

Scotland has a well-developed structure in place to support and guide organisations in applying for structural funds, which come under the portfolio of Jim Mather, the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism. I understand that support to smaller-scale community organisations in rural communities is provided through LEADER, the EU's programme for community-led rural and economic diversification, which is administered by our rural directorate. We have governmental contracts with two organisations to provide support for applicants for structural funding in the lowlands and uplands and in the Highlands and Islands. The support includes the delivery of workshops and seminars throughout Scotland to promote and explain the use of structural funds.

I state clearly that before the last election, when I was convener of the previous European and External Relations Committee, we warned the then Government that it had to put in place decent interim arrangements for the new structural funds. Although I am more than happy to pass on to my appropriate colleagues Mr McNeil's concern, I tell him that the situation has been going on for a very long time.

I remind the chamber that the responsibility for delays to the comprehensive spending review rests with Westminster; it does not rest with the Scottish Government.

For many years, I have been a fan of the artists, performers and, indeed, the organisers of the fèisean movement. Earlier this summer, I had the pleasure of attending Fèisean nan Gàidheal's annual conference in Aviemore, where I heard about the tremendous work that the organisation carries out. I believe absolutely that the fèisean movement enriches the lives of all the people who are involved in its activities, and that has been happening for 25 years. We support the strong, diverse and confident cultural life in Scotland, and organisations such as Fèisean nan Gàidheal contribute to it.

The proposal is very interesting, and I am sure that the member will be interested to know that I have arranged a meeting with its proponents. I think that Bryan Beattie and Arthur Cormack are coming to see me in December to discuss the matter further. As in any other situation, we will consider the plan that is put before us, but the idea is certainly very exciting.

The excellent exhibition shows the shared history of our nations on these islands. The archive documents cannot be exhibited permanently. I have checked, and I understand from experts that exposure to light could cause irreversible and cumulative damage. The documents and oil paintings in the exhibition were loaned by the parliamentary archives at Westminster, the House of Commons, the royal collection and the National Archives of Scotland, and they have to be returned shortly. I opened the exhibition and found it extremely interesting, so I am pleased to note that a feature based on the exhibition, including images of the documents, as well as text and illustrations selected from the exhibition, will be placed on the website of the National Archives of Scotland when the exhibition closes.

First, I tell Mr Lamont not to be quite so silly. Did he not listen to my answer? He wants the exhibition to tour round schools, but I have already said that exposure to light would cause irreversible and cumulative damage to the documents. I am sure that no member—whether nationalist or unionist—wishes that to happen.

I am sure that the Presiding Officer will consider it fair that I give no more credence to Mr Allan's comments than I did to Mr Lamont's.

My first six months as minister for culture have been a whirlwind of excitement and inspiration. I was thrilled by "The Bacchae" and "Black Watch" and I was mesmerised by the wonderful music of the Venezuelan Youth Orchestra. Scotland's international reputation knows no bounds. This year's Edinburgh festivals were some of the most successful ever. Performers and visitors came from every corner of the globe to celebrate art and creativity. I also applaud the national collections. This summer saw the opening of the John Murray archive, the tour of the "Fonn 's Duthchas: Land and Legacy" exhibition, and the Warhol and naked portrait exhibitions, to name but a few. The National Library of Scotland's "Tea and Tigers: Stories from Scotland and South Asia" exhibition and the National Museums of Scotland's "Picasso: Fired with Passion" exhibition were also resounding successes. Our national performing companies are achieving the highest standards in performance and outreach work. Scottish Opera and Scottish Ballet are to appear in the newly refurbished Eden Court. Internationally, the National Theatre of Scotland, the Royal Scottish National Orchestra and the Scottish Chamber Orchestra are all touring with support from the Government's international fund. It is with those successes in mind that I offer the Government's plans for culture. My vision for culture has three themes: first, our national cultural identity; secondly, celebrating Scotland's creative sector and its practitioners; and thirdly, our cultural policy, which is for everyone in Scotland. First, with the national conversation under way, it is apt that we talk about culture—the beating heart of our nation. Culture is a part of the way that we understand and project ourselves and Scotland's place in the world. We have a reputation for unique, accessible and high-quality culture that embraces the traditional and the contemporary. Scotland's rich heritage and vibrant cultural life play a huge part in making Scotland a  great place in which to live, work and invest, and to visit. As part of that, we are committed to developing and promoting Gaelic culture and language, which contribute to making us a unique nation. We want to expand Gaelic-medium education and we will ensure implementation of Bòrd na Gàidhlig's national plan for Gaelic. Our St Andrew's day programme celebrates our national pride and our winter festival programme showcases our excellent, world-class creativity. However, it does not stop there. We plan to support and promote Scotland-based artists by making available an annual Edinburgh festivals expo fund that will help with the costs of new productions, events and exhibitions that are premiered at the Edinburgh festivals. The second theme is the creative sector and its practitioners. When we talk about cultural policy, it is sometimes too easy to get lost in debates about structures, funding and process. Let us not forget the core of what we are about—art for art's sake, before everything else. What is important, and what the Government will strive to do, is to acknowledge, recognise and celebrate creative Scots. Our artists include musicians such as KT Tunstall, performers, sculptors such as Sandy Stoddart, writers, and filmmakers and theatre directors such as David Mackenzie and Mark Thomson—the list goes on. We will celebrate creative practitioners, giving shape to a community of people who best represent the elite of Scotland's creative and cultural achievements. Edwin Morgan, Scotland's national poet, has already agreed to be the founding member of that community. Let me set out our plans to support a culturally vibrant and creatively confident Scotland. In September, the First Minister announced that we intend to introduce a bill to establish a new body called creative Scotland. I now offer the Parliament some more details. I have considered the views that were expressed in the consultation on the previous Administration's draft culture (Scotland) bill. We have decided to continue with the plan to establish creative Scotland, but we propose some changes, which I will outline. Apart from that, we will keep new legislation to a minimum. Creative Scotland will support artists and creative practitioners. It will build on the successes of the Scottish Arts Council and Scottish Screen and will inherit their resources and staff. Those two organisations have achieved great things. People in the arts, film and the wider screen and creative industries in Scotland have benefited greatly from their efforts. I pay tribute to them and the folk who work for them.  Creative Scotland will identify, support and develop talent and excellence. It will support hubs of cultural and creative excellence that will have local reach. It will have the freedom to support any form of creative expression and it will continue to provide strong support for film and the wider screen industries, which it will do through its grants, loans and investments. It will have a licence from the Government to take risks, to stimulate controversy and to challenge accepted thinking. Much of what it supports will go on to become great achievements. Its efforts will inspire and support a culturally cosmopolitan Scotland—one that attracts and retains increasing numbers of talented people. Creative Scotland will also promote understanding, appreciation and enjoyment of the arts and culture. In particular, the Government will look to it to widen access and participation. We will ask creative Scotland to play a leading role as a catalyst for Scotland's arts and creative sector. Creative Scotland will lead good practice on stimulating and engaging audiences. It will promote cultural diversity and build further the contribution of voluntary and community arts, and also business sponsorship. Creative Scotland will work in close concert with a range of expert and interested bodies and sectors, including Bòrd na Gàidhlig; the national collections; the national performing companies; national advisory and membership bodies such as the Scottish Library and Information Council and the Scottish Museums Council; the further and higher education sectors; and the voluntary sector, all of which perform important functions. We will look to creative Scotland to work in close partnership with them and local authorities. I will develop that point later. Creative Scotland's role—to lead our vision for creativity—will not diminish the authority or value of any other body, but we will ask all partners to co-operate in developing common approaches to common challenges. Having listened to views that were expressed in the consultation on the ministerial power of direction, I announce today that, when we introduce the culture bill to Parliament early next year, it will be amended from the version that was published last year, to ensure that creative Scotland has complete autonomy when providing support—including financial support—and encouragement to those working in the creative sector. In making the proposal, I acknowledge that the Scottish Arts Council and Scottish Screen have always enjoyed operational independence. My predecessor as culture minister made that point, and it is a fair one. However, the principle of artistic independence is sufficiently important to enshrine it in legislation, therefore the bill will  include a guarantee that no minister may interfere in the artistic judgment of the body in its support of the creative community. I hope that creative Scotland and its role in supporting talent and promoting participation will be welcomed. Those are traditional and valuable aims, but creative Scotland will go further. It will have a new role to champion the potential of creativity throughout Scotland. It will break through into every part of our national life and help to realise all the benefits of the arts, culture and creativity. Ample evidence is available today that highlights the role that cultural activity can play in restoring physical and mental health, in encouraging positive behaviour among young people, and in building community pride. We recognise the impact of culture and creativity across education and in the myriad other ways that colleagues will know of from their own experience. I emphasise that the Government's creative Scotland bill will ask the new body to give due weight to all the benefits that arts and culture can bring. A number of consultees were concerned that the previous draft culture (Scotland) bill required creative Scotland to look particularly towards economic benefit. I agree with those anxieties, and we will change the new bill to reflect that. I hope that the Parliament will agree that our plans for creative Scotland offer an exciting and ambitious prospect for new creative achievements. The Government is fortunate that the enterprise is being led by Dr Richard Holloway and the joint board of the Scottish Arts Council and Scottish Screen. They have been thinking imaginatively about what is proposed for creative Scotland, and I expect that they will have many new ideas on how it should work, where it should be based and how it can be successful. I now turn to the remainder of the previous draft culture (Scotland) bill. I thank those who took part in the consultation on it. The draft bill proposed to reform the governance of our national cultural collections. There is merit in keeping the legislation up to date with modern practice, but I prefer first to assess how the present structures work. The draft bill included proposals to give local authorities a power to broadcast information. I can see an argument for adding to the powers of local authorities, but there is already scope for local television to be licensed by the Office of Communications—Ofcom—so, at the moment, we do not see that as a priority. Likewise, I do not propose to change legislation on local museums and libraries. Although it is old, I am content that it still provides for a strong local  service. I do not propose to legislate now to extend the Dealing in Cultural Objects (Offences) Act 2003 to Scotland. The Government is sympathetic to the purposes of that legislation, but I am aware that the United Kingdom Government is considering improvements, and it would be prudent to take account of that work. Should a suitable opportunity arise in our legislative programme, we will consider progressing that. The third theme of my cultural policy concerns everyone in Scotland, because I believe that it is important that everyone should be able to feel part of Scotland's cultural life. That is why widening access to and participation in culture is a priority for the Government. I have read and thought about people's responses to the proposals on local cultural provision in the draft culture (Scotland) bill. I have also detected a good level of consensus about the best ways to encourage more people, from all ages and backgrounds, to become involved in the arts and their living heritage. That is heartening, especially because of the amazing difference that coming into contact with culture can make to people's lives. I decided early that to deliver my cultural policy I needed a practical approach that was based on experience and consensus and which would therefore have the best chance of success. I seek success through outcomes that make a positive and lasting difference. One option was to use legislation, but I could not see how that would sit comfortably with what I and my colleague John Swinney seek to achieve through reform of the public sector. Our reform agenda requires a more mature relationship between central Government and local government that is based on outcome agreements and trust, to promote a strong, fair and inclusive national identity. Our goal is to inspire greater commitment to providing high-quality cultural opportunities that are developed through community engagement. That is not best achieved by using the law to require local authorities to undertake new planning and reporting processes. The way to inspire commitment to a jointly held ambition is to work together. That is what I plan to do. I am pleased that that approach has the enthusiastic backing of Councillor Harry McGuigan and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. Our national cultural bodies are part of our drive to widen cultural access. Richard Holloway has made a helpful start by visiting local authorities to discuss aspirations for the national-local relationship. Just as national and local providers of culture should work together to enhance cultural access, I expect local authorities to collaborate  with the voluntary, community and independent sector bodies in their areas to deliver new opportunities. There must be a focus in the new partnership on developing our understanding of the barriers to accessing culture and on taking steps to overcome them. There are places where we can start. Step 1 is about community planning partnerships getting involved in culture. Planning for culture should be everyone's business, with community empowerment at its heart. We will provide community planners with new advice and encouragement to help all sectors to play their part in cultural delivery, while adding value to other service plans through cultural activity. Step 2 is about sharing knowledge of the impacts of culture, so that other sectors and community planners get the message that culture delivers what it promises for quality of life—including creativity, well-being and fun. To do that, we shall, with our local government partners and with national bodies, further develop and publicise information about the difference that culture makes. Step 3 is about providers striving to deliver high-quality cultural provision. Just as all aspects of the national performing companies' activities are now subject to peer review, local provision should also be subject to assessment. We are working with local authorities and cultural bodies to develop a quality assurance framework under which local authorities can assess their standards of local consultation, planning and delivery. That will embrace sector models such as the well-regarded public library quality improvement matrix. Step 4 is about learning more successful ways to engage with potential participants and audiences from a range of backgrounds and to plan cultural delivery with their aspirations very much in mind. I am supporting 13 innovative projects throughout Scotland that are helping to find ways of overcoming some barriers to participation. They are working with communities and individuals who tend not to take part and they are forging links with community planning. For example, in Fife we are seeing genuine grass-roots engagement as citizens and professionals work together to determine the shape and scope of Fife's future cultural provision. The Dundee project has shown that social exclusion needs to be tackled proactively, so that all of society can enjoy the world of culture. The feedback that is emerging from those projects and others shows that we need new models of service provision that are based on local accountability and dialogue. Those projects will be our culture champions. What we learn from them about people-centred approaches will help to inform future policy.  Presiding Officer, I think that you and members will agree that the Government's commitment to our nation's cultural scene is aspirational and practical in its content, and that we have an exciting and inspiring time ahead for the benefit of Scotland's people. To quote Sir Walter Scott, we have the "will to do" and "the soul to dare".

I will start with what Mr Chisholm called "the disappearing culture bill". I am legislating to establish creative Scotland as a public body, and I have explained what I have taken out of the draft bill, mainly because it was daft to include it in the first place. I trust our local authorities, our artists and creative Scotland to lead the way on culture provision in this country. Mr Chisholm talked about cultural entitlements, but what on earth are they? They were not included in the bill; they were covered in the guidance, because the previous Administration did not really know what the phrase meant. I trust local authorities to implement their community planning measures and to consider culture for everyone. I have no doubt that they will achieve that under their outcome agreements. Legislation is already in place that says that culture must be provided in local authority areas. We should remember that community planning is not just about local authorities; it involves health boards and all public bodies that have a locus in the provision of culture. Part of the problem has been that so many people have run around doing their own thing. Whenever there was a problem, the previous Administration simply set up another body or another scheme to deal with it. We are looking at what really happens on the ground, and we are handing over responsibility to those who know what they are talking about, and to those who implement measures and will deal with the Government in a mature way.

I thank the Ted Brocklebank for his broad welcome for my statement. Those who care about our country's culture and who recognise the importance of our arts and creative industry will welcome it. I guarantee that the bill that we will introduce will contain an absolute commitment that no artistic direction can be given to creative Scotland. It is fine for Mr Chisholm to say that artistic direction was never the previous Executive's intention but, if that is the case, why did the draft bill include a provision that would allow ministerial direction over creative Scotland? Such a provision does not make sense, so we will remove it—there will be no artistic direction from ministers and creative Scotland will be at arm's length. On the expo fund, Mr Brocklebank and I have had the argument before. Scotland-based artists will be the recipients of the fund and I have no doubt that the quality of work that will be  encouraged by the fund will be of international stature. I am sorry if Mr Brocklebank thinks that that could be a problem. On the Byre Theatre, I did not know that KT Tunstall started there. I have not managed to visit the Byre Theatre yet but I hope that, when I do, I will have a worthy escort in Mr Brocklebank. My view is that business sponsorship for the arts has been a hidden resource in this country for too long. Our big international companies and our small and medium-sized enterprises support the arts in their own communities. Loads of that goes on but we have never properly celebrated it. Arts & Business Scotland does great work in encouraging business to invest in the arts. We also need to recognise the economic benefits that come from the arts—the traffic is not just one way—so I feel strongly that such involvement must not only be celebrated more, but encouraged more, so creative Scotland will look at that issue as well. On broadcasting, I assure Mr Brocklebank that the Government will never give up its striving to ensure that Scotland gets a fair deal.

How ungracious that was, after starting so well. I was going to say that Iain Smith could accompany Ted Brocklebank and me to the theatre, but now I am not so sure. In six months, I have talked to stakeholders at great length and have taken advice from people in the know. I have made a statement that told members what we will do in the draft bill. It took eight years and umpteen working groups, commissions, task forces, debates and discussions for the previous Administration to come up with a draft culture bill. It is laughable to suggest after six months that we have failed. All members know that, until the spending revenue statement is made next week, I will make no announcement on finances. However, I assure Parliament that the Government will, as our manifesto made clear, publish firm and detailed plans for different aspects of culture. Mr Smith referred to significant improvements that were made under the previous Administration. If those improvements were so significant, why did it try to spoil them with its silly draft culture bill?

As Alasdair Allan and many others were, we were hugely disappointed that "Seachd" was not put forward for British Academy of Film and Television Arts award. Scottish Screen contributed financial input and advice to the  making of the film, and we all feel strongly that it was good enough for nomination. The Scottish Arts Council currently supports a great range of Gaelic arts organisations. I expect creative Scotland to continue and to build on those relationships across the art forms, which include the film and screen industries. I am confident that bringing together the expertise of the Scottish Arts Council and Scottish Screen will lead to a resurgence in the screen industries in Scotland. It is extremely important that Gaelic be part of that. The broadcasting commission's remit is primarily to do with television broadcasting, but film is also an aspect of its remit, as is drama and everything else. I hope that some of the commission's findings and recommendations can be agreed by the Government; it would then be up to the likes of creative Scotland to develop and offer input. The timing of all that could work out rather well. I think that we will see resurgence in recognition of our creativity in Scotland. Part of that will be on the wider stage, which reflects the importance of film and screen.

As I have said over and over again, I will not discuss funding until members have heard Mr Swinney's budget statement next week. I repeat again that we wish to have a mature relationship with local authorities and that they  wish to have a mature relationship with their Government. I have absolutely no doubt that local authorities will step up to the mark through their community planning partnerships to do the best for the people whom they represent. It is sad that others in the chamber do not have the same trust.

As I said earlier, our national performing companies are achieving the highest standards, both at home and internationally. We should be extremely proud of them. Creative Scotland will work in partnership with a range of expert and interested bodies at national and local levels to develop, support and promote excellence in arts and culture. One such way will be through the Government's international fund and another will be through our expo fund, of which I will bring details to Parliament fairly soon.

In relation to cultural entitlements, it was clear from the responses to the consultation on the previous Administration's  draft bill that people thought that the inclusive solutions that were proposed for widening cultural participation at local level were sound and could succeed. However, it was also noticeable that consultees were unclear about the use of the term "entitlements". I, too, am unclear about what the previous Administration meant by it. Rather than deal with it in the draft bill, it dealt with it in the guidance. What was the concept about? Was it about a set of enforceable rights or did it simply express an expectation that local authorities would make certain things available? I do not know what the previous Administration meant. I intend to promote the people-centred approach to developing much more inclusive cultural opportunities. That approach has been endorsed by the findings that are beginning to emerge from the 13 access projects that local authorities are delivering. I want to clear up the confusion surrounding the use of the term "entitlements". They are opportunities to take part in cultural activities that are informed by the communities to which they will be provided. That is what is important. We cannot go imposing culture on people all over the country; people must come and say what they want. The First Minister set up the Scottish Broadcasting Commission to carry out, on behalf of the Government and of ministers, an investigation into broadcasting and to come up with recommendations, which will be considered by ministers. I do not understand the confusion about the creation of creative Scotland and when it will be up and running. I imagine that the interim board of creative Scotland will give evidence to the commission. The commission will talk to the Scottish Arts Council and Scottish Screen. If the Government thinks that there are recommendations that should be taken forward, it may well be that creative Scotland will have a locus in that regard. That is perfectly straightforward and logical, so I do not see what the issue is.

We believe that we should celebrate St Andrew's day and that it should be a public holiday, but it is up to employers and others to encourage staff to celebrate it. We will fight for that all the way because it is what we want people to do. St Andrew's day this year will start off our winter festival, which will run throughout our wonderful hogmanay celebrations and the new year celebrations that are held in January in the Highlands and in Shetland, and which will end with Burns night. Our winter festival has already been greeted with great enthusiasm. People have e-mailed me to ask whether activities that they already do can be part of it. For the benefit of Scotland, everyone should get behind the winter festival idea and St Andrews day. Let us kick off a really good series of events over the winter. Heritage and culture are part of the same thing—they are part of our national identity. We should all work together to ensure that the national companies, the national collections and the heritage and environment organisations work together to widen access to that culture. We have something fantastic in this country and we must bring it together and celebrate it. On RCAHMS, as I have said in answers to written questions, we are looking at the whole landscape of public bodies. Michael Matheson referred to that in his question. We are considering what solution is best for Scotland. I will look at RCAHMS and Historic Scotland in that context and in relation to other such bodies.

Of course, the Edinburgh festivals are crucial to attracting visitors and showcasing Scottish talent on the international stage. On encouraging the Edinburgh International Festival to do more showcasing of Scottish talent, that is a decision for the festival organisation. However, I feel strongly that if there is a Government commitment behind our artists, if we give them their head and let them create and if we say that we will help them because we want them to be able to celebrate their art and show it around  the world, we will automatically retain our own artists and attract talented people to Scotland and retain them. By doing that, our international showcases will not just think that they should showcase Scottish art but will actually want to do that. It would become a given that our artists would be showcased as being among the best in the world.

Obviously, contemporary music is a huge creative industry that brings immense economic and creative benefits to Scotland. Creative Scotland will have a role with the creative industries—we have always made that plain. I am discussing with Scottish Enterprise and creative Scotland's interim board and officers how best to meet the needs of the creative industries. I am also meeting with umbrella groups from different sectors of the creative industries to discuss that issue. It is not for me to impose how that work will be done; it is for me to learn from people in the field and for those who have experience to say how they think their needs can best be served. We will look at that. However, we have always said that creative Scotland will have a remit with the creative industries.

It seems to me that Malcolm Chisholm has done my job for me, so I can just talk about what I want. It was clear from the debate that some members well appreciate how important the connections are between the quality of life in our beautiful country and the natural and cultural resources that we enjoy. It was also plain that some members have a great love for their own part of the country: Nanette Milne for the north-east, Roseanna Cunningham for Perthshire, Jeremy Purvis for the Borders and Jim Hume for the south-east of Scotland. Helen Eadie, too, never wastes an opportunity to tell us how much she loves Fife—including the bridges—so I thank her for that.

That was very quick.

I would have thought that Johann Lamont would rise to the occasion, but sadly I was wrong. Des McNulty's speech included wonderful artistic examples of mankind, nature and society. Most of the speech was very much in the spirit of the debate that we proposed, but his amendment did not reflect that. Next, we come to Mike Rumbles's amendment. We are, currently, in the legal reality of the UK—we accept that, which is why we are accepting the amendment. However, as internationalists in both politics and the arts—Mr Brocklebank will be pleased to know that—we recognise that when Scotland is no longer in the UK, we will still have some common heritage that can be celebrated with the rest of it. We are a privileged people indeed. As the motion suggests, we are especially enriched in Scotland by the wonderful works of art—music, literature, painting, film, dance and every other art form—through which talented men and women across the centuries have sought to interpret for themselves and for us the reaction, emotion and sheer amazement that Scotland's scenery and environment have inspired in them. Peter Peacock said that the motion states the obvious; in that case, I have to ask why so many of his colleagues misunderstood it. It was wrong to suggest, even for a minute, that the motion does not reflect urban Scotland, when it names people such as Alasdair Gray. Chris Harvie spoke about Alasdair Gray's wonderful work in Glasgow where, after the city's decline as a big industrial city, he led a revival of writing. The motion also mentions Andy Scott, who has put urban art all over the place. Cathy Jamieson and Roseanna Cunningham have a particular interest in public art. The Scottish Arts Council is exploring how to maximise the value to community life of public art works, which are a tangible expression of identity and belonging. Scotland's urban places are remarkable, too. They are cityscapes with their own beauty, grandeur and world-renowned centres of creativity. Artists have always played an important part in reconnecting people with their environment, giving us a sense of place and identity. Roseanna Cunningham understood that very well.  It has been said that it is a bit invidious to single out certain individuals as we do in the motion. However, the motion is an expression of celebration and profound pride in the people that it names and the many others whom they represent. The motion mentions the creative legacy that influences how we relate to the landscape today. The landscape of Scotland bears the marks of every generation, as shown by its sites, its buildings and its impressive evidence of prehistory in the form of earthworks and standing stones. We are celebrating something vital that all places—unspoiled countryside, which many members mentioned, or the gritty urban landscapes of Peter Howson and film-maker Peter Mullan—have in common; I refer to the communities that inhabit them. Rob Gibson, Ted Brocklebank and Bill Wilson all talked about how Scotland as a land is uniquely shaped. Rob Gibson also said that there was little time to debate in great detail what we would be doing. I ask everyone in the chamber to take what we are doing today as a start. It is a celebration of creativity and of our people and our land—the wonderful environment that surrounds us. Let us rise to the occasion and say that the motion is pretty good. Let us celebrate it and pass it today.

It is very good.

Are you that old?

The Scottish Government is continuing its consideration of its international activities. We have already published a paper on our approach to international development, views on which are being sought by the end of this month. We have published the Scottish Government's current European Union priorities and we will consult on how our new European strategy should look. Last week, Jim Mather and I chaired the China consultation group, which is a high-level group that is helping us to think about how to approach our engagement with China. We will use that same consultative approach to consider how the Scottish Government approaches its international activity across the piece. That will enable us to publish a new international strategic framework early in the new year.

As we have announced many times, the Scottish Government is committed to increasing the international development budget to £9 million in this parliamentary session. The exact profile of that budget is dependent on the outcomes of the forthcoming spending review. The paper has been placed on the website and I am looking for responses from those in the field on how we can best expend moneys to achieve the best possible outcomes in the developing countries that require that money.

I have met so many people in the field that I may miss some of them out, so please excuse me if I do. I have met the encompassing umbrella group—the Network of International Development Organisations in Scotland—to which most Scottish aid agencies belong. I have also met the various groups that deal with our special relationship with Malawi. In addition, I have met individual non-governmental organisations, including the Mercy Corps, Oxfam, the Scottish Catholic International Aid Fund and Scottish International Relief. It was plain from the discussion at my main meeting with NIDOS, before we put our short paper on the web asking for ideas, that this is the correct time to re-examine the international development policy, which was unanimously agreed in Parliament with the previous Administration, and to assess it to see where we go from here. Once I get the responses back from the many people whom I am sure will respond, we will be able to have a consensual approach on how to go forward. Everyone in the field wants the same: the best possible outcomes for those who need our assistance.

Funding for culture is currently being considered as part of the strategic spending review 2007. We will announce the outcome in late autumn 2007 when spending plans will be set for the next three years.

Why am I not surprised by that question from Mr Purvis? I know that he and others who represent the same area are hugely  keen that Abbotsford is given the credit that they believe it deserves. I also think that practically any member could ask the Government to commit to preserving something in their area. Would it not be wonderful if that could happen? I have spoken to Jeremy Purvis about Abbotsford, and I have received some information. However, I have not had a formal approach for a meeting from the board of trustees. I am happy to learn at any time of an initiative that is part of Scotland's heritage and culture, and I look forward to hearing more about it.

As I said, we await the outcome of the spending review, and I will make an announcement then.

Through Historic Scotland, we already protect a number of key historic sites in the guardianship of the Scottish ministers—Skara Brae and Lochranza castle in Arran to name but two. Historic Scotland also works with many partners, including local authorities and local community groups, to identify threatened coastal sites and to support survey and excavation where the sites' physical protection in situ cannot be achieved. Historic Scotland has recently commissioned the Scottish Coastal Archaeology and the Problem of Erosion Trust—SCAPE—which is based at the University of St Andrews, to provide a summary of the current state of knowledge on coastal erosion and historic sites in Scotland. Members may remember that John Swinney hosted SCAPE and its exhibition in Parliament recently. The study will help to ensure that we have the information that we need to understand and manage coastal sites and to help us target available resources most appropriately.

Obviously, climate change worries us very much in relation to our heritage and coastal sites in particular. The First Minister has announced that there will be a climate change bill. It is up to the appropriate cabinet secretaries to talk to members about that; I am sure that they are already in discussion with Ms Boyack about her proposed member's bill.

I would have to know about the Wemyss caves, given that Tricia Marwick and Ted Brocklebank raise them with me regularly. That important archaeological site is protected by coastal defences that were erected by Fife Council. I was interested to find out that the results of recent excavations and recordings done by "Time Team" will soon be published, and I am interested to learn more. I will ask Historic Scotland to give me much more information about the Wemyss caves, and yesterday I pledged to Mr Brocklebank that I would visit them.

There certainly is an issue. Historic Scotland maintains sea defences at a number of properties that are open to the public— Skara Brae in Orkney and Jarlshof in Shetland are good examples. Those defences will work for several decades at least, but in the very long term, and if climate change predictions are correct, hard decisions will have to be made about the increasing costs of continued defence in comparison with the costs of the other options of relocation or abandonment. Part of Historic Scotland's work is archaeological, involving not just digging, but photographing and archiving. It does a lot of work in that area. Although the newspapers reported that SCAPE's overview study was complete, it is at draft stage. We expect the final version by the end of October. It will provide a basis on which to move forward.

There is much that I could say in response to the question, but I assure you, Presiding Officer, that I shall be brief. There are three major institutions with which it is essential that Scotland engages. The first is the European Commission, given the number of its proposals that have a direct impact on Scottish interests. I am pleased to say that, since coming into office, Scottish Government ministers have had bilateral meetings with six EU commissioners who are responsible for policies of key interest to Scotland. The First Minister has met five of them. The second institution is the European Parliament. Scotland is lucky to have a cross-party team of MEPs who work well together in the interests of Scotland. We must increase engagement with them, as well as with committee chairs and rapporteurs, who are important, too. The third institution is the Council, with which our interaction is different because of the current constitutional arrangements with the United Kingdom Government, which negotiates on behalf of the entire UK. We have already set out our desire to take the UK lead on fisheries negotiations. Richard Lochhead has this week sent the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs a plan of how we expect the negotiations in December to be handled.

I was down at the joint ministerial committee on Europe the other day, where I found its new chair, David Miliband, and the other ministers to be constructive. I was particularly pleased that the committee accepted and agreed to consider a submission on Scotland's position in relation to fisheries from Professor Sir Neil McCormick. However, I hope that the committee will be much more constructive in the future and will realise that Scotland should lead negotiations on the fisheries industry, for example, which affects Scotland much more than any other part of the UK.

I told the European and External Relations Committee about the portfolio interests that we will track in Europe. The difference between the SNP Government and the previous Government is that we will have a much more political and proactive approach to Europe, because Scotland's place in Europe and its place in the world are of paramount importance to us. There are issues on which Scotland should be leading in Europe. We expect Scotland to do so and will lobby for that. It is in no doubt that the Government will always act in Scotland's best interests, which will come first. In that context, there are many things that we will have to push a bit more, because there has been no such push before.

I am delighted to report that I have accepted an invitation to attend the official opening of this year's Royal National Mod.

The first meeting of the commission has been arranged for the end of October. Obviously, it is not for ministers to decide the commission's agenda, but it is likely that at its first meeting, it will consider the draft remit for and scope of its work, as well as how it intends to approach its assignment.

I will respond to the questions that I can remember.  I am glad that Mr Whitton was as outraged as I was by comments that Mark Thompson made earlier this year. However, Mark Thompson's announcement of a potential rise in network broadcasting and commissioning is super. It shows that we were right to set up the Scottish Broadcasting Commission. In the light of what the BBC has said and STV's news programme announcement, we have given a push to broadcasting in Scotland. The member talked about "Waterloo Road" being made in Manchester. I am sure that the Scottish Broadcasting Commission, with its breadth of experience, will look at that scenario, to ensure that what is called Scottish commissioning is Scottish commissioning. The commission's focus is on how the broadcasting industries in Scotland can be more successful. I am glad that a commission has been set up to investigate a hugely important creative industry. Everyone should welcome that, and I look forward to the commission's findings.

I make it plain that we have handed over no money—let alone £500,000—to the Scottish Broadcasting Commission. There is a provisional allocation to support the work of the new commission. That allocation is based on the funding for the previous Administration's Cultural Commission, which cost a bit more than £500,000. The money has not been handed over and the commission has not yet held its first meeting. It is for the commission to determine its remit and how it will go about its work; it is not for ministers to direct that. Part of the first meeting will be given over to a discussion of costs and how the commission will take evidence. As the responsible minister, I will then consider what the commission has decided. That is how the commission will be funded. The daily rate for Blair Jenkins's pay is based on the pay of the chair of the previous Administration's Cultural Commission.

As a minister of the Scottish Government, it is a great pleasure for me to lead the debate in our Parliament. Some members will point to the fact that the Scotland Act 1998 prevents this Government from directly participating in the international discussions that are under way on the draft European Union reform treaty. Our clear view is that, for all the influencing that we can do—and, in fact, do—through the United Kingdom Government, Scotland would be best able to represent its interests as an independent member state of the European Union.

No. The devolution settlement demands that the Scottish Government and Scottish Parliament be closely involved in a huge range of European issues. Much of the legislation that the Scottish Parliament deals with starts in Brussels, and decisions that are made at the European level affect the lives of everyone who lives in Scotland. Members who were at yesterday's European and External Relations Committee meeting know first hand the variety and detail of this Government's EU priorities. Those priorities and our engagement with the EU in general reflect the fact that it yields great economic, social and cultural benefit to the people of Scotland. The international co-operation that it affords means that many of our priorities on the environment, the economy and energy will be delivered in partnership with it and its member states. However, anyone who followed the discussion at the committee yesterday will also know how difficult and divisive any treaty reform can be. Therefore, it is entirely right that the Parliament should consider and form views on the structure and processes of the European Union. Although we may not always like every outcome of the EU's activities, this Government will be a reliable, consistent and competent partner on the European stage. Members will be aware that the First Minister and I visited Brussels in the first 100 days of this Government to start building the contacts that will allow us to raise Scotland's voice in Europe. I will mention some facts about the draft EU reform treaty. First, the timescales and process  that emerged from the European Council in June were clear but demanding. The intergovernmental conference has been tasked with producing a text for agreement in mid-October, with formal sign-off at the European Council in December. The mandate to which the IGC is working means that much of what will be in the reform treaty text that emerges is already decided. Equally important, much is still up for grabs. I would not take seriously the claims of anyone who thinks that they can predict how all the discussions will go, but it is right that this Government is clear about what it can and cannot accept. It is worth saying what is good about the treaty that is likely to emerge. Negotiating a document among 27 partners with a wide range of interests will never be easy going, but the treaty is an important contribution—indeed, it is the only one on the table—to helping an enlarged EU do some of its business better. We should all welcome steps towards improving the efficiency and transparency of the governance of the EU. Some members are, of course, sceptical of the European Union. I am sure that they will welcome the clarity that the reform treaty brings to the voluntary nature of membership of the EU. It seems likely that the treaty will include a provision that asserts the right of any member state to withdraw from the union. There is no irrevocable transfer of powers to the union. At the European and External Relations Committee yesterday, Margo MacDonald asked about passerelle clauses, and I will answer her question now. Some passerelle clauses exist in the current treaties. New ones in the reform treaty would extend the use of procedures that allow decisions that currently require unanimity to be taken by majority voting. Some people have raised concerns about those clauses, which would allow simplified treaty revision without an intergovernmental conference—I understand that those provisions are what Ms MacDonald referred to yesterday as "the ratchet clause". I understand those concerns, but the fact that any such change requires the agreement of all the member states and that, in the most significant cases, a single national Parliament is allowed to block such a move means that there is comfort that such flexibility will not be misused. That in-built veto on the loss of a veto is a decision that the UK should accept but, of course, I would be more comfortable if we, like many small independent countries, were at the top table considering directly whether that was the correct thing to do.

It is a veto on a veto that Scotland will not have. We should have it; we should be up there with all the other small independent countries that will have that right if the treaty goes through. As it is a reform treaty and not a constitution, we should welcome the clear delineation of competences. However, this Government profoundly opposes where things have got to with the common fisheries policy. The identification of conservation of marine biological resources as an exclusive competence of the EU is a measure to which we continue to object. It puts the objectionable common fisheries policy directly into the treaty base for the first time and would make it all the harder to retreat from that policy, as we wish to. My party made its opposition clear when the issue was discussed during the drawing up of the previous treaty, and this Government will continue to make the case for reform of the common fisheries policy and for returning competence over the conservation of marine biological resources to coastal states. Had we been at the negotiating table directly, we could have made clear to all concerned the depth of our opposition.

We are also not happy with some of the institutional effects that will probably emerge from the treaty. As a result of the enlargement process, the UK Government is preparing once again to reduce the number of members of the European Parliament who represent Scotland. We have made our opposition to that clear, but the solution is also clear: an independent Scotland would have twice the number of MEPs that it currently has. In the short term, we think that there is a strong case for looking again at the UK legislation that provides that Scotland will have only 6 MEPs from 2009.

One area that is up for grabs at the IGC and on which we are working closely with the UK Government is the framework for justice and home affairs policy. We supported the UK line at the European Council in June and are working with the UK Government to continue to ensure that the UK negotiating position at the IGC takes full account of our interests in defending the unique justice and legal systems in Scotland. On many of the issues currently under consideration, the challenge to us following any ratification will be to ensure that the UK Government implements the treaty framework in a  way that allows Scottish interests to be reflected properly. The same is true of this Parliament and its Westminster equivalent in relation to the new subsidiarity proposals. I hope that this Parliament will be able to build a constructive relationship with Westminster to ensure that Scotland's voice is present in the operation of the new mechanism. In conclusion, I hope that members share my view that this Government and this Parliament should continue to take a close interest in developments at the IGC and beyond, but I reiterate that any deal that entrenches the common fisheries policy would be something that this Government would oppose clearly and vocally.

The Scottish Government core funds the Scottish Library and Information Council with £220,000 in 2007-08 and is funding a new public library quality improvement matrix with £500,000 a year in 2006-07 and 2007-08. The matrix is designed to be used by local authorities as a self-evaluation tool, encouraging continuous improvement in public library services.

It is, of course, up to local authorities to take legal advice when they are deciding on the arrangements for the management and delivery of local libraries, museums and galleries. The precise nature of the contracting-out arrangements might well be a material factor in that. In our view, there is no legal bar to a local authority contracting out museum and gallery provision. However, there is an area of doubt over local libraries. Irrespective of any management structure, the Government would expect all library services to be evaluated using the public library quality improvement matrix.

As the member will know, the on-going two-year programme has had some success. Obviously, all such matters will be evaluated as part of our wider cultural agenda.

The Scottish Government meets regularly with a wide variety of interested parties to progress its priorities for culture. For example, in the last 10 days, I have had meetings with, among others, representatives from the Scottish Arts Council, the Saltire Society, Bòrd na Gàidhlig and the Historic Environment Advisory Council for Scotland.

There has been concern for some years about the consistency of the approach that has been taken to the funding of many such projects. I am unaware of the particular projects to which Mr Martin refers but I would be interested to know more. Of course, until I know how they are funded—whether it is via the lottery, the local authority or various other pots of money—I am unable to speak further about them.

Mr Scott is obviously talking about the Scottish National Party policy that was decided on at our national council meeting in June, which called for the St Ninian's Isle treasure to be returned to Shetland. As Mr Scott knows, we have a hands-off approach to our cultural bodies, national  collections and national companies, which is how it should be. I understand that Mr Scott recently met the director of the museum to discuss such issues.

In answer to the first part of Mr Chisholm's question, I confirm that our agenda for widening access to culture and the arts incorporates particular types of projects in areas of disadvantage. I have read with sympathy the letter from the north Edinburgh arts centre. It is always difficult for local groups. However, as I said to Paul Martin, until I know all the details about how a group has operated and about the funding package that is in place, I am unable to answer in detail. I have passed the letter on so that more information can come back to me. Nonetheless, I reiterate the fact that local authorities and the Scottish Arts Council do not work under the artistic direction of the Scottish Government.

Mr Brocklebank is right to talk about the exciting work that is done by the RSNO. I thoroughly enjoyed the orchestra's final concert at this year's festival and I am looking forward to the next one, which will feature one of my favourite pieces, the Firebird suite. We are absolutely committed to ensuring that the national companies—which came into the Government's remit, rather than that of the Scottish Arts Council, earlier this year—are supported for the promotion of their arts both within Scotland and overseas. As Mr Brocklebank knows, we are currently awaiting the Westminster  settlement, which will allow us to formulate our spending plans for the next three years. When we have that settlement, I will have no hesitation in returning to Parliament to detail all such issues.

We are committed to making more of our national day and we are currently working with local authorities and other partners to develop a programme of events. I will make a full announcement as soon as plans are confirmed. We are excited about the plans that are being formulated by our six cities and far beyond.

I am happy to agree that we have a hugely talented people here in Scotland—it is wonderful. We are organising events in Brussels, for example, where arrangements are being made in a partnership between the Scottish Government's European Union office and Scotland Europa. We very much want to mark St Andrew's day in Brussels. Some of the plans are still being worked up, but we have confirmed two literary events in the Scottish writers series. There will also be the annual Scotland house St Andrew's day lecture, which this year will be given by Richard Holloway, and a St Andrew's day concert featuring Scots and Gaelic song with pipes and fiddles. That addresses the part of Mr Gibson's question about music. Other international events include the Caledonian Society of Beijing's St Andrew's day ball, which will be attended by the head of Scottish affairs in China. Our Scottish affairs office in Washington is planning a St Andrew's day reception, and various other St Andrew's day events right across the globe have been planned. At the moment, we know of 58 events in 55 countries, and that figure will increase over the next few months as events are confirmed.

Yes. The Scottish Government continues to contribute to UK negotiating lines at the intergovernmental conference on the European Union reform treaty. I attended the joint ministerial committee on Europe ahead of the European Council, and the First Minister has written to the Foreign Secretary to make clear our constructive approach to developing UK negotiating lines and to set out issues of particular interest to us.

Although it is only proper that we respect the confidentiality of on-going international negotiations, and although members should be aware that the intergovernmental conference has a limited scope, I should make it clear that, given Scotland's very distinct legal and judicial system, we have a particular interest in the operation of the UK's justice and home affairs opt-in protocol and emergency brake procedure. We agree with the UK on other elements of the treaty, but we cannot under any circumstances agree to so-called redline issues such as the inclusion of the conservation of marine biological resources under the common fisheries policy. Changes are being made to the text of the treaty, and the time to reach a considered judgment on the question whether a referendum is the right way to go will be when we get the full text back. We expect to get the text in October, and we are looking forward to seeing it.

As we all know, tartan day represents an excellent promotional opportunity for Scotland in our most important market. The Scottish Government is currently considering its involvement in the event to maximise its obvious potential.

We are aware of, and have closely studied, the research that Mr Brocklebank mentioned. Indeed, that is why we are reviewing our position on tartan day—or, rather, on tartan week, because the celebrations have been marked by a week of events. The First Minister has already made it clear that this Government will be the most outward-looking that Scotland has ever had, and we consider tartan week to be a very important promotional tool for raising Scotland's profile in the wider world. We are absolutely determined to put in place a strategy to address the report's criticisms about cohesion, planning and follow-up mechanisms. I know that Mr Brocklebank's colleagues expressed concern that not enough emphasis was being given to the event's business and promotional elements, and we are discussing that matter with Scottish Development International. However, the event also has a cultural side, and we must try to find a way of merging all those elements to Scotland's benefit. We are working hard on the matter. Tartan week does indeed form part of the wider diaspora policy that we are considering.

I am happy to commend Angus Council's work on that. I remember Andrew Welsh's members' business debate on the issue, during which many members were fascinated to learn about the work that the council has done to create friendship links. We also heard about the number of people who have been attracted to the area because of the council's outward work. Many of the people who are involved in tartan week are not part of the Government and are not publicly funded and they, too, should be commended for the links that they are trying to make.  One criticism that has come back to us about previous tartan day and tartan week events is that they have been very New York-centric. Part of our strategy is to look beyond New York to see how Scotland's business and cultural interests could be best served. Once that strategy is properly formulated, we will let the Parliament know about it.

The Scottish Government is considering how we can make tartan week, Scotland week and Scotland's engagement in the US and North America generally so much better. I cannot talk about particular personnel issues, but I will let members know fairly soon what will happen in the office in Washington.

I value all strands of our promotional work in the US. Scottish Development International is involved in the business aspect and I am confident that Jim Mather, as the relevant minister, and SDI, will be interested in the member's comments.

Historic Scotland is in frequent discussion on our behalf with many people, including local authorities, private owners and international experts, about the preservation of Scotland's Roman heritage.

I understand completely the issues that exist in Roseanna Cunningham's constituency. Unlike the continuous Antonine wall, the Roman installations along the Gask ridge consist of a series of individual sites, so it was decided at the time of application for world heritage status that they should not be included in the bid. I understand that the bid cannot now be reopened and will therefore go to the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization as being for the Antonine wall. We should find out the result of the bid next year. There is no reason whatsoever why a further application cannot be made to UNESCO in relation to another site. The Antonine wall is part of Roman heritage across Europe, so why should Ardoch and Gask not be included in future? The private owner of Ardoch fort wishes to maintain it in private ownership and is working with Historic Scotland. Elements of Roman heritage are either in state care or designated as scheduled monuments, in the case of the best preserved ones. We are talking about part of the international frontier of the Roman empire. I know that there is a strong campaign relating to Ardoch fort and the Gask ridge, and that it will continue.

I am very aware of the Antonine Guard and I have the pictures, in which I look quite nice. I am aware of the work that the people in the Antonine Guard do. The depth of their research is fascinating and amazing, and the passion with  which they campaign for their ideal of having the site recognised and maintained is very much to be respected. I have heard talk of the Roman heritage centre but I have not received a detailed submission.

Presiding Officer—

I am sorry, Presiding Officer. I was anxious to answer the question.  The Scottish Government is undertaking a wide variety of actions to support the arts and culture in Scotland. In the coming months, I plan to make further announcements that will make clear our commitment to supporting excellence in, and widening access to, the arts and culture. Our future cultural policy framework will affirm the place of culture in Scotland and acknowledge the important role that the varied cultural and creative practitioners play.

The creative industries are a real success story in Scotland and a significant and growing part of our economy. The Scottish Government is determined to play its role in creating the conditions for the sector to continue to flourish. Members may be interested to know that, earlier this week in the Parliament, the National Endowment for Science, Technology and the Arts held a joint meeting with the Parliament's futures forum. There are powerful lessons to be learned from the delegates and the summing up of what happened at the conference. In particular, I want to consider the need for the different arms of government to work closely together and for funding mechanisms to be capable of responding much more quickly and flexibly to the creative industries' needs.

I have been impressed by what I have seen of the work that all the agencies that have been involved have put into the year of Highland of culture. From what Highland Council and those who have been closely involved with all the events that have taken place—some of which ministers have been fortunate enough to attend—have said, there will be a lot of discussion about  how we can capitalise on a very good year for culture in the Highlands.

Many wonderful Scottish artists of all descriptions would be disturbed to learn that the Conservative party's arts and culture spokesperson thinks that their work is parochial.

I am aware of the many issues that smaller museums throughout the country face and know that the Scottish Museums Council is active in dealing with them. I would be happy to meet Rhona Brankin to discuss specific issues relating to the mining museum in her constituency, just as I have met members with a particular interest in Scotland's Museum of Lead Mining in Wanlockhead.

Scotland's relationship with Northern Ireland is already good. It is the Government's intention to strengthen and develop our links for mutual benefit and common interest.

Senior officials in Scotland and Northern Ireland have been asked to draw up proposals for developing our co-operation as a matter of priority. On the basis of our discussions and the terms of our agreement, we will work together to raise awareness of each other's history and culture and to encourage education programmes that build on existing links between our universities and colleges. We will collaborate on tourism through the tourism group of the British-Irish Council. Renewable energy and its effects on the environment are of interest to us all. We also want to strengthen co-operation between the devolved Administrations. We have agreed that we will review progress in all those areas by the end of the year.

I intend to meet representatives from BBC Scotland and SMG in the near future.

The full details of what I intend to discuss at those meetings have not been finalised, but I will be pleased to raise those issues, which would be raised anyway, and any others that members would like to raise. On the first part of the question, I am aware that the Office of Communications report showed that Scotland's contribution to the UK network originations has fallen by half over the past three years both by value and volume. I am concerned about that, so I will certainly raise the issue as well as pointing out the importance of the dedicated channel for Gaelic.

I thank my colleague Andrew Welsh for lodging the motion. He made a passionate speech on an issue that he strongly supports in his Angus constituency and in the United States, as everyone knows. He was part of Parliament's delegation to the 2006 celebrations and I have heard from many quarters that his speech at the University of Wisconsin's centre for Celtic studies was excellent and well received. Parliament has rightly supported tartan week since its earliest years, because—apart from  anything else—the US remains an important overseas market for us. The US is important for trade, investment and tourism and the country sends more overseas students to our universities than does any country except China. We also have a range of cultural links with the US, from the modern-day actors who are big stars stateside, like Alan Cumming, to the earliest Scots who left this land to settle in the new world, for whatever reason. John Farquhar Munro talked about the Scots who left our shores, from the explorers and pioneers to the people who had no choice but to leave. Such cultural links are not necessarily to do with the performing arts but are about identity and show us exactly who we are. Members talked about the contribution of Scots to the American declaration of independence, which was signed by descendants of Scots and inspired by the ambitions that were set out in the declaration of Arbroath. Students of the Scottish enlightenment tell us that the US electoral college, which elects US presidents, was devised by David Hume, whose grave is only a few hundred yards from this chamber. John Paul Jones, the founder of the US navy, was also a Scot. I could mention many others. People in Scotland have had a long and mostly harmonious relationship with people in America. We should foster and enhance that relationship. Tartan week offers an opportunity to put Scotland on the map in the US and in Canada. This Government will make the most of that opportunity and any others that we find. The First Minister has made it clear in Parliament that his Government will be the most outward-looking one that Scotland has had. Tartan week offers us an opportunity to make progress in that regard. As Patricia Ferguson said, tartan week has had a chequered history and has not always attracted positive comments. We have come to a natural hiatus; Grand central station will not be available in 2008, so we have an opportunity to sit back and think about what we want to do with tartan week in the future. For good reasons, the focus of the previous Administration's activities was, predominantly, New York. Perhaps that was the best approach while the event was being built, but perhaps we should now look at other areas that are equally important to us. Boston and California spring to mind, and Canada, where the origins of tartan day lie—we have heard about that—offers big opportunities to increase our profile. Doing so could pay high dividends.

We are open to ideas about tartan week because we want to include Parliament in the process. I urge members please to get in touch with me if they have ideas. I was particularly interested in Bashir Ahmad's maiden speech—well done to him. As he said, tartan day is an example that shows what it means to be Scottish. All strands of society and people throughout our nation should be involved in it because it can be seen as representing our Scotland, our own tartan land, in which cultures are interwoven to make a fine pattern. Andrew Welsh and other members talked about celebrating tartan day throughout Scotland, but perhaps we should also look outward. The Government is working with several Scottish organisations that are organising events to celebrate the 60 th anniversary of India's independence and the founding of Pakistan. That is interesting. Those events will celebrate links between Scotland and India and Pakistan. For those who are interested in that work, we will soon publish details of it on the Government's website. Last year, more events than ever in New York showcased Scottish literature, theatre, music, history and design, but we want to work to make its celebrations better. It is a grand triumph, for example, that the National Theatre of Scotland will tour America with "Black Watch" and "The Wolves in the Walls". John Farquhar Munro said that we should move beyond the performing arts. I am interested in that idea. I love the idea of an event that is centred on shinty and shipbuilding. That could work well. An independent evaluation of tartan week is being finalised. The report will go into the mix in order to help us to make the right decisions. Andrew Welsh's motion recognises the work of Parliament, the Government and Angus Council in establishing tartan day. I want that successful work to continue. It is much more likely that a united Scotland approach to the United States will be more successful than a disjointed approach. I commend Angus Council for its work in establishing its own tartan day events, of which there are many—indeed, I was amazed by the number of them. I also commend it for its vision for 2020, which is an inspiration to other local authorities. I applaud its long view through to the 700 th anniversary of the declaration of Arbroath. We should recognise the Scottish diaspora's hugely important contribution to establishing tartan  day—people who have left our shores have been mentioned. In the many countries in which tartan day is commemorated—Australia and New Zealand are another two such countries—Scots and people of Scottish descent have voluntarily used 6 April to celebrate their ancestry and this country's contribution to their new homelands. Without them, this country would be culturally and spiritually poorer. It is often said that our people are our greatest asset, but it could also be said that our overseas people are potentially our greatest asset. We must engage more with them and provide them with a reason to continue their efforts.  The debate has been useful and constructive, and again, I thank Andrew Welsh for securing it. I want our approach to tartan week in 2008 and beyond it to be useful and constructive, so I am working towards that.  Meeting closed at 17:49.

The Scottish Cabinet regularly discusses issues that relate to engagement with Europe and European Union aspects of Scottish Government policy. However, the Scottish ministers operate on the basis of collective responsibility and do not disclose details of their private deliberations or of what they will or will not discuss at Cabinet.

I do not know whether I managed to note all Mr Park's points, but I presume that he was referring from a Scottish Trades Union Congress perspective to the Lisbon agenda in particular. He will know that the previous session's European and External Relations Committee, of which I was the convener, took strong evidence from the STUC on that issue. There are contradictory views on whether business in Scotland is underregulated or overregulated. I hope that the new European and External Relations Committee and the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee will discuss the matter further. The Scottish ministers take the economy seriously and will, no doubt, discuss the issues that have been raised by Mr Park.

I confirm that the Scottish Government has been in discussion with the UK Government in advance of the European Council meeting of 21 and 22 June. Indeed, I represented the Scottish Government at the meeting of the joint ministerial committee on the European Union on 5 June, which was attended by UK Government ministers and ministers from the Northern Ireland Executive.

I do not have time to address all the issues that Mr Smith raised. I hope that when I meet the European and External Relations Committee, of which he is a member, we will be able to discuss the issues further. We can properly answer questions regarding what is happening with the constitution only when there is a text to refer to. We must wait and see how the German presidency proposes to take the issue forward, which I presume will be through the intergovernmental conference that Mr Smith mentioned. We are keen to see subsidiarity working properly, including within the UK. I encourage the Parliament to press the Westminster Parliament to share information fully in that regard. Members will have heard the First Minister talk earlier about the extension of EU competencies, particularly in the area of justice and home affairs. We will watch that closely, and we expect co-operation from the Westminster Government on that to ensure that Scotland's interests are taken fully into account.

An SNP Government will always put the interests of Scotland first, and an SNP Government will always take into account the views of the Parliament on such issues, through its committees and plenary chamber.

As I said, we can comment properly on such issues only when there is a text to comment on. However, it is clear from SNP policy that we will support referenda on constitutional issues. I am afraid that until we see the results of the current discussions and the intergovernmental conference that is likely to follow, we will not know whether there will be any constitutional reforms that require referenda.

We have always been clear about the importance of fisheries to Scotland and the Scottish economy. Indeed, fisheries was a red-line issue during the most recent discussions. We do not yet know what will come out of the European Council meeting, but I assure the member that we will always put first the interests of Scotland, her fishermen and her fisheries.

We plan to press for reactivation of the joint ministerial committee structure.

I thank my friend Hugh O'Donnell for telling me to keep a straight face—I will do that. I agree that the way in which the Westminster Government dealt with the Scottish Government recently was shambolic. I have every faith in the First Minister of Scotland to be smart enough not to allow that to happen to him.

I understand the value of Dumfries house. I have not yet seen a business plan that demonstrates that opening the house to the public would offer a significant economic benefit, but I do not want to prejudge the possibility of such a plan being developed.

All that I can do is repeat what I have already said—I have not yet seen a business plan that demonstrates that opening the house to the public would offer a significant economic benefit, but I do not want to prejudge the possibility of such a plan being developed.

Discussion about the potential sale of the property and its contents has been going on for some years. In 2004, the National Trust for Scotland made an offer, which was rejected.  Historic Scotland has a total grants budget of £12 million. The Government must be careful how it spends the money that is available for heritage. I can only reiterate that I have not yet seen a business plan that demonstrates that opening the house to the public would have a significant economic benefit. However, I will not prejudge the possibility of such a plan being developed.

I thank Andy Kerr for almost giving me notice of the question when he phoned me by mistake last week. Unfortunately, he did not tell me what his supplementary was going to be. I am considering an appropriate definition of "artists", which is needed for the operation of the proposed scheme.

Mr Kerr and I are thinking along the same lines. In an overall arts and culture policy, it is important to ensure both that emerging artists and those who are earning are treated well and appropriately, to ensure that their art is able to flourish, which is why I do not want to define quickly what we mean by "artists". I am considering the issue carefully and I am taking advice on it. I am looking closely at the Irish artists exemption model and at how other countries define "artists". The report of the Cultural Commission in 2005 showed clearly that a number of definitions and models are employed. So that no one is disadvantaged and that we do our best to boost the arts in this country, I intend to take advice and to make decisions once we have all the advice that is necessary.

Scottish ministers have already met informally a number of diplomatic and official representatives of European Union member states. Officials frequently discuss issues of mutual interest with consular and embassy officials from countries in the European Union.

People are aware of the issues to which the member refers, as they are raised fairly regularly. I would be glad to meet Mr McAveety to learn of the direct experience of the area that he represents.

I found it unfortunate that when ministers in a previous Administration answered questions to which they were not entirely sure of the answer they instantly resorted to political attacks. I will not do that. I do not know enough about the situation to which the member has referred to be able to give her a definitive answer. However, I assure her that she will have that answer from me very quickly in writing.

The Scottish Government opposes any reduction in the number of MEPs representing Scotland. The distinctive political and legal circumstances in which those MEPs work is an issue that we will raise in contacts with the Electoral Commission and the United Kingdom Government.

Angela Constance is quite right. The fact that Scotland's MEPs operate within very particular circumstances, many of which are to do with the country's separate political and legal systems, merits the UK Government considering whether the current legislation is appropriate. The Scottish Government will make those points in its response to the Electoral Commission and in separate representations to the Secretary of State for Justice.

It is always a pleasure to follow a temperate Johann Lamont. She is one of the few members who makes Kenny Gibson look temperate at times. We welcomed this debate and decided to address the terms of the Conservative motion, which is what we have done. We have looked at the overall position of Scotland in the sporting field and at how Scotland could be the best. We support the first part of the motion, which wishes the British team every success in the Beijing Olympics, but we do not believe that it is in the best interests of Scotland or Scottish sport for our sportspeople to be part of a GB team beyond then. There is a strong case for revitalising, inspiring and invigorating Scottish sport from the grass roots up by giving a sense—which we had in the Commonwealth games—that the participants are  competing for Scotland. That is not, however, to put down Scots athletes who take part in the British team.

There is an element of that, but the fact is that it is national teams that enter the Olympic games. If we want to do the best for our sporting stars, that is what we must address. Criticisms of the SNP's position have been more about diverting attention away from a worrying issue that the Liberal Democrats as well as the SNP have addressed—the loss of lottery funding. Stewart Maxwell addressed the matter directly. There are huge concerns about the amount of lottery money that is being used to support the staging of the 2012 games. Nicol Stephen outlined some of the figures. There has been a rise in projected costs of more than £5 billion, and £675 million is to be contributed from the national lottery, in addition to the £400 million that has already been taken from the Big Lottery Fund. There is no doubt that the few sports facilities that we have, along with some of our lottery projects, will be hammered by that. Labour members should wake up and smell the coffee—that is happening; it is not in doubt. That is what has been said at Westminster and here. Frank McAveety spoke about desperate negativism. What we are hearing from the Labour benches is desperate denial of what is going on. However, the Scottish people are not in denial. They recognise the achievements that could be made by fully supporting our athletes. I think that Jackson Carlaw said that the Scottish people do not support the idea of a Scottish team, although I might have picked him up wrongly, because I have a vision of him on holiday wearing a saltire T-shirt, sandals and socks.

No, thank you. A survey by the campaign for a Scottish Olympic team showed that 78 per cent of Scots support the creation of a Scottish Olympic team.

No, thank you. I suggest that that percentage would have been a lot higher if the poll had asked whether people  supported maintaining the integrity of a Scottish football team rather than allowing it to play as part of a British football team.

I am in my last minute, sorry. I reckon that the support for that would be nearly 100 per cent and that the SFA and the tartan army would be backed all the way. I ask members to consider the benefits that would be gained by supporting Stewart Maxwell's amendment to the Tory motion. They should sit down, think about it carefully and vote for what is best for Scotland.

I welcome the debate and thank Patrick Harvie and the Greens for lodging the motion, as the issue is incredibly important. We should debate the matter until the two thirds of Scots whom Patrick Harvie mentioned are given justice and their right to reject weapons of mass destruction on their shores. That right should be recognised and acted on. There have been a lot of speeches. I thought some were absolutely super in that they showed depth and knowledge. There were too many to mention them all, so I will address them by party grouping. I say to Mr Foulkes, Mr McMahon and others that it is the right of parties to decide what will be debated during their debating time. Labour members will recognise that when they get the chance to bring debates to the chamber for the first time as an Opposition party. Right from the start, the Scottish Parliament, across all parties, has had a proud record of debating, discussing and voting on issues that are not technically within its remit.

See the way I feel about you just now, George? It is going to be Mr Foulkes for a while longer. One thing that I very much respected about Jack McConnell as First Minister was the fact that he brought to the chamber issues that were not within the remit of the Parliament but about which members right across the chamber felt strongly— dawn raids and how we treat asylum seekers, for example.

I am responding to George at the moment. Similarly, there was anger right across the chamber about the treatment of the Black Watch. Jack McConnell was not slow to recognise that, or to speak about it. When George Foulkes has been here for a while longer, he will see that we are not a parish council but a Parliament with the right to reflect what people are thinking. We have the right to put forward their views, including the view that we should not have weapons of mass destruction on our shores.

See—I told you I had a lot to say. Sadly, some Labour members have tried hard to justify being unable to follow their individual consciences on the matter—although following their conscience is what Labour members at Westminster did when Scottish MPs voted against the renewal of Trident. I really enjoyed listening to Bill Butler, Malcolm Chisholm and Elaine Smith. Marlyn Glen did not speak today, but I know that she is re-establishing the cross-party group on nuclear disarmament. I hope that there will be so many members on the group that we will force the Parliament to debate the matter over and over again. That is one of the most important things we can do. I absolutely defend the Parliament's right to do that.

Our priority is to do whatever we can to help Scotland's varied and vibrant culture continue to flourish. I plan to meet a wide range of interested people soon to gather ideas about exactly how we make progress on that.

I have inherited many good things from the previous Executive, for which I thank Patricia Ferguson. However, a new and fresh Administration obviously wants to look anew at how it progresses. I intend to do that in the next few weeks, after which I will happily come back to the Parliament with ideas and plans. I hope that, on many issues, we can make progress together for the benefit of the arts and culture in Scotland.

I understand Mr Allan's concerns. At present, we provide local authorities with Gaelic-specific grant funding toward the cost of providing Gaelic education in their areas. Gaelic may be studied by learners in primary school through the Gaelic language in the primary school programme. Bòrd na Gàidhlig recently published its education strategy as part of the national plan for Gaelic. Among other things, the strategy seeks to expand the availability of Gaelic language in primary schools and the availability of suitably  qualified teachers throughout Scotland. I look forward to further discussions with Bòrd na Gàidhlig, as soon as I can have them, about how the Government can best support the implementation of the national plan. I intend to consider a range of options for improving access to Gaelic for learners and to Gaelic-medium education, including the creation of a right to Gaelic-medium education where reasonable demand exists. I also intend to consider how we might increase support for Gaelic in the home and in communities.

I admire the perseverance with which Ted Brocklebank has for some time pursued that admirable aim of his. I am always happy to meet my opposite numbers to advance Scotland's culture and heritage. I look forward to meeting him to discuss the issue further.

I agree with Karen Whitefield, with whom I have attended those concerts many times. North Lanarkshire Council has an extremely vibrant and forward-looking way of dealing with music tuition in schools, which is summed up every year in the concert. I am considering the youth music initiative, which was supported by the SNP when it was introduced. I would be happy for access to be widened even further in schools so that all children  can have the opportunity to learn to play musical instruments. Cathy Peattie, who is sitting beside Karen Whitefield, had a bugbear about the importance of the voice as a musical instrument. I am looking forward to learning much more about the initiative and how we can use it to best advantage.

Tavish Scott is absolutely right. Scotland has a potentially great film industry, which is why the Executive will examine how well the United Kingdom tax incentive works in attracting films to Scotland. Depending on the outcome, and after examining similar schemes in other countries, we will proceed with our plans to develop a new scheme, to ensure that Scotland can compete on equal terms to attract and produce high-quality items.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I would like to ask the First Minister whether he will accept this 885-name petition from Lourdes secondary school pupils Cheryl Paterson and Lauren Bendford. It is about their school-friend Grace Waku, who has lived in Glasgow with her family for six years but was subjected to a dawn raid on Monday and incarcerated in Dungavel removal centre.  In light of this week's statement from the Executive on action that it will take on asylum seeker families who live in Scotland, will the First Minister personally intervene to ensure that Grace and her family can go home to Cardonald?

Will the First Minister accept the petition?

Many of us—some of that group are here in the chamber—attended a presentation the other night by the Long-Term Conditions Alliance Scotland. How much are ministers listening to people who suffer from chronic conditions, with a view to helping with self-management work and prevention?

People always say that we should not ask a question unless we know the answer, but I really do not know the answer to this. What could the Executive do to encourage the  likes of health boards to procure, for example, Fairtrade cotton for bedding? Could something further be done than just general encouragement?

I thank Christine May for giving us the opportunity to have the debate. I do not think that the Parliament has missed a year of marking Fairtrade fortnight. In addition, there has never been a fair trade debate in the Parliament in which I have not mentioned Strathaven and Avondale. I am pleased to say that, tomorrow—yet again—14 schoolchildren from Avondale, who won the Fairtrade poster competition this year, will be coming to Edinburgh to see their national Parliament. They will be really pleased that we have held this debate. I have noticed that it has started to become quite fashionable of late to criticise the Fairtrade movement. People have asked what difference a couple of extra cents makes, or a couple of extra soles for coffee in Peru, for instance, to refer to a recent criticism. That is fine—I can see why people want to be cynical these days. As far as I am concerned, however, if we are getting the idea of fair trade into the national psyche and if we are starting with schoolchildren such as those from Avondale who are coming through tomorrow, that is very important. We must make fair trade thinking the norm and then take the wider issues into account, too. We all recognise that the issues around fair trade cannot be considered in isolation. There are trade justice and debt adjustment issues. There are also the World Trade Organisation rules—which I am always railing against—which actively work against real fair trade. That applies to copyright and intellectual property rules in particular. I was horrified to learn the other day about a case involving a company in the United Kingdom. The Kikoy Company UK Ltd is trying to trademark an anglicised version of the word "kikoi", which would prevent kikoi producers in Kenya from selling their national dress in Europe. That is a piece of absolute nonsense. Members might remember a similar fuss over basmati rice a few years ago, when an American company tried to trademark the word "basmati" so that Indian producers could not use it or sell their product. That, too, was ridiculous. Fair trade issues go much wider than small consumer goods. We are now talking about fair  trade nationhood, which is wonderful. I was fortunate enough to question the minister about the matter last week at question time. I believe that, if we aspire towards fair trade nationhood, we must take it really seriously. It is about much more than tea, coffee and other consumables. The key, as Christine May suggested, is procurement by public bodies, with consideration being given to fair trade procurement where that is at all feasible, whether the fairness in trade relates to producers at home or producers overseas. The minister said last week, in response to my question, that European rules preclude a lot of measures, but in fact it is not that simple. I looked at the Executive's procurement guidance, which, alas, relates only to catering. It details the Executive's view that fair trade requirements cannot be specified in tender documentation and says that Scottish Executive policy may only encourage. My first thought on reading that guidance was that we should have a go and challenge the situation. Then I came across the inquiry by the Westminster International Development Committee into fair trade and development. The committee was clear in asking whether existing Government guidelines work against fair trade, and it concluded that they do. After much study, the committee concluded that the UK—ergo Scotland—has got it very wrong. The Government does not do nearly enough to promote fair trade and, rather than enabling fair trade procurement, it constrains it. Evidence that was submitted to the committee states: "EU legislation is not concerned with what is being procured"— the stuff that goes out from Government in this country says that it is— "but rather how it is being procured." In fact, it is possible to make explicit reference to fair trade in contract documentation. The Scottish Catholic International Aid Fund and Oxfam in Scotland have sent us information on the matter. SCIAF notes: "the contracting authority can procure whatever it wants", with "the European Commission itself making such fair trade specifications without difficulty." Oxfam notes: "Madrid, in support of their bid for the Olympic Games, included a tender for a supply of fair trade t-shirts". Oxfam also mentions moves by Bonn, Barcelona, Utrecht, Zuid-Holland, Lyon and Bilbao. On procurement rules, it says: "The non-discriminatory thrust of EU rules is aimed against those member states that seek to give unfair  advantage to their own national suppliers over suppliers from other member states within the European single market." If authorities keep to those rules, it is not actually a matter of what they procure. The Executive has often been accused of being overcautious in implementing and transposing EU directives. That is an argument for another day—we have had quite a few such arguments lately. The issue is far too important to be arguing over. We ought to work together to get it sorted. I would like to hear a pledge from the minister to study personally and carefully the results of the International Development Committee's inquiry; to ask for advice from organisations such as Oxfam and SCIAF; and to come up with a policy that ensures that, rather than being accused of paying lip service to fair trade when we go for fair trade nationhood, we genuinely become a fair trade nation in a way that people can be proud of and which will inspire others.

I am sure that the minister will agree that it is marvellous that towns, schools, councils, universities and zones have achieved fair trade status. However, if we are really to be a fair trade nation, a much more ambitious commitment is needed. If fair trade nation status is to be truly what it purports to be, it must involve not just retailers' providing fair trade tea, coffee and smaller consumer goods but an examination of the nation's procurement targets and practices. Will the remit of the working group allow that issue to be taken forward so that, for example, our public bodies will be able to procure fair trade goods for public services?

Will the minister give way?

I declare my membership of the Chartered Institute of Housing. I am a wee bit worried by the fact that I have to agree with something that Bill Aitken said. Like him, when I read the Executive's motion, I thought that it was so bland and weak that the Executive must have something up its sleeve and that we were going to hear a big announcement that would  take our breath away. Sadly, that has not happened. I must also say that whoever wrote the minister's speech or directed its content is not taking the housing debate in this country seriously enough. It was complete nonsense. We have heard for years about some of what she was saying. There was nothing new at all. We have heard before about how we have to focus on the whole market holistically. She also said that we should consider intervention when required—I find it worrying that, eight years down the line, we are still considering that approach. She said that the Executive is going to look at energy efficiency and building regulations. The Executive has had two chances to beef up building regulations—for example, to meet the lowest standard of sustainable housing in Scandinavian countries—but the Executive parties knocked those chances back. Now we are to look at them again. Of course, it is not all bad. Looking at the market holistically is going to incorporate looking at land, infrastructure, supply and planning—we are "going to" do that, eight years down the line. The Executive's homestake programme is great, but I must say to Phil Gallie that the Executive is not building on a Tory embryo when it looks at shared equity. In the mid-1990s, when I was with Bute Housing Association, we tried that to take that approach in Argyll, but the Tory-run Scottish Office would not let us because it said that it would interfere with the free market. There is no Tory kudos for that programme. The minister even said that the single survey was making a difference. I hope that it will make a difference, but it certainly is not making a difference yet, because it is not operational—we are still waiting for it to be introduced. It strikes me—again—that the Executive has a terrible habit of announcing that something is going to happen and then behaving as if it has already made everything fine. The Executive has not made everything fine, and eight years down the line, we are still talking about plans. Tricia Marwick was right that a lot is not said in the Executive motion. For example, I am stunned that prudential borrowing—another great housing initiative that was mentioned two or three years ago—was not mentioned today. Many members have asked about the rights of councils to provide and build housing, and when Margaret Curran answered the same questions a couple of years ago, she referred to the wonderful new prudential borrowing initiative. Will the deputy minister, in his summing up, tell us where we are on that? Margo MacDonald told us about the good example from Midlothian Council, but what about the others? Have other local authorities been encouraged to borrow prudentially and provide houses?  What can I say about stock transfer? It was not even mentioned in the Executive motion or the minister's speech, despite clearly being in the amendment lodged by Tricia Marwick. The story of Glasgow is very sad. People were promised second-stage transfer; Wendy Alexander, the minister at the time, said that there was no plan B; and Malcolm Chisholm said a couple of months ago that there was no black hole. I can tell the chamber what there is none of—there is no second-stage transfer in Glasgow. We keep hearing from Labour and Liberal members about how wonderful community ownership is. Karen Whitefield expounded on the value to communities of taking control and what can happen in communities they take control. Community ownership has been happening for years, but the problem is that it needs to happen a lot more quickly. There is nothing new in the policy, as housing associations and co-operatives have been following it for years. We just need to step up the pace. Part of that involves organising what was promised to Glasgow tenants—second-stage transfer. Perhaps if the Labour Party had listened to the SNP when Parliament debated the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001 and enshrined in legislation the right of communities to community ownership, people in Glasgow might have had something by now. However, the Labour and Liberal Government knocked back enshrining in legislation the right to community ownership. I have never understood why it is that, although Labour municipal politicians have no problem with community ownership on islands and in rural areas, there is a big problem when it comes to urban areas and town centres, where they do not want to allow it. In 2001, Labour and the Liberals also knocked back the right of people co-operatively to own their houses. In fact, co-operatives have had to change their status to continue to operate. The Labour Party is full of people who jump up on their hind legs and tell us what great stalwarts of the co-operative movement they are, but they will not allow tenants the right to own their houses in co-operatives. That is very strange. The Executive's motion says nothing. Eight years down the line, it says what the Executive wants to do. The SNP's amendment states: "this Scottish government has failed to adequately address the housing crisis in Scotland". It has clearly failed to do that. I ask members please to support our amendment.

I am interested in all the speeches that have been made. The reasons for members from the north-east speaking have become apparent. Avondale, where I live, lies in Central Scotland, which I represent. The secondary school for Avondale—Strathaven academy—will soon be replaced under South Lanarkshire Council's public-private partnership schools contract. That matter has been debated in the Parliament, so I will not discuss all the wrongs that are involved. The aspect that is relevant to this debate is school transport. The outlying rural communities and households of Avondale are already served by school buses, so the debate is relevant to them. Later this year, Strathaven academy will close for demolition. Despite a continuing campaign by parents, the council continues to insist that, rather than investigate building a new academy in Strathaven, where sites are available, and moving pupils in, it will bus schoolchildren to a school some nine miles away, in East Kilbride, along a rural road that is deemed by locals to be potentially dangerous. It seems that around 20 buses will travel along that road every day and return along it. I understand parents' worries about that. We do not know what kind of buses will be involved—whether they will be single-decker or double-decker, or whether they will be old or new. Despite the plans for what will happen later this year, parents do not know what safety issues may arise for their children or whether there will be supervision on the buses.  I want to put it on record that the issues that members have raised should be addressed. Mike Rumbles talked about lobbying Westminster. I hope that the minister will agree to do that, but we must consider the matter as a whole rather than only one issue. Maureen Watt is to be congratulated on securing the debate. When we hear stories about what can happen—such as those that we have heard today—we should agree that safety should always come first, as Nanette Milne said. I ask South Lanarkshire Council please to listen to the parents in its area and to understand that, like all parents in Scotland, they have safety concerns. I ask it to rethink its idea of charging buses along the road, and back, for two years.

To ask the Scottish Executive what the extent and current status are of the restricted areas arising from the Chernobyl incident. (S2O-11850)

Does the minister agree that, when more than two decades after a nuclear incident as far away as Chernobyl we still have restricted areas across Scotland, including within the area that I represent, and when the Food Standards Agency and the Scottish Environment Protection Agency are still carrying out such monitoring, it would be absolute folly to allow the siting of any further nuclear power stations in Scotland?

I listened to what the minister said about guidance. Will the minister tell me how, in the absence of a specific provision in the recently approved Planning etc (Scotland) Act 2006, the Executive will ensure that the needs of Gypsy Travellers—who are also citizens of this country—will be met?

I certainly do not wish to knock anything that the minister has been saying, but I want to put something on record. All those things are admirable and different people are doing a lot of different things. However, there is a great danger, which I have seen over the years, that the approach can get a bit highfalutin and that we can sometimes miss the very basics. I go back to the sort of thing that Donald Gorrie was talking about. I have never forgotten what a young lad on the access project in Motherwell said to me. He had come from local authority care, he had gone into a flat and he had ended up homeless. He said to me, "You know, they gave me a house, but they didnae tell me how to work it." It is that basic when it comes to youth homelessness. We must consider long-term outcomes, as it will take more than a year for a lad like that to get it right. We should stop looking at the outputs from all the various projects—as admirable as they are—which sometimes go above people's heads, and instead start looking at the very basics and the long-term outcomes.

It is a mark of how important the subject is that members have agreed to bring the debate forward by an hour. I declare an interest, as a fellow of the Chartered Institute of Housing. That membership exists from the days before I was elected, when I worked in housing associations. I have experience of dealing with homelessness applications from a service provider's point of view, as well as from a politician's. I think that I speak for most housing professionals when I say that there was always a particular poignancy when a young person presented as homeless—I felt helpless and that I could not be of real assistance to them. My experience has given me a perspective on the issue that underpins my belief in the absolute necessity of tackling homelessness and seeking to eliminate it as far as is humanly possible. Part of that task is the provision of suitable and affordable housing, including owner-occupied and social rented housing. We all know that that is an issue in many areas. In East Kilbride, where I live, it is a particular problem. A major part of the task must also be helping people to avoid homelessness in the first place. That is the main thrust of the home smart campaign, which seeks to ensure that every fourth-year pupil in our schools knows that help and advice is available. Great credit should be given to the Scottish Council for Single Homeless for creating the campaign. Its importance is underlined by the statistics on youth homelessness. In 2005-06, 19,400 young people between the ages of 16 and 24 turned to their local authority because they had nowhere safe and secure to stay. That is a rise of almost 4,000 since 1999. If we consider the figures for 16 and 17-year-olds, in 2005-06 more than 4,300 young people turned to their local authority. While few fourth-year pupils are likely to think that homelessness will affect them personally, the figures tell a different story.  There is a significant, worsening problem with youth homelessness that we owe it to Scotland's youngsters to address. With 3 per cent of young people in Scotland reporting as homeless each year, we cannot afford to turn away and hope that the problem resolves itself. We should be grateful to the Scottish Council for Single Homeless for the work that it has been doing and we should embrace the home smart campaign as an extremely worthwhile endeavour. The council's idea for the campaign is simple, but appears to offer the right kind of help. Rather than waiting until the young person strikes out on their own, obtains a tenancy, then fails to maintain it and ends up homeless, it has taken the sensible step of taking the message into schools. The information in learning packs allows teachers and pupils to consider the issues that often arise with tenancies and young people, and to consider how they might avoid the pitfalls that have befallen so many in the past. As well as facilitating discussion, the packs offer sensible advice, including, for example, advice about how to ensure that the behaviour of one's friends does not affect one's tenancy. That seems fairly straightforward to those of us sitting here, but one of the major problems that young tenants have is in controlling their home environment and not letting it turn into a community centre for their friends. I wish to make it clear, though, that the campaign is not an entirely new venture for the Scottish Council for Single Homeless. The I'm offski! learning materials were first produced in 1988 and have won awards. However, home smart goes even further. The experience of the organisation over many years is illustrated by its developing and innovatory campaigns. It will soon produce an evaluation toolkit to measure the success of the campaign—I am sure that it will be very successful. Getting pupils to think about the issues while they are still in the fourth year of secondary school will ensure that the information is embedded and that they know that support and advice is available. Targeting the campaign at fourth years is important—I believe that it is the optimum age group to target. It is the age group that is perhaps desperate to leave home for negative reasons. It is an age group that may have a rose-tinted view of how one can strike out on one's own and be a success. Many young people who are at a stage in their lives when they should be building for the future can struggle to find the resources just to survive. Surviving day by day instead of planning for their future leaves them vulnerable to all sorts of outside influences. Home smart is about trying to stop that happening. It is hard to judge how many pupils have so far been exposed to the materials produced by the  council, but around a third of our mainstream schools have indicated a strong interest. That points towards a possible 20,000 pupils. I make particular mention of John Ogilvie High School and Strathaven Academy, schools in central Scotland that I know well for their openness to new ideas and that have responded positively to the Scottish Council for Single Homeless.

Absolutely. I am happy to commend Balnacraig school in Perth. That underlines the fact that the campaign is national. As I said, every mainstream school has received a pack, and any special needs and residential schools that have expressed an interest have received one too. I congratulate and commend the Scottish Council for Single Homeless for the work of home smart. I also want to thank Lovell, the housing developer that has sponsored the campaign and provided the prize for the recent draw. If the campaign has ensured that pupils know that there are people and organisations to which they can turn for help, and if it has encouraged those pupils to think about the issues and appreciate the challenges and difficulties that leaving home presents, the campaign is worthy of congratulation and encouragement. As I said earlier, more than a third of all homeless applications are from people between the ages of 16 and 24. Scotland's politicians should be working towards ending the scourge of homelessness. Each of us in the chamber should be humbled that the problem has still not been turned around eight years after devolution, despite the good intentions of us all. That perhaps indicates a need for more positive action on the part of Scotland's politicians, a more proactive agenda on youth homelessness and a greater encouragement of the work done by organisations such as the Scottish Council for Single Homeless. No vote is taken at the end of members' business, but I am confident that the general mood of Parliament today will be to agree with my motion.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether police forces are required to follow its guidance on recruitment, contained in police circular 8/2003. (S2O-11662)

The minister is correct to say that I have received answers to my parliamentary questions. However, I have a copy of a letter from her department to a constituent of mine that intimates that the guidance became regulations—I refer to the 2004 police regulations. Is the minister aware that Strathclyde police, alone among Scotland's police forces, discriminates against potential recruits with a minor form of colour blindness, and that that is against those regulations? Will she undertake to ensure that the one Scottish police force that contravenes those regulations amends its recruitment procedures and makes amends to applicants who have been unfairly and unjustly disadvantaged?

How will the Executive ensure that our local authority monitoring programmes are able to detect unapproved experimental GM traits and imports before they enter the supply chain in future?

I decided to contribute today because of my concern about some of the letters and e-mails that I have received over the past week from people on both sides of the argument. They generally place the wrong emphasis on the issue. Indeed, in an awful lot of cases, they show no understanding of the current law. Some express views that might  reflect their creed or morality and others feel strongly that we are dealing with an equalities issue. However, with the exception of a very few of the missives that I received, the main point has been missed, as other speakers mentioned. We are talking about children or young people who, for whatever reason, are not fortunate enough to live in a home that is neither institutional nor temporary and who may have to share attention and care with many others, even at the time in their lives when they most need that bit of extra individual attention. That happens despite the best efforts of those who care for young people in such circumstances—carers are drawn from all parts of society and walks of life and have varying beliefs and orientations, but their common ground in the majority of cases is commitment to those for whom they care. If passed, amendments 94 to 98 would maintain the status quo instead of allowing a child to have two legal parents as part of a stable family relationship. As we heard from Iain Smith, two parents would offer a potential safeguard against any future disruption in the life of a child who might have suffered disruption enough. I urge members to vote against the amendments, which I believe are clearly opposed to the best interests of the child.

Who is he?

I declare my membership of the Transport and General Workers Union and the highly active Scottish National Party trade union group. I have no issue at all with Margaret Curran's motion. I could nitpick about it if I really wanted to but, as Kenny MacAskill said, today should be a celebration of the work of past, present and future trade unions. The Tory amendment is a bit disingenuous, so we will not be supporting that. The work of trade unions for workers in Scotland has been covered, so I will focus on the movement's support and campaigning work. We all know that the trade union movement in Scotland is overwhelmingly opposed to all nuclear weapons and does not support the replacement of Trident. Unions also believe that there are grounds to justify an independent inquiry into the use of Scottish airports by Central Intelligence Agency rendition flights and do great work in campaigning against dawn raids and for the rights of asylum seekers and their children.  I would like the Government and Parliament to join those campaigns. The STUC does not recognise matters as being reserved or devolved; it just recognises whether issues are right or wrong and campaigns accordingly. In international matters, too, our unions have long supported trade unionists in adversity and solidarity causes. The Fire Brigades Union's long hard work to help the anti-apartheid movement in South Africa is an example of that. Trade union rights in Central and Latin American nations are a particular interest of mine. I was privileged to meet trade unionists in Peru while it was under the oppressive Fujimori regime. Thankfully, things in Peru are improving somewhat, but they must be watched carefully. Despite all the talk about the sweep of the left wing and socialism through Latin America, there are still quite a few countries in the region that have not been caught up in that change and could do with being watched. When Gilberth Bermúdez, the general secretary of Costa Rica's SITRAP union visited me a few years ago and told me of the on-going struggle in his country against the world's largest fruit companies and when Doris Calvo spoke at the SNP conference of her people's struggle against the kidnapping and intimidation of union activists, I was glad to know that Bill Spiers, the STUC and trade union members throughout Scotland were offering support. However, the struggle is still going on. SITRAP banana and pineapple members have been threatened with mass sackings and, inside the plantations in Costa Rica, there is a permanent and intense campaign to intimidate and threaten workers with blacklisting or plantation closure if they join the union. Trade unionists throughout Scotland are still working to help their fellow workers on the other side of the world. That brings me to my final point, which relates to the political levy. I understand why the political levy was put in place and agree with the reasons for doing that, as it provided necessary support for the labour movement at the time. However, times have changed. I would like union funds to be used to support international solidarity for workers. As an example of how that can be done, I have examined what SASK, the Trade Union Solidarity Centre of Finland, is doing. It was founded by the Central Organization of Finnish Trade Unions and its affiliated unions in 1986 and functions as part of the Finnish and international trade union movement to strengthen trade unions in every corner of the world. That is what we should be about: the international solidarity of those who have to work for a living. SASK promotes social and economic equality in the developing countries in the Baltic region and in  the new democracies close to Finland by supporting organisations that are not as strong as it is. I am particularly interested in a project that it is funding in Peru, which is designed to bring together the two unions that operate in the mining industry, in which there are many abuses of workers. SASK's projects are jointly planned and implemented by workers from the local organisations. SASK's activities are funded by member unions, the Government of Finland and the European Commission. A branch or an individual member of a trade union can support SASK's projects by regularly paying a percentage or by being a support member. I think that that model is something that trade union members across our country would think was a good idea and would be happy to support. The Executive's motion talks about how we achieved a new politics in Scotland. I would like that new politics, which has engaged civic society, to move on. I think that allowing our unions freely to assist trade unions and their members across the world would be a good way for that to happen.

I am not convinced that Gypsy Travellers can be put in the same category as other minority groups, because it is obvious that they are discriminated against in all walks of life, particularly in housing, as has been discussed many times in the chamber and in committees, including during the passage of the Housing (Scotland) Bill. It is a fact that local authorities often prevaricate about their perceived duties in relation to Gypsy Travellers. I will be interested to hear what the minister says, but in my view it cannot be stated too often that Gypsy Travellers have needs that should be addressed, that we have not addressed those needs for decades and that it should be enshrined in legislation that special treatment should be given.

To ask the Scottish Executive what monitoring is carried out of the effect of depleted uranium contamination on the environment. (S2O-11080)

Is the minister aware of the concern people felt when they recently learned from a BBC Radio 4 programme that the United States of America has been suppressing information on the potential effects of depleted uranium? Will the minister confirm that the British Government and, therefore, the Scottish Executive have access to that suppressed information through the MOD? Will he pass that information to people in Scotland and to this Parliament? Will he confirm whether the US has permission to fire depleted uranium at or around Cape Wrath?

Will the member take an intervention?

I declare my interest as a fellow of the Chartered Institute of Housing. The SSP motion—members will not be surprised to know—contains a few statements that I fundamentally disagree with. I found it amusing that the motion asks us to confirm our belief "in the fullest democratic control and management of council homes by tenants". I have never seen that in my life, despite having worked in housing for many years. A big issue is that tenants have never had democratic control of council housing because the monolith has been too big. We have had the odd play at democratic control through attempts at tenant management co-operatives and so on, but we have never had full democratic control of council housing. Let us not pretend that we have had. Before Frances Curran accuses me of lacking credibility, let me say that, yes, I have lived in council houses and, yes, I have had to deal with tenants. In fact, my family has been evicted from a few council houses, although I do not say that with great pride. The motion also talks about the privatisation of housing through housing associations. Housing associations are not, and never have been, private landlords. Yes, they use private money, but where do people think that the money that funds the public sector borrowing requirement comes from if not from the private market? The use of private money does not automatically mean privatisation.

No. Some people say that housing associations are not profit making; the claim was repeated in the  SFHA briefing. In fact, that is a bit of a myth—they are. They are not profit distributing, which is very different. Housing associations make a profit, which is why those that are not charities pay corporation tax. What is great about them is that the money is ploughed back in for the benefit of the communities that they serve.

No. The money is put into sinking funds and so on to ensure the on-going maintenance of houses. I believe in housing associations and both the SNP and I believe in stock transfer. However, we heard from the minister Labour's view of stock transfer. She cited some good examples of it, which can be found all over the place. Why did we not use them? Why did the Executive not listen to the SNP and others who said that stock transfer is good when it is tenant led but that large-scale stock transfer is bad, because it involves replacing one monolith with another? People do not have real choice or real community ownership. That is clear from the lack of secondary stock transfer in Glasgow. As Tricia Marwick indicated, that was pointed out a long time ago, in the minority report of the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee on housing stock transfer. I remember Wendy Alexander saying when she was the Minister for Communities that there was no plan B. That is the problem—there has never been a plan B. In 2001, I tried to have the right to community ownership enshrined in the Housing (Scotland) Bill. That proposal was knocked back by the Executive. If such a right had been included in the legislation, perhaps there would not be the current fuss in Glasgow about the failure to have secondary stock transfer.

No, I am in the last minute of my speech. Earlier this year the minister told Tricia Marwick that in Glasgow secondary stock transfer is not being prevented by a financial black hole. If that is the case, why is secondary stock transfer not happening? Why are the promises that were made to tenants in Glasgow not being kept? The situation is making people lose trust in the Executive every time another ballot is held. Why are the tenants who are being balloted in other areas not being given the option of secondary stock transfer in the papers that are sent out? Is that not happening because the Executive does not really want to have secondary stock transfer? I hope that the minister will tell me otherwise and  will be able to say that second-stage transfers in Glasgow will go ahead, so that we can have full community ownership.

The remit of the inquiry carried out by the European and External Relations Committee was to look into the Scottish Executive's plans for the delivery of structural funds in Scotland from 2007 to 2013. Many organisations were naturally concerned by the reduced level of funding that would come from the European Union via Westminster and how that funding would be administered. The committee responded to those concerns. I speak on behalf of all committee members when I say that the inquiry was extremely interesting. The evidence received, both written and oral, was substantial and of a quality that reflected the knowledge and commitment of those who have worked with and administered such European funds in the most recent funding period. I thank all those who contributed, as well as the Scottish Executive for its speedy response to our report. The committee agreed to structure the inquiry around eight questions that would inform members' deliberations and understanding of how stakeholders viewed the current operational structures and how those structures should be adapted to benefit the country best, in the knowledge that funding would vastly reduce. The committee welcomed the Executive's statement that no final decisions had been taken on the future delivery of structural funds in Scotland and therefore the committee's inquiry and report came at an opportune time to inform the Executive's decision taking. Members who read the committee report will have noted the level of detail involved. There is not enough time today for me to do justice to the amount of work carried out by those who contributed to the inquiry. I can, however, relay to the chamber the conclusions and recommendations reached. Other committee members will provide in their speeches further detail on the specifics. I have no doubt that Irene Oldfather will pick up on all the things that I miss in this opening speech.  With regard to the current structure of structural funds programme delivery and the potential advantages and disadvantages of changing it, the committee concluded that although the programme management executive structure that managed the structural funds programmes from 2000 to 2006 did a good job in establishing a bottom-up, partnership approach that has been lauded throughout Europe, the reduced funding levels require and dictate change. Even though structural funds make up a small percentage of the total regional development moneys in Scotland, it is vital that the money available is spent wisely to achieve the best results. The Executive told the committee that the current cost of the programme management executive to the public purse was approximately £4.5 million a year and that costs could fall to between £750,000 to £1.5 million if the system were restructured and streamlined. The committee believes that that is a significant and welcome saving in administration costs that should free up more money for projects. The committee is mindful of the potential pitfalls of changing to a new structure and is concerned about the added burden that any transition would place on resources. It could have a particular impact on smaller organisations, and adequate support must be provided by the Executive to minimise that burden. The Executive's proposal to move to a Highlands and Islands programme and a lowland and upland Scotland programme must not result in a loss of local accountability, and any new structure should harness current expertise effectively. In the past day or so, there have been media reports about the potential loss of jobs and projects because of the late commencement of the 2007 to 2013 programmes, and I am sure that other members will elaborate on that. The committee was certainly mindful of the issue and thoroughly questioned the Executive on the potential funding gap and the requirement for transitional funding. At first, the minister was optimistic that the new programmes would begin on time, on 1 January 2007. In fact, he rather annoyed me by suggesting that the committee's glass was always half empty while the Executive's glass was always half full. In light of what we now know, I suggest that the minister gets a bigger glass. The committee believes that there is a danger that the transition from the 2000 to 2006 programmes to the 2007 to 2013 programmes could lead to a lot of instability, which could have serious economic impacts on current and future projects. Steps must be taken to address all those  concerns and, where necessary, to provide transitional support. The committee recommends that the Scottish Executive urgently put in place appropriate transitional planning that meets the European Commission's requirements and the needs of those who plan and deliver projects in Scotland. I gather from hints in its response to the committee's report and from media reports that emerged last night and today that the Executive will now proceed towards introducing transitional arrangements. I look forward to hearing more about that matter from the minister. The committee also recommends that every possible effort be made to enable new programmes to begin on time. Obviously, since the report was published, we have learned that that will not happen, so I must stress the second part of the committee's recommendation, that "there are no financial or staff costs to projects as a result". There was much discussion by the committee and in external forums on how structural fund delivery should be linked to Scottish Executive priorities. Although the committee agrees that a close link is important for the sake of complementarity and to avoid the duplication of resources, it was clear that such a link to domestic priorities should not mean that structural funds are used in place of a committed Scottish Executive budget to fund established projects outwith the structural funds programmes. Structural funds should always provide added value and be additional to committed domestic spend. As Fife Council said: "The Scottish Executive does need to co-ordinate activity across its departments and ensure that Structural funds are providing additionality and not simply replacing domestic spending". The committee therefore recommends that the Executive uphold the principle of additionality at all times when planning and approving programmes. With regard to the main priority areas for the new programmes, the committee understands that the European Commission has set specific targets that require a large percentage of funds to be spent on projects that support the Lisbon strategy, particularly under the competitiveness objective. However, the allocation of funds should, where possible, address issues such as social exclusion, the economically inactive and infrastructure as well as economic growth and development. The committee recommends that the Scottish Executive make an assessment of the impact of any reduction in competitiveness objective funds for infrastructure and tourism projects and indicate whether it intends to reprioritise other budgets as a result. Of course, clearly identified economic and social outputs should be established to measure  projects' effectiveness. Those outputs should be measured against desired outcomes; after all, as we know, outputs and outcomes are very different things and should not be confused. The committee acknowledges that because of European Commission stipulations there is limited opportunity for infrastructure projects. However, it understands that, although the Department for Trade and Industry has agreed a 50:50 split between European regional development fund and European social fund moneys, it is up to the Scottish Executive to determine the convergence objective split between ERDF and ESF funds. The committee supports a weighting in favour of ERDF. It also understands that there is more flexibility on this matter in the Highlands and Islands. Although the broad priorities should focus on economic, social and environmental sustainability, there are, as we all know, accessibility and connectivity issues that must be addressed, along with improving infrastructure where possible. In the committee's view, those issues contribute fundamentally to the Lisbon strategy goals in the longer term. The committee recommends that there should be two programmes in Scotland to deliver structural funds from 2007 to 2013—one for the Highlands and Islands and one for lowland and upland Scotland—and both should have separate ERDF and ESF programmes within them. The committee also recommends that the programmes that cover lowland and upland Scotland should include geographical targeting where necessary and appropriate, and I understand that tender documentation based on that model has now been put out by the Executive.

I will say a wee bit more about that. We were concerned about the potential lack of local accountability, but it is essentially up to the Executive to decide how the programme is administered. We relayed our concerns, as did others who gave evidence, and I hope that the minister will address those concerns when he responds. With the move to the two programme areas—a Highlands and Islands area and a lowland and upland Scotland area—the Scottish Executive must ensure that there is local accountability, that partnerships and expertise are not lost and that a  degree of geographical targeting is retained. It is essential that the money is not spread too thinly. Urban and rural areas must have their own needs addressed as necessary. I must address a particularly contentious issue on which the committee took evidence: co-financing rather than challenge funding. The committee felt strongly that there was not enough information on the possible co-financing models. The Hall Aitken report, which studied the situation in England, highlighted some issues that must be addressed. We were pleased that the Executive seemed to have taken on board our recommendation that we should go for co-financing and single-stream funding but should also leave an element of potential challenge funding. I shall leave community planning partnerships and the future of the delivery of the funds in particular areas to other members, as I am now running out of time. However, I would like to mention our recommendation that the Executive should continue to consider other forms of European Union funding to complement structural funds. Dennis Canavan will talk about that, as will Irene Oldfather. I finish by thanking the clerks, past and present, for the work that they put into the committee's report, and the Scottish Parliament information centre staff who fed us with loads of information. I move, That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the European and External Relations Committee's 4th Report, 2006 (Session 2): Report on an Inquiry into the Scottish Executive's plans for future structural funds programmes 2007-13 (SP Paper 611).

This has been an interesting debate and I have enjoyed every speech. There is much to be answered. I will do the big UK picture first because I feel that the things that were said about that require answers. Mike Pringle talked about the UK's commitment to achieving the UN target for aid of 0.7 per cent of gross national income. There is no reason why that target cannot be achieved now—after all, we signed up to it decades ago through the UN but never achieved it. Des McNulty spoke about the UK being a trailblazer. Although I think that Gordon Brown has done rather well, I would not go beyond that. I put it to members that the Scandinavian countries have been the trailblazers because they, unlike the UK, met the UN target some time ago. Small independent countries throughout Europe have also met that commitment and Scotland, too, could do that. Many members spoke of what people do, and have been doing for years, to help in Malawi, other parts of Africa, and, indeed, in places all over the world. I suspect that what is now happening is that the Government is falling behind the aspirations of the people, who are looking for much more. I am going to be nice now because the holidays are coming up. We will finish on a positive note. As I said, there were many interesting contributions to the debate. Murdo Fraser, Karen Gillon and Irene Oldfather, particularly, spoke of school links. I was also interested in what Murdo Fraser said about households in Malawi being headed by seven-year-olds. I learned a lot about that during my short trip to Malawi. Karen Gillon said that primary education is now free in Malawi. That is great and it is wonderful that Malawi has achieved that, but when I was there I learned that in many rural areas people still pay for primary education because knowledge about the law that such education should be free has not filtered through to those areas. That relates to the lack of a democratic and governmental infrastructure to feed information to people. Even if education is free, how can a seven-year-old who heads a household go to school to take advantage of education if their day-to-day existence involves trying to earn a living to be able to feed their siblings? I welcome the statistics, but I think that we should look behind them and recognise that there is still a lot to do. I was particularly taken by one of Karen Gillon's stances. Other members mentioned this, too, but she started the strand of discussion on the point that we cannot be seen as imposing ourselves on others, which is right. One thing that always concerns me is the perception that we get from the media here that Africa is always in trouble and needing handouts and that Africans are not quite  able to manage things for themselves. Some of the most vibrant, educated people whom I have ever met, who are spot on about how to achieve things, have come from African communities. It is a shame that Africa is never shown in a positive light in countries such as ours but always portrayed negatively. It is also patronising to assume that what we regard as the best way of life in our countries and the best way of doing things should just be imposed on others. When I was in Malawi, quite a few African folk spoke to me about another aspect. The discussion, which I found fascinating, was about the dependency culture that can be created when the west comes in with great intentions and imposes things. A Malawian chap gave me an example of that. He said that although it is wonderful to see secondary schoolchildren from Scotland—or France, Germany or Spain—taking part in a project to build a small rural school, when that happens the Malawian schoolchildren stand and watch. The Malawian children do not have the opportunity to volunteer and take part in a joint effort, which does not promote the sense of the common good that is required if communities are to be able to build themselves up. We are getting better at acknowledging that aid of all types must be delivered differently. Alex Johnstone talked about cash cropping, which was a huge issue under corrupt Governments in Latin America, where people starved while asparagus and other crops were shipped round the world to people who could afford to buy them. Such cash cropping remains an issue in Africa. We must learn from the mistakes that were made in the past and, thankfully, Latin America is turning a corner in that regard—politically and environmentally. As Alex Johnstone said, food is sometimes available but unobtainable. I talked to a fantastic woman from the north of Malawi who is a community activist. She told me that in her area some fruit is not recognised as food, although it would be a sustainable food. Folk in the village think that only animals eat the fruit, so she is taking part in a project through which fruit trees are planted in people's gardens and well-known, respected local people are recruited to go about eating apples and bananas, so that the villagers start to regard such fruit as normal food. I was fascinated to learn about that project. Another form of cash cropping leads to the environmental degradation of Malawi's forests. The sale of charcoal across the border to Mozambique is a huge problem. The trade is illegal but represents an example of a law that cannot be properly enforced, for various reasons—it is easy to criticise that from a secure standpoint. As Irene Oldfather said, there is a  need for sustainable jobs, so that people do not have to degrade their environment and living conditions in order to feed their families. James Douglas-Hamilton talked about health training, which is crucial. Hospitals and clinics are needed, but health staff must also be trained so that they can work with people in rural communities. I was fascinated to hear about a project at the University of Dundee, which provides distance learning for nurses in Eritrea and Kenya. I hope that nurses in Malawi will be able to take advantage of that project. People do not need just a standard health course; they need to learn about the health care that their communities need. In Malawi, we should aim for security in jobs, food, energy, health and the environment. When there is a measure of such security, we will be able to say that we have made a difference.

Just as the Scottish National Party welcomed the establishment of this Parliament's international development fund by the Executive, so we welcome today's subject debate. A year on from the G8 summit, this is an appropriate juncture at which to discuss international development and Malawi. As the minister said, some progress has been made since last year on the commitments that were made at the G8 summit, but it is generally recognised by people of every political persuasion that there is still a sense of disappointment about those grand promises. In some cases, debt relief being offset against aid has not fulfilled the promises that were made. People recognise that what we can do in the Parliament and in the Scottish Executive is fairly small, but it is right that we should focus on Malawi, because of the historical links between our countries. It is also right that we should look at the bigger picture to see how everything fits in. Because this is a debate with no motion, I think that a lot of personal views will be expressed in members' speeches this afternoon. My personal view is that there can be so many good, worthy initiatives going on at all levels that we sometimes forget about the major issues. One of the major issues for Africa is public health. There are a lot of initiatives around HIV/AIDS at the moment, for example. Then there are malaria and tuberculosis campaigns, and that is great, because it all needs to be done. However, when we look at how public health developed in our own societies, we see that it was about infrastructure for potable water and sewage. Although there are small initiatives across Africa—I believe that the Executive is funding such a project run by Mercy Corps in Zimbabwe—until we can guarantee people across that continent good infrastructure for potable water and sewage, we  cannot really say that we are tackling the public health problems. That is what I am trying to get at when I talk about the lack of a strategic overview across the nations that are able to help. Another big issue is trade. However we look at it, western trade policies are hard to defend. I hope that the new G8 round and the next World Health Organisation round will have everyone, including Governments that profess to care, lobbying for real change in trade rules. I am also aware that there are trade barriers even within the continent of Africa. That is another discussion that has to go on—internally within the continent as well as externally. It is not just countries that consider themselves western democracies that are participating in Africa. I understand that China has become Africa's fastest growing business partner, with trade up 37 per cent last year. Commentator Hamish McRae has said: "You could almost say that western relations with Africa are dominated by aid, while Chinese relations are dominated by trade." The view of some people on the ground is that China is taking in its own workers, carrying out the work and then leaving, so its policies on trade with Africa do not really have a legacy of self-sufficiency. Perhaps, in the new spirit of co-operation that the west has with China, such an approach could be encouraged. I have spoken about fragmentation and about the fact that lots of little initiatives are going on. One of the things that stuns me about Malawi and which harks back to that 150-year history of our relationship with the country is the number of folk in this country who have been carrying out such initiatives for years and years. I recently met people from the Kwenderana group, run jointly by churches around the Busby area. For years, that group has been funding a small school in northern Malawi and has been sending out goods and equipment. The minister referred to ordinary Scots making a difference, and that has been happening in Malawi over the piece. I am pleased that one of the projects that has been funded—I think that the University of Edinburgh will carry out the work—is a Scotland-Africa directory, so there will be a database that shows exactly what is happening. I hope that the minister can confirm that smaller voluntary groups that are not attached to non-governmental organisations can have their work added to that database, so that we have an overall picture of what is happening. Another big issue in Africa and in Malawi in particular is the lack of a democratic structure. That cannot be denied when we talk about Malawi. I would like to praise the work of a Westminster- based organisation, the Westminster Foundation for Democracy, which believes that properly functioning political parties are the key to an effective pluralist democracy. The WFD funds, to varying degrees, political parties that have representation at Westminster—the SNP is a beneficiary of those funds. I recently went out to Malawi with the WFD along with my colleague Pete Wishart to see whether there were political parties with which the SNP could logically join up. It was a very interesting trip and we met a lot of people, but one thing that stuck out was that there are no grass-roots organisations that lead into politics. Political parties are formed from the top down. For example, as soon as the current president was elected, he left his political party and started another party because he fell out with the first one. I say as an aside that it is interesting that the Liberal Democrats are linked to both parties—that is a very Liberal Democrat thing to do. The SNP has agreed that we will link with two of the smaller parties: the People's Progressive Movement and the People's Transformation Party. We will head back out to Malawi fairly soon to carry out training for women and youths—that work is very important for the future of any democracy. People say that it is ridiculous to fund political parties, but they can be the bedrock of a society that will grow and become a functioning democracy. I am getting hard looks from the Deputy Presiding Officer because my time is up. I would love to say much more as there is so much to be said on the subject, but I will stop now. I have the privilege of closing the debate for the SNP group, so I can say everything else then.

Does the minister agree that although the campaign for the retention of services at Monklands hospital will and indeed should, continue, neither the health board nor the campaigners should suggest that there is any relationship at all between the distribution of services between Monklands and Wishaw and South Lanarkshire's retention of access to an accident and emergency service? Will he assure us that, regardless of what happens to Monklands, the management and staff at Hairmyres hospital can look forward to planning for the future in the confidence that East Kilbride and the surrounding area will have an accident and emergency service that is fit for purpose?

We have had many parliamentary debates on race equality since the Parliament was reconvened. However, although an awful lot of good things are said and people are terribly well intentioned in such debates, we have tended only to talk about the issue. We say all the right things, but the question is what we are doing to achieve greater race equality in our society. A few members have already referred to the extremely useful briefing from the Commission for Racial Equality. The briefing states clearly: "progress towards race equality in Scotland is still not happening fast enough". It also reiterates one of my concerns, which is that progress "remains patchy and often relies on isolated initiatives." The lack of a big picture worries me somewhat. An awful lot of grand initiatives are under way, and some of them are wonderful—Dave Petrie talked about the many community initiatives that are aimed at delivering different elements of the strategy. However, we perhaps sometimes miss the big picture of what we are trying to achieve. Racial discrimination is varied. There is the direct discrimination that some members have spoken about, and a couple of members have mentioned the absolute racism of England supporters being beaten up. It strikes me that those incidents have received a large amount of publicity, given that every blooming day people suffer direct racial abuse because they happen to have a brown face or do not have English as their first language. As racist events, such incidents do not receive nearly as much publicity. That is not to downplay the horror of the other occasions that have been mentioned, but there is a kind of indirect racism in our society that does not accord the same importance to what happens daily as it affords to incidents involving people whose ethnicity is English, Welsh or European generally.  Sadly, the colour of people's skin is an issue. Indirect discrimination happens all the time. It is inadvertent—people do not even realise that they are guilty of it. We must raise awareness of that kind of racism, just as we must keep ensuring that institutional racism is stamped out. That is still an issue, despite the Chhokar case and the Lawrence case in England. We are not yet free of institutional racism. We must continue to monitor the issue and to work towards improving the situation. Stereotyping is something else that we do. I had a wry smile on my face when Dave Petrie referred to the arrival of the Italian community and how much we all loved its ice cream parlours. What a stereotype that is. I say to him that we started in chip shops and moved on to ice cream parlours—he should get his facts right next time. I am not trying to get at Dave Petrie. The Italian community has internalised the stereotype and turned that kind of humour on itself, for various historical reasons that I do not have time to go into. I often think of myself as a third-generation Italian. I do not suffer racism, but if I were third-generation African, Indian, Pakistani, Bangladeshi or Chinese, I would suffer racism because of how I looked and spoke. That is inherently wrong. What are we going to do about it? I am glad that the minister is looking to develop further the Scottish Executive's one Scotland strategy. My concern is that it focuses very much on direct racism. I would like the final documentation that will come out over the next few years to be expanded to address the more hidden types of racism that also exist. The minister focused on three main themes: employment, the Scottish refugee integration forum and mainstreaming. I am glad that he put on record the fact that the forum covers asylum seekers, because there is some confusion about that. The ethnic minorities and the labour market strategic group that Dr Charan Gill is heading up will look at labour issues. As some members have rightly pointed out, non-white people from ethnic minorities are less successful in the labour market. I have heard some mutterings about what the group's findings will be. Will the minister clarify whether the data that are being used to formulate the report, which will appear at the end of next month, are specific to Scotland? Do we have sufficient data to back up the report, or do we merely have extrapolated UK data, because much of what is involved—employment legislation, for example—is reserved? If we are serious about moving forward in this area, we need to know that the base data from which we start are absolutely right. We know that it is no longer true that ethnic minorities constitute 2 per cent of the population of  Scotland. We need to update that figure, which came from the 2001 census. I ask the minister what representations he has made to the Home Office on the specific issue of reinstating the right-to-work concession to asylum seekers in Scotland. Under a European directive, it is perfectly acceptable for asylum seekers to work. In fact, if a decision on an asylum seeker's status has not been made a year after their arrival, they should have the right to work. What representations are we making to ensure that level of equality? I note that, although the Scottish refugee integration forum action plan is expected later in the year, it is already late—we were promised it before then. I ask the minister to be more specific about how much later it will be. There are also concerns about funding. I do not deny that admirable work and consultation are involved in the new action plan and that some really knowledgeable people are contributing, but we need to know when the action plan will be published and that budgets will be set for the beginning of 2007 so that we can move on. Many Executive departments are still not carrying out proper race equality impact assessments in the mistaken belief that their initiatives and policies do not have a racial dimension. Absolutely everything has a racial dimension, just as everything has a gender dimension. I would like to hear from the minister that impact assessments will be mainstreamed properly across Government departments. I finish with the SNP amendment. It is crucial that asylum seekers are granted equality with everyone else in our country and are not regarded as being somehow basic. The destitution of asylum seekers is horrendous. How does the Executive measure that, so that we can truly do something about it? Is the minister considering reintroducing an education maintenance allowance for the children of asylum seekers? Children of asylum seekers go through school—it is not as if they get a decision quickly—and want to go into further and higher education, but they cannot do that without an education maintenance allowance. Will the minister also consider changing the terms of the bursary regulations, which might ease the problem as well? I have asked many questions, which I know the minister will try hard to answer. If he does not do so today, perhaps he will get back to me at some point in the future.

Will Mr Aitken accept that when he does it is generally his fault?

I wonder whether Mark Ballard shares a concern that I have. In the first session of the Parliament, either in 2001 or in 2002—I see Cathy Peattie nodding—the Equal Opportunities Committee carried out a major study into discrimination against Gypsy Travellers but, sadly, that group's perception is that nothing has changed since then. We should take action to address that community's problems.

I find it difficult to know where to start my speech because there is so much that I would like to say. First of all, I inform the chamber that I do not seek local press releases because I would like to talk about the Executive's architecture and design policy. The debate is about so much more than houses and boxes; it is about architecture and design. I believe that Jamie Stone has been the only person to mention the beauty of our surroundings. There is absolutely nothing wrong with creating something beautiful. We Scots with our Calvinist streak sometimes think that everything must be functional and must have a reason to exist. No—sometimes it is nice to be surrounded by and to appreciate beautiful things. As far as architecture and design are concerned, beauty should come towards the top of our list of criteria, while  acknowledging that certain elements must be functional. We can then use that approach to focus on aspects such as architecture for communities and housing. Public art also comes into this matter. In that respect, Carolyn Leckie and Frank McAveety mentioned the Gorbals. As an aside, I agree that what has happened with architecture in that part of Glasgow has been disastrous, but the problem stems as much from the social conditions that were imposed at the time as from the design of homes. After all, high rises work in many places, especially for people with lots of money, because they can be beautiful and functional and can provide all the necessary facilities. They do not work when people are forced into them by social conditions. Similarly, garden cities and new towns are wonderful concepts, but other problems can make such places not quite as lovely as the architects and designers first imagined. Returning to public art in the Gorbals, I cannot remember what the piece is called—I am sure that Carolyn Leckie or Frank McAveety will tell me later—but I think that the angels on the buildings in Crown Gardens are absolutely fantastic. When the proposal was first reported in the newspapers, people laughed at it. Now the piece has been accepted as part of the surroundings. When everyone takes good design and architecture for granted—and, indeed, expects them as their due—we will be able to move on.

Of course. I see that the member has moved from the Conservative benches.

We are getting well carried away now. We will have not only architects working wonders in every local authority but artists beautifying towns. Perhaps we should also have musicians and street performers. Indeed, why should we not aspire to such things? Architecture in Scotland is not just a matter of the past. Just now, some fabulous Scottish architects, designers and engineers are creating wonderful designs. However, as members have pointed out, not all the design work that is being carried out is wonderful. Carolyn Leckie mentioned the schools project as an example of that. I know  that members have previously discussed ecoschools. If we gave design its proper place, instead of having standard-construction PPP buildings we could have wonderful schools that are conducive to learning and hospitals that are conducive to healing. We should not just look backwards. Jamie McGrigor and Alex Johnstone talked about the Scottish vernacular style. In Argyll, which Mr McGrigor represents, I have seen some wonderful new examples of that style—as well as some bad examples of the little boxes that Rob Gibson mentioned. We do not have to go back to centuries-old design to make things of beauty. Rob Gibson referred to the award-winning house on Loch Eriboll, which shows that it is possible for new and innovative design to fit in with the surroundings. No one has mentioned Architecture and Design Scotland's travelling exhibition on rural housing, which I found fascinating. At this point, I must congratulate the minister on establishing Architecture and Design Scotland. Although the agency has not really entered the psyche of people in Scotland, I believe that it represents a way forward. I will quote something that John Richards wrote in 1994. I had huge respect for him at the time when I worked in housing associations and I think that he is absolutely right. He wrote: "There are many examples of new buildings which interact successfully with their older neighbours without attempting to copy past styles. Even within a group, design unity does not require uniformity. New houses should not normally be expected to look as like old houses as possible, but care should be taken in their design that they do not spoil, but enhance, the public's enjoyment of neighbouring buildings." That is extremely important as a way to move forward. Members talked about community involvement in design. I saw the importance of that during my years of working in housing associations, when I also worked with some fantastic architects. I have concerns about the time when design and build came in and schemes started to become developer led. That led to some uniformity, because capital costs rather than innovation and design were all-important. However, I believe that we are starting to break away from that. An interesting example of progress is the building in Rothesay that won lots of awards. When I worked in Rothesay, I was involved in the feasibility study for the Foley House site. At that time, the feasibility study had to be about refurbishing the old building on the site and trying to cram as many box-like new houses as possible onto it. That approach was required due to the restrictions and the financial constraints under  regulation from the party that does not believe in regulation. It was impossible to achieve because the unit costs were too high. The building that is on the site now is much better. It is a fantastic, new, beautifully designed building that is gaining plaudits from all over the world and it is making local people very happy. I am rabbiting on because I have so much to say. Have I got a wee bit longer?

I refer to the summary version of the "Survey of the Building Design Professions' Attitudes to the Policy on Architecture", which was published by the Scottish Executive in July 2005. It contains some interesting things, although there is a long way to go with the architecture and design policy. The document states: "there is also reluctance among other professionals for the public to be involved in the design process without first educating and raising the levels of public understanding." That is not about elitism or snobbery, of which building design professionals are often accused. People have been faced with some horrendous housing and public buildings in Scotland, particularly in the past century. If they do not know what to aspire to or what is possible, it is difficult for them to know what they can have. The document also states that most building design professionals "would like the Executive to work more closely with schools to make young people more aware of their environment and encourage more interest and community involvement in matters affecting the built environment." So there are two strands to the issue, and it is a long-term issue. We are not going to change things overnight, but people have to know what is possible and what can be achieved. We should all work together to help to achieve that.

Does Carolyn Leckie agree that it is not the construction of kit schools that is the problem, but the uniformity of the kits, which is dictated by the developer-led nature of the projects?

Will the member give way?

Oh?

I point out that studies have shown over and over again that many people have no interest in living above shops. The proposal might also stymie development in town and city centres because there are restrictions on the types of businesses that can be located underneath residential properties. Perhaps we should be more imaginative about the use of empty spaces above commercial ventures.

No.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will join in the thanks to the senior school pupils from all over Scotland who participated in the youth forum on Europe in the Parliament on 7 and 8 May 2006 and whether it recognises the importance of youth contributions to the debate about our country's future. (S2O-9866)

In recognising the importance of youth contributions, will the minister and the Executive reflect on the concern that was unanimously expressed by the youth contributors last week that the lack of emphasis on language training in our country is potentially damaging to our future? Ailsa Wallace of Mintlaw academy encapsulated the issue: "However at the moment the Scottish education system's commitment to teaching two foreign languages has been undermined by the decisions of the Scottish executive." Will the minister, in the spirit of youth participation, undertake to meet youth representatives who took part in last week's gathering to discuss the matter further?

I apologise to you, Presiding Officer, and to Margaret Mitchell for unavoidably having to leave early. It is good that Margaret Mitchell has secured the debate. She ably outlined her views on the problems that have occurred and on how South Lanarkshire Council has behaved. I will speak just as someone who lives in Strathaven and who has tried to facilitate discussions between the council and Strathaven academy action group, which has proved hard. That is unfortunate. The council has been intransigent on the matter and I have received disingenuous letters from it. For example, back in March, the council said that the action group had never submitted its plans but, at that point, the action group was looking for a meeting at which it could ask for its plans to be considered. Such an approach does no one any good and creates the perception that local democracy has been bypassed. In relation to this case and others, I would like South Lanarkshire Council to be more amenable to discussing matters with people who are most directly affected. I know that Strathaven academy action group's plan has now been submitted to the council. I say honestly, as I have to the group, that I do not know whether that is a really good option or a brilliant plan or whether it has been properly costed. I do not pretend to have the technical expertise that would allow me to make such judgments. However, the important point is that surely a local authority should not be dictatorial in how it deals with local people. The council should sit down to consider that plan and perhaps others, because a  solution that would suit everyone might be out there. I would like that discussion to take place; it is not too late for that. I am not a parent and I do not have children at Strathaven academy, but I live in Strathaven and I am constantly approached by people who have grave concerns, which I share, about the two-year decant. Not least of the concerns is the bussing for two years of the academy's entire roll into and back from the Ballerup high school site in East Kilbride every day. That will involve using a horrible road—the A726 is not a good road. I do not want to be a scaremonger, but parents have huge concerns about their children going back and forth along that road every day. I have asked parliamentary questions about the road, which have shown that there is some confusion. One answer says that the route is a trunk road and another says that it is a local road. However, both answers show that no safety audit has been undertaken and that the Executive knows of no safety audit that is to be undertaken on that stretch of the A726. I ask the minister to take that on board and to ask his colleagues with relevant responsibility to ensure that the safety audit happens, because that road is notorious to those of us who live in the area. Timing is another issue. Strathaven academy educates not only children who live in Strathaven town centre, but children who live in Avondale and the outlying areas. Those areas really are outlying. At the moment, youngsters from places such as Drumclog and further out, on the farms, are getting picked up before 8 o'clock in the morning to get to Strathaven academy in time for 9 o'clock. When they have to add on the extra time for the decanting into East Kilbride, what on earth time are we expecting children to get up in the morning in order to attend school? Extra-curricular activities may well be missed. I noted in the local paper that South Lanarkshire Council has said that it will take steps to ensure that extra-curricular activities are not affected. With the best will in the world, I cannot see how the plan will not have some effect on extra-curricular activities. I am aware of the time, so I will close shortly and allow others to speak, but another part of Margaret Mitchell's motion mentions that pupils from Strathaven academy have been selected to represent central Scotland at the Parliament on Sunday and Monday. Margaret gave them her congratulations, as do I. Strathaven academy is a marvellous school, and all of us who live in that community are very proud of it. It is not often that I say anything terribly nice about Andy Kerr. I know that, as a minister, he cannot speak in this debate, but I also know that he thinks very highly of Strathaven academy, as do all of us who live in  the town. We are very proud that the pupils are coming to Edinburgh this weekend. We do not want any of the good work that Strathaven academy does being eroded by some of the plans that South Lanarkshire Council sadly seems to have and refuses to consider altering.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will designate a specific department with responsibility for developing a framework for language skills for Scottish businesses. (S2O-9728)

The minister will be aware that I recently received answers to a range of written questions on the subject, which pointed to undefined languages support being offered to some businesses, but made it clear that there is no overarching framework. It looks as if the greatest effort has been put into helping business to articulate demand for language skills, but I would have hoped that by now we would be beyond that stage and that we would be providing the wherewithal to acquire and access those skills. Does the minister accept that the failure to ensure that there is a proper strategy and framework could leave Scotland at a competitive disadvantage in the global marketplace? Will he consider examining the case for a proper language development framework for business across the country?

As was the case with an earlier question, Karen Gillon's question relates to local authorities' implementation of national policy frameworks. How can the Executive ensure that local authorities put into effect the agreed policies of the Parliament?

It will be up to Brian Adam to decide whether to withdraw amendment 32 when he winds up. He is the convener of the Standards and Public Appointments Committee and he has already told Parliament that such a procedure exists in the Scottish Parliamentary Standards Commissioner Act 2002. It is important to accept that the proposed procedure is not brand new and is not being sprung on Parliament for the first time. Some members have used phrases such as "in the light of experience" and "with hindsight" when  arguing that certain procedures have not worked properly. If we accept that that position is valid, we must accept that it is valid to argue that there may be a time when Parliament feels that provisions in the schedule need to be revisited. Amendment 32 refers only to modifications of the schedule. It says: "The Parliament may, by a determination, make any modifications". It does not say that one or two individuals, or only a committee, may do so, but that Parliament may do so. That suggests to me that the procedure would be similar to the one that has been used today. A committee may well make recommendations, but Parliament would have to decide whether to agree to a determination.

I will be very honest and admit that I do not know whether that would be the case. It would be up to Parliament to decide how to proceed—members would tell the parliamentary committee concerned how they wanted things to be done. That would be part of the debate.

The minister mentioned the "health, sporting and confidence-building benefits" that could accrue from the games. Is she aware that last week the Republic of the Marshall Islands became an Olympic nation, despite their being little more than an American protectorate and having a population of only 60,400? Is she aware of the proposals for Greenland and the Faroe Islands to have their own teams and that the proposals have been supported by the Danish Government? Will she now add her support to the growing campaign for Scotland to have its own Olympic team in 2012?

Business people from Europe have spoken to me many times about the difficulty of travel between Glasgow's airports. The Scottish Executive has said that it has no plans to consider establishing single-mode public transport links between those airports. Will the minister at least consider the feasibility of single-mode public transport between Glasgow and Edinburgh airports?

I am pleased to open the debate on behalf of the European and External Relations Committee. The European Union's importance as a source of legislation for the United Kingdom and Scotland is often not recognised. Indeed, even where it would be appropriate, its role is seldom appreciated. The UK Cabinet Office estimates that European Union legislation accounts for half of the total volume of regulation in the UK. In areas such as agriculture and the environment, the proportion is even higher. EU legislation impacts on all aspects of life in Scotland. For example, it affects not only regional policy and structural funds—the European and External Relations Committee is about to begin an inquiry into the future disbursal and implementation of such funds—but transport, fisheries, research and development, enterprise and industry, and justice and home affairs. Given that, in European Union terms, Scotland is a region of the EU rather than a member state with direct representation, it is crucial that the Parliament's European and External Relations Committee not only monitors the effects of EU legislation and regulation but actively seeks opportunities to influence new legislation that affects our country and, where appropriate, asks for existing legislation to be reconsidered. The Parliament should actively grasp chances to influence legislation, where we see advantage in doing so. For that reason, the European and External Relations Committee considers the European Commission's legislative and work programme, which is published every year as part of the EU's legislative cycle. The work programme lists all the Commission's intended new legislation and indicates its thinking contained in green papers, communications, reports and reviews. The committee first considered this year's work programme in November last year, shortly after it was published, and selected areas of potential interest for further consideration. The Executive also considers the Commission's work programme, and the committee has taken evidence from the relevant minister on the  Executive's priority programme of work and how it overlaps with that of the Commission. Other committees of the Parliament address specific subjects within their remits. By considering the Commission's work programme, preparing their positions and making timeous representation, the Parliament's committees can try to influence the final shape of new and substantial legislation that is of importance to Scotland. Just as there are opportunities for private individuals and interest groups to respond directly to Brussels, there are opportunities for our committees to do so. For example, committees can submit direct responses to Commission green papers and can lobby the UK Government and the UK Parliament and its committees. The theory is that we have a favourable wind as, following the negative results of the French and Dutch referenda on the constitutional treaty, the Commission says it is particularly keen to listen to views from below member state level—from regional level, from citizens and from institutions close to them. Although committee colleagues will have more detailed comments to make, I would like to point out some of the legislative developments that we can hope to influence and on which we can make our views known. The first is the proposal for a European institute of technology, which envisages the establishment of five centres of research across the European Union. The committee raised the issue with the Executive and continues to follow developments, to ensure that if there is potential for Scotland in the proposal, advantage is taken of it. We look forward to further proposals from the Commission, which are expected in June. The second issue is the Commission's proposed green paper on adaptation to climate change, which will help to identify areas where action is needed at Community level to support the EU's adaptation to increasing adverse effects of climate change. The Environment and Rural Development Committee has engaged with that issue in the past, as has the European and External Relations Committee, during its consideration of the July G8 summit agenda. There may be further committee engagement with the issue in 2006. Structural funds are another issue. Agreement on the budget for 2007 to 2013 at the December European Council has made possible progress on planning for structural funds programmes. The European and External Relations Committee has agreed to respond to the UK Government's consultation on the national strategic reference framework, focusing on the Scottish section, as the Scottish Executive is responsible for the delivery of funds in Scotland. The committee will also invite the Executive and others to give evidence on the disbursal of structural funds and  the implementation of programmes over the new budgetary period. A further issue is energy. The committee will shortly consider its response to the Commission's green paper on a European strategy for sustainable, competitive and secure energy. Sustainable development, covering areas such as renewables, carbon capture and energy efficiency, is likely to be a major focus of our interest. As everyone knows, some elements of energy policy are within the Parliament's remit. There is a proposal to complete the internal market for postal services while maintaining safeguards to ensure that a universal postal service continues to be provided across member states. Although the issue is reserved, the proposal has potential implications for rural Scotland—remote areas and island communities—in particular. The committee has already taken up the issue with the Executive. There is also the better regulation agenda. The work programme includes a dedicated section on better and more effective regulation, as part of the growth and jobs strategy. A member of our committee, Jim Wallace, is currently engaged as rapporteur in an inquiry into the transposition and implementation of EU directives in Scotland. The committee is looking forward to considering the recommendations that will follow from that inquiry. As I said earlier, the Scottish Executive has its own list of EU priorities for this year—some of which overlap with the Commission's programme—that it presented to the committee on 28 February. Some of those priorities are near the end of the legislative cycle, but others that have the committee's support are close enough to the start of the cycle for us to influence them, such as the European institute of technology. The committee is particularly pleased that the Executive agrees on the potential importance of that initiative for Scotland. Other examples are the European qualifications framework and the applicable law and jurisdiction in divorce, with which the Justice 1 Committee has been actively engaged. It is crucial that the committees of the Parliament ensure that Scottish interests are taken fully into account. That has not exhausted the list of issues that the European and External Relations Committee is tracking, but they are all issues of importance to Scotland and we have the opportunity to influence them if we wish—and in many cases we should. I do not have time to mention many of those issues so, to conclude, in the interests of Scotland this Parliament must ensure that it has mechanisms in place to understand, monitor and influence European policy. The Commission's work  programme is one element that enables such understanding. I am pleased to have presented a quick résumé of the work of the European and External Relations Committee to ensure that we have such understanding and promote our potential influence. I move, That the Parliament notes the European Commission's Legislative and Work Programme for 2006 and its importance for the work of the Parliament and its committees and to Scotland.

Unlike Nora Radcliffe, I am horrified to learn that I have only nine months left as a young thing and that I will then suddenly become part of a strategy for old age.

That sounds like very good advice. I will try to get over my horror and astonishment and to make some of the points that I had planned to make. The minister started by talking about an issue that we have been discussing in western societies for a long time—the demographic change that cannot be ignored. There are many more older people in our societies. However, many members have made the point that older people are not a homogeneous group. Just as there are in any other walk of life or age span, there are many variations within the group. I want to talk about a particular group about which I have spoken many times before—elderly carers, especially elderly parents of children with learning difficulties. There has been much talk about that issue of late, due in large part to the Murray Owen Carers Group in East Kilbride in South Lanarkshire, which has submitted petitions to the Parliament and has been very active in raising awareness through Enable. As a result of its activity, South Lanarkshire Council recently published a report that contains a great deal of information and which the Executive is considering. There are some items of concern. Although I am quite knowledgeable about this subject, some points in the report really stunned me. We must bear in mind that its findings do not apply only to South Lanarkshire, but are likely to be relevant to the whole of Scotland. The report highlights the exacting nature of caring tasks for elderly parents. Two fifths of their sons and daughters living at home have an additional disability, such as epilepsy, erratic sleeping and dementia. Irene Oldfather talked about dementia in older people, but people with some forms of learning disability are prone to early-onset dementia with which elderly parents whose children still live at home have to deal. More than 42 per cent of family carers are lone parents and of them more than a quarter are over 70 years of age.  The problem is not just their living situation, but the fact that there seems to be disparity in different places—that takes us back to the postcode situation—in achieving assistance and getting information about help and services. That creates a terrible anxiety about the quality of the support that exists. I have come to be very fond of the people I know who are over 80 and caring for their adult children at home. The report said that for many older family carers in South Lanarkshire, any new services might come too late and that the local authority should work with older carers as a matter of urgency. I found that particularly horrifying. The problem is probably Scotland-wide, and that is disturbing. What brought the Murray Owen Carers Group to petition the Parliament was the publication of the report "The same as you?" The strategy was very worthy and the people who petitioned the Parliament had no problem with the principles of the report, but they said that despite the worthy attempts to ensure that people with learning difficulties who come from institutional care are properly placed and looked after in communities, those who still live in their family homes are not being provided for to the same extent. Only one parent in the East Kilbride group of elderly carers of adults with learning difficulties has been able to get rented accommodation for her adult son to move into and that happened only after a crisis situation. That contrasts with the new accommodation that was recently provided for five residents so that they could move out of a hostel and into proper housing. That is not to say that those five residents should not have got that proper housing, but the needs of other groups must be considered, too. We have spoken about demographic change and the fact that there are now more elderly people, but there has also been demographic change in relation to people with learning difficulties. The University of Lancaster carried out an interesting study on behalf of one of the Whitehall departments, although I cannot remember which one. The report says that there is good reason to believe that as a result of changes in the demographic profile of people with learning disabilities, changes in expectations and the pattern of informal care, the situation will become substantially more pressing over the following two decades. I know that the Executive has seen and considered that academic study and that there are no plans to commission the same kind of research for Scotland. However, as I said, the South Lanarkshire situation is likely to be spread throughout Scotland and I imagine that the situation in England is similar. I ask the Executive  to consider carefully and with compassion the needs of elderly carers of adults with learning difficulties.

To ask the Scottish Executive, in the context of its rural development strategy, what role rural postal services play in promoting a more diverse rural economy and thriving rural communities. (S2O-9423)

Does the minister agree that, where the only postbox servicing a community has to be removed, a year after the removal of the postbus service, Royal Mail must then ensure that a replacement facility is put in place without delay? Can he exert influence in any way on Royal Mail to ensure that the rural community of Gilmerton has a postal collection service that does not require people to walk along a busy road with no pavements?

And Italy.

When I joined the European and External Relations Committee, it was just compiling the report "An Inquiry into the Scottish Executive's Fresh Talent Initiative Examining the Problems It Aims to Address, Its Operation, Challenges and Prospects". It was immediately obvious to me that a lot of time had been spent and a lot of hard work had been done by committee members, past and present, under the stewardship of the redoubtable John Swinney, who was the committee's previous convener. The clerking team and staff of the Scottish Parliament information centre also did a lot of work on the report. I found it an extremely interesting report and I enjoyed contributing to its compilation. Since its publication, however, there have been changes, and the initiative has progressed in some ways. The committee recognised in its report that, as a relatively new policy that aimed to tackle long-term issues, the fresh talent initiative would change and develop. No doubt, the minister will outline during the debate his perspective on progress made; likewise, others will express their views about the initiative's effectiveness and ambition. My role today is to reflect the findings and recommendations of the European and External Relations Committee. The committee's first recommendation was that the Executive should set out clearly the purpose, direction and expectations of the initiative to help to ensure a better understanding of how the initiative fits into Scotland's economic strategy. We recommended that as well as attracting external talent, the Executive should aim to mobilise Scotland's existing talent pool to the fullest extent, paying particular attention to the 688,000 people in Scotland who are economically inactive. The evidence that we received suggested that the employability framework should be revisited. As part of that, another recommendation stated that in "mobilising Scotland's existing talent, the Executive seeks to address any barriers to economic participation." We recommended that the Executive should develop into policy the originally stated intention of  attracting skilled Scots and graduates back to work in Scotland. In relation to potential new Scots contributing to our nation, the committee recognised existing examples. For example, we noted the Executive's recruitment efforts in Poland and recommended that such work should be undertaken in a proactive, promotional way in other accession states. We also recognised the experience of the FirstGroup and suggested that it be promoted as an example of good practice in identifying and filling the skills gap. In some of the recommendations, we expressed concern about the employment conditions and needs of potential workers in developing countries. We recommended that " the Executive monitor recruitment processes to ensure it avoids depriving developing countries of needed skills through the Fresh Talent initiative", and asked it to report back to the committee in that regard. Some members expressed concern about the exploitation of workers who come to our country to work in certain sectors, and there was much discussion about the report's recommendation that " the Scottish Agricultural Wages Board and other bodies should monitor proactively the employment of foreign labour through agencies to prevent unfair exploitation of foreign employees and to minimise the risk of friction between local and foreign workers."  Of course, we also acknowledged that such workers need support to be able to fit in with our society, and recommended that " the Executive consider the support that employers of Fresh Talent workers may need in taking into account the particular social, moral and cultural responsibilities that there may be in taking on non-UK workers."

I hope that Irene Oldfather, who was party to all the discussions on the inquiry, will discuss that question with other committee members and respond directly to Mr Stone's point when she sums up. Although I absolutely see where he is coming from, the point was not raised in the short time that I was involved in the report's compilation. Other speakers will no doubt focus on recent announcements on the United Kingdom's immigration policy. On that matter, the committee's recommendation was quite clear: we wanted the Executive to " report to the Committee on the views it has expressed to the Home Office on the new points-based immigration system it is proposing as a replacement for the many existing work schemes for non-EEA nationals."  The recommendation that probably received more media coverage than any other was that " the Executive, in its discussions with the Home Office, make the case for employment opportunities for those asylum seekers awaiting a decision."  That recommendation recognises that a lot of fresh talent is already available in Scotland, but that we are not able to utilise it because of laws over which we have no control. I do not know whether, since it responded to our report, the Executive has gone any further than its response at that time, which was that it was up to the Home Office to determine policy on the issue. Perhaps the minister can give us some more information about that. One of the committee's overarching recommendations was that the Executive should ensure that, instead of "being a stand-alone initiative", fresh talent is mainstreamed across policy areas. In that respect, the committee also felt that "in seeking to grow the Scottish economy, the Executive may see sectoral employment gaps which a more focused approach within Fresh Talent may be able to address directly." I very much look forward to hearing from committee members who, unlike me, were involved in the inquiry and the compilation of this fine report from the start to the finish and to hearing the minister's views. I move, That the Parliament notes the 4th Report 2005 (Session 2) of the European and External Relations Committee, Report on an  Inquiry into the Scottish Executive's Fresh Talent Initiative Examining the Problems It Aims to Address, Its Operation, Challenges and Prospects (SP Paper 448).

I really enjoyed listening to Dennis Canavan opening the debate. It struck me that he had so much to say and so little time to say it in, which is a mark of just how big the poverty agenda is, both nationally and internationally. Dennis Canavan made the important point that, although we can have respect for Hilary Benn and for others who are doing some good work, there is fundamental bottom line, which is that we do not contribute the 0.7 per cent that we said we would contribute. Other countries comparable to ours manage to do so, but we do not, and until we meet that commitment we have no right to be parading about saying just how wonderful we are. Patrick Harvie mentioned that it would be possible for this Parliament to do something, and indeed it would. We welcome the £3 million that was announced for international development, and it is wonderful that this Parliament is taking a stand, but other devolved legislatures—in the Basque Country, for example—use a portion of their income for international development. I would like the Government in Scotland to say that that is something that it wants to achieve, and it is something that would gain cross-party support in this Parliament. There are lots of different issues that could be mentioned, but as there is not enough time to cover them all, I want to highlight the hypocrisy of the developed countries in the European Union, whose own commissioned studies have come to the conclusion that trade liberalisation harms poor communities and environments, yet which still  push ahead with the agenda of pressing developing nations to agree to ambitious market targets. We have to stop pushing those poor countries, through the world trade talks, to open their economies in ways that suit us, and we must respect their right to decide their trade policies so that they can end poverty and protect the environment. That is not a naive view, because I also recognise that there are highly inappropriate forms of democracy in some developing nations. Governance is a really big issue, so we also have to fund governance measures in a lot of those countries to ensure that the people who are worst affected actually help to make the decisions on how to move their countries forward. We can sometimes be a wee bit smug when we look at some of the things that we are achieving, and we tend to think that things are working well when the reality is often different. I am going to say something about Malawi, because I was there last week and it is freshest in my memory. It may look on the surface as if we are doing really well with HIV/AIDS programmes in which there is take-up, and people are quite positive about how things are moving forward, but there is also evidence that there is not equality of access for treatment in some of those health programmes, because the poorer people are not getting the treatment. There are cultural reasons for that, so education at grass-roots level is needed in communities, so that they can grow and blossom into something that will help the country to make progress. We talk about the fact that some African countries have achieved 100 per cent primary school education. That might be the law, and it is wonderful, but there are a heck of a lot of orphans out there who cannot get to school because they are looking after younger siblings and trying to earn money to keep the family. If there are about a million orphans in Malawi alone, that will be a huge issue for the future, and it is something that we must consider if we are serious about moving the country forward. I am not knocking what people are doing, but I caution all of us not to get too carried away with what we see as good results on paper. Let us be a bit more objective when we look at what we are actually achieving, and let us recognise that social organisations as well as Governments need to be funded. I hope that such organisations in Africa will blossom and move up, as happened in Latin America. I hope that what comes down from the top level will help to create a better future.

I stand here so often with a sense of déjà vu and I have—encore—that sense now. In the previous session of Parliament there was the cities review, the annual social justice report—which has been abandoned—the sustainable development strategy, the closing the opportunity gap strategy, the smart, successful Scotland strategy and the employability framework. Now we have a regeneration strategy, which is a "statement of intent" and a commitment to "a series of meetings and events ... to discuss our approach to regeneration". However, it is not, as it has been billed, a policy statement; rather it is, as the minister said, the start of a process. No new policies have been laid out, nor have any new plans or real actions that can be pinned down. The statement is all a bit amorphous and insubstantial. It says things such as, "We aim to lay down a framework for our future action". An action plan, in fact, is due later this year. That is all, despite a ministerial group having met for the past two years. We do, however, have new terminology. We now have "mixed ... communities", which have taken over from balanced communities. I am still waiting for a minister to tell me what the heck a balanced community is. The Executive never defined it, so it has changed it. This time we are not having a steering group, a consultative panel, a task force or a working group—we are having a "sounding board". I have a real concern about the "People and Place" document, but that is overshadowed by a greater initiative sickness because there has been initiative upon initiative. The Executive may attempt to convince us that that is joined-up government, but it comes across instead as a confusing and crowded bidding agenda. There is lack of clarity and a waste of resources at Executive and agency levels. On the creation of the two urban regeneration companies, will they have any relationship at all with the pathfinder companies that were announced last year? Is the funding for regeneration additional to the cities growth fund and the vacant and derelict land fund? We hear more and more announcements all the time, but how many measures are delivered? How  many are completed? What will have to give this time, to allow another measure to go ahead? If the proposed policy is actually one of consolidation, the minister should tell us exactly how much new money is being committed by the Government, and how much money is forecast or expected from the private sector. Is the Commonwealth games village in Glasgow included in the policy? Will the minister tell us now or will we, further down the line, have to watch the charade of Glasgow City Council and the Scottish Executive standing up, patting each other on the back and reannouncing money? I could talk for ever about housing, but I am running out of time. How often will the 21,500 affordable homes be reannounced? Why are we still encouraging private sector developers and registered social landlords to build for sale or rent in the most deprived areas? As for the idea of demonstration mixed-tenure projects, they have been around for years and years. We do not need any more pilot schemes. We have areas of deprivation and we have to address the consequences of market failure in the west of Scotland. That has to be done, but it is to the shame of successive Governments that areas that had heavy industries in the past are still undergoing transition. If the market is structurally tilted against people, and if we cannot make macro-adjustments to the way in which they compete in that market, we are forced to intervene at a micro level. We are forced to put sticking plasters over gaping wounds. It is sad for our nation that that is what this Executive seems to be intent on doing.

Cumbernauld!"

Like Christine Grahame, I was a bit worried about having another subject debate on volunteering. I had hoped that I would hear some announcements about the strategic funding review or full cost recovery or that futurebuilders Scotland was more successful than when we last debated it, when it was running behind schedule, but I heard nothing of the sort. We are in danger of becoming a bit patronising by patting people in the voluntary sector on the back every now and then. It is a wonderful sector in which people do wonderful things, but how long can the Executive come up with task forces and strategies without coming up with the goods that make the sector work better? The latest strategy is "A Vision for the Voluntary Sector: The Next Phase of Our Relationship", which Malcolm Chisholm launched in December 2005 and which I read through again last night. It does not say anything with which I disagree, but it certainly says some things that I do not quite understand—we must have such documents in language that is easier to understand; the Plain English Campaign comes to mind. The vision outlines some of the elements of Executive policy so far, some of which have been good, but I am concerned that it does not say what our voluntary sector as a whole is about and acknowledge the sector's diversity. I am worried that we are starting to talk about the voluntary sector as if it is all one, without realising that, just because people are in voluntary organisations, that does not mean they are all the same. It is the same with the business sector: we talk about it as if it is all one, but everybody realises that IBM is not quite the same as the wee grocer shop on the corner. I make a plea on behalf of small organisations  that have been working away in their communities for many years—decades, in some cases—but feel that they are losing out because the umbrella organisations are involved in a big voluntary sector push. That push is a good thing, but not all voluntary organisations are members of the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations, have staff or feel confident to approach the Executive.

Yes, and that is what Christine Grahame said earlier. There are an awful lot more volunteers in Scotland than we count, because people volunteer to do things all the time and do not even realise that they are volunteers. However, there are organisations that provide vital public services and need the funding, partnership agreements and compacts that allow them to operate. The Parliament has been in existence for six years and we have talked away about core funding, three-year programmes and the fact that voluntary organisations need the guarantee of continuing funding, but none of that is happening. In May last year, the minister said that core funding was no longer an issue because we were moving on to full cost recovery. When on earth will that happen? I am also interested in ProjectScotland, which I mentioned in last year's debate. It is marvellous. The minister said today that ProjectScotland is being focused on less well-off young people. I ask him to tell me how that is happening. Do we have in place something that allows them to go overseas and volunteer for a year even though they do not have the support network to fall back on in a family, a home or some kind of funding? Are we examining the benefit system and finding ways to allow them to achieve such things? I have spoken to young people in Motherwell who would love to go overseas and do international development work but, if they are homeless, on benefit and do not have the support network that much more fortunate young people have, it is just a pipe dream. The minister says that, through Jobcentre Plus, we are building up support networks for those who are less well-off to enable them to volunteer. How is that being done and what type of people are benefiting from the initiative? Is an agreement on benefits in place to allow people to volunteer as a step towards employment in time? I end by making a plea for the small organisations, which Donald Gorrie mentioned. They do very good work on a small scale but are told that there is no point in their applying for more lottery funding if they carry on doing the same thing—that is on the Community Fund website.  For some people who need support, innovation is not good, because they like the familiar and like to continue with what they have. That must be acknowledged.

The SNP amendment welcomes the sustainable development strategy and supports its vision, but we ask that achievable targets be set so that individuals, businesses, local authorities and  communities play their part in reducing Scotland's global footprint. Other members have commented on the need to take tough decisions, such as the hard choices to which Des McNulty referred. Although it is true that a sustainable development strategy must be led from the top by example and encouragement, it is sometimes necessary to offer the stick rather than the carrot if we are to ensure that things really happen. I believe that the minister and the Executive have a genuine commitment to sustainable development, but I have concerns about the timidity that is inherent in "Choosing Our Future". For example, page 8 states: "We hope these will inspire others to follow suit." That is fine, but we need action. In the section on procurement on page 80, the document states: "The Executive needs to show leadership". I agree, but is that a tacit admission that the Executive has not shown leadership already? If such leadership results in no moves forward, what will the Executive do? Hope, inspiration and showing leadership are good things, but they may not be enough to achieve the required changes. Despite the absence of targets and detailed steps on how those will be achieved, the strategy document gives an important role to the voluntary sector. A plethora of organisations are mentioned: "The Executive will work closely with the Sustainable Scotland Network, Scottish Sustainable Development Forum, Sustainable Development Commission, Forward Scotland and other key stakeholders". I am also aware that the sus it out programme was recently announced at a presentation at Edinburgh castle and that funding is being provided to help civic society to move forward and become engaged with the issue. I am concerned about the lack of a single, coherent voice on this matter, although that concern, which is not just for this minister's department, might be for another day. For some time, I have also been concerned that voluntary organisations are becoming so entangled in delivering on Government plans that, instead of Government standing up and being firm about what must happen, those organisations increasingly appear to be little more than one of its arms, delivering services. I look for reassurance that Scotland's voluntary organisations are not being asked to deliver on the Executive's environmental targets. For example, is there a requirement on local authorities to engage with the sus it out campaign? What kind of clout does the campaign have? Does the Executive back what it is trying to achieve?  I am also interested in what the strategy has to say about both housing and public buildings. The issue has been discussed before; indeed, the document cites the very good example of the Slateford Green project in Edinburgh, which was built for a housing association and shows what can be achieved. Moreover, excellent long-standing projects in Shettleston and Easterhouse in Glasgow are heated by communal wood-burning facilities. We should move in that direction. However, the public sector and other sectors are not doing enough to develop real sustainable housing. By that, I am not simply referring to the eco-housing model; I am talking about smaller projects. For example, housing stock transfer organisations have ordered thousands of sets of uPVC windows. What is wrong with wood? It is more sustainable, and brings us back to the potential for local delivery and employment and the green economy. We should take such matters more into account. Alex Johnstone said that initial capital cost was an issue for affordable housing. However, why should capital cost be an issue only for people who cannot afford to buy their own homes or who choose to rent from housing associations, councils or other public sector bodies? The secret is to consider the whole life of these houses. After all, best value is not just a matter of unit cost; as I have said, the whole-life aspects of these buildings must be taken into consideration. I have cited the example of Scandinavia before, and we should examine how those countries deal with and cost their housing. We should not simply think about how much we can achieve—

Alex Johnstone has raised a particular issue. However, from my experience in housing development, I know that the claim that such projects have higher upfront capital costs is often no more than rhetoric. That is where the Government must lead by saying, "No—we want these standards to be achieved" and using the stick as well as the carrot. However, we can always begin with the public housing sector, which receives public funds. After all, we cannot exactly force private housing developers to use sustainable materials if housing associations of whatever hue are themselves using non-sustainable materials. We have to look at the whole picture.  I have not left myself an awful lot of time to moan about some of the ridiculous public buildings that are being built, but Robin Harper referred to some earlier. As studies have shown, public finance initiative schemes for hospitals and schools are not sustainable, despite all the rhetoric about how the materials can be reused if there is sensitive deconstruction. That is not always the case. [ Interruption. ] It looks as though I am going to have to finish.

Right. Well, I will finish by mentioning again—

We could achieve an awful lot more if the Parliament had the powers. I urge everyone to support the SNP amendment.

I am glad that Professor Bramley will carry out further research into housing supply. Will it take account of where people want to live in housing market areas by covering difficult-to-let properties and potential demolitions? I was pleased to hear the minister's comments on the innovation fund and his assurance that we would build on successful approaches. Certain cross-cutting and innovative measures have already been taken on homelessness and its causes; for example, the minister has visited the youth-based accommodation, employment and support services—or ACCESS—project in north Lanarkshire. Concerns have been expressed that such projects could be closed because interim new futures funding has run out and that innovative approaches might well be lost if services are mainstreamed. Will efforts be made to ensure that existing successful approaches remain as they are?

To ask the Scottish Executive what guidance has been given to national health service boards in respect of the identification and prevention of osteoporosis. (S2O-8508)

I think that the minister would agree that there is variation in services across the country in the identification, treatment and management of osteoporosis. Will he consider drawing up a national strategy to combat osteoporosis? Does he recognise that, in the long term, that would give a better quality of life to those with the condition, as well as creating both time and cost savings for the health service throughout Scotland?

Welcome to the voice of reason. All I will say in response to Mr Sheridan and his amendment is  that if he wants to ask me about my Edinburgh flat, I will tell him about it. It is that easy—he does not need to rant about it. I am sure that that goes for most of my colleagues. We are here to debate the Interests of Members of the Scottish Parliament Bill. Progress on the bill was well under way before I became a member of the committee. I am impressed by the work that has been done over nearly five years to try to get the bill right. We must get it right. As Bill Butler said, we are obliged to bring forward a bill to replace the members' interests order. The bill relates to the principles on which the Parliament was founded; they are basic principles on which we can all agree. We might disagree about who has the most wisdom—personally, I think that it is Scottish National Party members. There is, in general, willingness in the Parliament to examine the issues properly and proceed on the basis of evidence that is presented to us. We seek justice in many forms—we may not agree on the best path to deliver it, but at least we already have a firm parliamentary tradition that insists that injustices cannot be swept under the carpet. There is a common desire for the delivery of justice. As far as compassion is concerned, each member can look to themselves on that one. The principle of integrity is the one that links into what we are doing today at stage 1 of the bill. We must ensure that we are personally and collectively as a Parliament accountable to the electorate and the population. However, the process must be proportionate and workable. That is why I give credit to those who have worked hard on the bill and to those who have responded to requests by committee members to put forward their points of view. The issues can be difficult, although some of them are obvious. Bill Butler mentioned paid advocacy. It is obvious that members should not take payment for putting forward points of view in the Parliament. The point about overseas travel is also fairly obvious. Other things are not so obvious, however. When I joined the committee, the prejudice test was being discussed. The issue at the time was one of members having to consider their interests objectively in the light of a perception of gain. Although such perceptions can be actual or guided by others, all of us recognise their importance. Nowadays, perceptions are quite often seen as fact. An awful lot of members feel that that is the case and recognise the difficulties in having to deal with them. We have to try very hard to do everything that we can to ensure that perception is not seen as all and that the facts are made available.  Responsibility for the issue does not lie only with the members of the Standards and Public Appointments Committee; it is one for all MSPs. It is a good thing that an ad hoc committee is being established for stage 2. It means that members other than those on the Standards and Public Appointments Committee will look at the matter. It is also good that the ad hoc committee will take forward the views that are expressed in today's debate, look at the issues in a brand new light and, following its stage 2 deliberations, bring the matter back to the chamber. Members of the ad hoc committee should be given a certain leeway; they should be allowed to be imaginative and not feel that they have to say, "Oh, we have already agreed the principles—some of them are set in stone." As Bill Butler said, some principles are set in stone under the Scotland Act 1998—to do with criminal offences, for example—but we can look again at other things. The committee will bring the bill back to the chamber for all of us to consider again. Too often in the Parliament, we just let others get on with things—I am as guilty of that as the next person—and then, when something is put down in black and white, we all go, "Oh, gosh! I didn't realise that that was going to happen," and panic ensues. I urge all members to speak to the members of the ad hoc committee about any of their concerns. In that way, the ad hoc committee will get a broad picture of the views of MSPs on the matter.

I have been away from the Communities Committee for a wee while, but I was pleased to learn from Tricia Marwick and from today's debate that the spirit that existed before has continued, with the Executive genuinely taking on board the committee's suggestions. To some extent, that is evident in the bill. It is a great thing, and it is how we should be working. Having said that, I want ministers to take my comments in the spirit of being constructive, because that is how they are meant—I will get on to the non-constructive ones in a minute. However, I mean this constructively: it is great that the housing improvement task force was set up. It was an excellent way to promote the housing legislation that was so desperately needed. The reality is that announcements and legislation are not always guarantees of delivery. I am concerned that we have done so much—admirably—that we are perhaps missing some bits somewhere, that we are not quite on top of the situation and that we are not where we want to be. I will mention the Homelessness etc (Scotland) Act 2003 at this point. We had a debate on homelessness recently. I do not think that any of us are convinced that the situation has advanced as we would have liked it to. It is time to take stock of all the housing legislation that we have put through. As Tricia Marwick mentioned, there is other legislation relating to housing. I have some concerns about whether there are contradictions in some pieces of legislation. I remember that the rest of the Communities Committee was terribly amused when I expressed great excitement at the visit of the Scottish Association of Chief Building Control Officers to the committee to give evidence. From what its members were saying, I felt that they had concerns about how the Housing (Scotland) Bill related to the Building (Scotland) Act 2003, the new building regulations and so on. We need to reconsider that.

I have one minute, so I now have to be non-constructive. Although I welcome the assurances the minister has given today about Glasgow Housing Association, I am surprised at the near complacency that exists, according to which we seem to be saying, "Aren't we good, having reacted as we did?" It should not be about having a reaction; the situation should have been sorted before we had the reaction and before the debacle that took place. After all, the GHA is a creation of the Executive, which should have been on top of what was happening. A huge tranche of funding went to the GHA—that is not to be denied—but can the minister confirm that the money required to allow second-stage transfers of all the stock in Glasgow that was transferred to the GHA was given and that it is still there? I do not know whether the money is still there. I ask the minister to enlighten us. Such transfers can be expensive, and funding needs to be front loaded to create savings later on.

In closing, could I also ask yet again whether—

When it comes to future transfers, will the rights of tenants be preserved in respect of community ownership?

It is obvious that Edinburgh does not have the same tradition of community ownership as Glasgow. Did anyone take the time to explain to the tenants of Edinburgh what the options were in relation to true community ownership before it was decided what would go in the ballot proposal?

Like Tricia Marwick, I welcome amendment 64, provided that it will stop the debacle that the GHA has suffered of late. I cannot help feeling that if the Executive had accepted the SNP amendment to the bill that became the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001 that would have enshrined in legislation a right to community ownership, we would not be in the position that we are in now. I am concerned that the Executive has never been able to define what it means by community ownership. I have asked it that question repeatedly, but I have never had a response that has given any kind of answer. Can the minister guarantee that the second-stage transfer in Glasgow will go ahead for all tenants and will not just be a token gesture that involves some people in specific areas? Will all tenants of Glasgow Housing Association now have the right to proceed to second-stage transfer? If necessary, will resources follow the bill to allow that to happen?  The minister mentioned the stock transfer in Edinburgh but, as far as I am aware, amendment 64 makes no reference to second-stage transfers. Will the right to proceed to second-stage transfer be given to all tenants who are the subject of large-scale voluntary transfers? Will they be able to take control of their own housing destiny and to shape their areas and communities in the way they want to? Surely that is the spirit of all the talk that there has been.

On behalf of the SNP, I speak to oppose the business motion. We believe whole-heartedly that a debate is now necessary, especially after what we have heard earlier in the afternoon and this evening. The confusion on the issue is now immense. The First Minister has said that the Home Office briefing is cack-handed. I would like to talk about the substance of the matter, which we have discussed before. The First Minister stated that he wants "to ensure that we in Scotland have a regime that ensures not only that there is consistent application of immigration and asylum rules but that the system operates humanely."— [ Official Report , 29 September 2005; c 19655.]  Nicol Stephen stated: "We want asylum seekers in this country—particularly in cases in which children are involved—to be treated with dignity, respect and fairness when they require to be removed from the United Kingdom."— [ Official Report , 27 October 2005; c 20096.]  The Executive's amendment at the debate on the matter stated that the Executive would "convey to the Home Office the widespread concerns about practices such as so-called 'dawn raids', handcuffing of children, and the removal of children by large groups of officers in uniform and body armour." I think that everyone in the Parliament agrees that those practices mean that people are not treated with dignity, respect and fairness. Malcolm Chisholm said during the debate that what was happening was "absolutely appalling." It seems to me that we all want the same thing, despite the spin that Executive ministers have been putting on what exactly the protocol means. We all want the practices to stop, because such treatment offends us and it offends the people against whom it is meted out; it offends those who have come to care for those people in their community and it offends everyone who has dignity. Let us have a debate. I ask the First Minister to accept one of the amendments that have been moved to allow us to have the debate in which he can reiterate his true views and feelings about what is happening. I also believe that if we have an unequivocal pledge from the First Minister, not in the rammy that is First Minister's question time  but during a structured debate, the Parliament will come behind him and say that it is pleased that he is taking a stand and saying to the Home Office, "This is not acceptable in our country. You have no alternative but to stop it and to deal with this." The First Minister would have behind him not just the Parliament but civic Scotland, including all the voluntary groups and the professionals who work every day with the people who are being treated in this way and see the sorrow that is caused. He would also have behind him the general population of this country, because we all want to know that Scotland stands for dignity, respect and fairness. We want our First Minister, with the backing of the Parliament, to go down to the Home Office and tell it that that is how Scotland is going to be.

First, I want to restate how all this started. In February 2002, the homelessness task force recommended setting a target of 10 years for local authorities to be in a position to offer permanent accommodation to all homeless applicants, regardless of their priority need status. I think that at the time Tommy Sheridan said that 10 years—a decade—was too long. However, the Executive agreed with the recommendation, which was  endorsed by the Parliament when it passed the Homelessness etc (Scotland) Bill. The 2012 target then became part of the Executive's overall housing policy. Under the 2003 act, the Executive is required to make a statement by the end of the year on how the target will be met. That is why, like Tricia Marwick, I was bemused to discover that this afternoon's business was to be not that statement, but another subject debate on homelessness. Although the minister assured us that the statement will be made, I was still wondering why we are having this debate, given that only seven weeks are left before recess and the clocks go back this weekend. Then I listened carefully to Des McNulty, who referred to limiting supply in relation to those who require or desire either to rent or to transfer to more suitable accommodation. That is fair enough; as many members, especially Murray Tosh, have pointed out, we are talking about bricks and mortar. However, to the loud support of some of his Labour colleagues, Des McNulty then called for the 2012 target to be scrapped. Is that why the minister called this subject debate only weeks before having to make his required statement? Is he testing the water to see what might happen if he ditches the target? Does he intend to water down the impact of his statement? I hope not. The Executive has a responsibility to meet that target and the SNP would find it unacceptable if the target were diluted, extended or abandoned. I suspect that, in saying so, I speak for other members in the chamber.

With respect—

With respect, it is up to the Government to get things right before the legislation is passed. I hope that that is what the Government did. At the time, I expressed concern that the target might turn out to be only an aspiration and was assured by the minister that there would be no increase in homeless applications. Well, as we know, the current situation is very different. Patrick Harvie, Tommy Sheridan and other members expressed the view that the target can  be met if the political will and resources are there. Indeed, Roseanna Cunningham pointed out that COSLA asked for assurances that the resources would be made available. The two strands of the homelessness policy are prevention and supply, the first of which includes housing support. In her opening speech, the deputy minister said that the key was manageability and sustainability. That would be fine but for the fact that the Executive has cut the supporting people fund, which, by supporting vulnerable people in their tenancies, provided one of the cost-effective ways of preventing homelessness. The Scottish Executive must reverse the 12 per cent real-terms cut in the fund in the current year. Another aspect of prevention is housing advice, which must also be funded. The housing benefit system must be reformed to ensure that it works smoothly and properly. I cannot remember who said that it is unacceptable for landlords to begin repossession action when an outstanding benefit claim is being processed but, whoever it was, they were right.

Right from the start, the SNP has called for responsibility for housing benefit to be brought within the Scottish Parliament's remit. That certainly could happen. The other strand of the homelessness policy is supply. We talk a good talk in the chamber, but the truth is that, despite the targets that the minister talks up in every housing debate, the number of housing association new builds has consistently fallen over the past four years. We have heard lots today, as often before, about infrastructure, land use, planning and other such things. Innovative solutions are required to enable the 2012 target to be met and I want to hear about them when the minister makes his statement just before Christmas. I want to hear about innovative solutions, about prevention measures and about the resources that will be put in place to allow councils to achieve the target by 2012. What I want from the minister today is a clear statement that the 2012 target for the eradication of homelessness stands and will continue to stand.

I was pleased to sign Bill Butler's motion about the summer academy because I had the privilege of attending an open day that took place at the end of one of the fortnightly academies and was extremely impressed by what I saw. Bill Butler has outlined what the academy does, so I will give my impressions of what I saw on that day. I was invited by the principal, but that invitation was at the instigation of Kirsteen Currie, a family friend who has been one of the summer academy's mentors for a couple of years, during which time she has told me how much good is done through the work of the summer academies. I turned up that day and the place was busy, because it was the day when parents were coming  to see the young people graduate. There was an exhibition of the work that had been done during the previous fortnight. I was absolutely stunned by the amount of work that had been packed into those two weeks, by the standard of the work—some of the projects were extremely detailed—and by the variation in the work. Most of all, I was struck by the socially inclusive nature of the academy. Young people from all walks of life and from all sorts of schools were taking part in the on-going teamwork. Although the two-week academy could make some academic difference, it was primarily about motivation and confidence building. Two things stuck in my mind from that day. First, one of the teams had carried out a healthy eating project and had produced a billboard with "healthy eating" on one side and "unhealthy eating" on the other. In the middle of the "unhealthy eating" side was a big picture of Alex Johnstone stuffing his face with a pie. When I said to the team, "I know that chap. Do you know who he is?" they said, "Oh yes—he should know better." That was why his photograph had been used. I apologise to Alex Johnstone for telling that story, but I have already told him about it, so I hope that that was okay. The other thing that stuck with me was much more serious. I got talking to two young girls who had carried out a somewhat forensic project on different elements of the bladder, how people's bodies work and so on. It was complicated and interesting. One young lass said to me that, when they first went to the academy, they thought of leaving immediately because everyone else spoke much better than they did and they felt a bit out of their depth. However, they were amazed to have done better than some of the people who spoke better than them. That is an important issue—some people in that age group are not confident that they can compete and go on to higher education. In that regard, some of the parents who I spoke to were absolutely delighted that their children were doing so well at the summer academy. They were being motivated to push their children a little more because they had found out what they were capable of. Just before the graduation ceremony, there was a concert during which some of the work that had been produced was dramatised. Again, the standard of work was high and it was amazing to think that that had been achieved in two weeks. Bill Butler introduced the topic as a good news story—it certainly is and its benefits should be spread. I understand that this year pupils from 119 schools in 13 local authorities in the west of Scotland attended the academy. I would love to see that rolled out further across Scotland. The University of Strathclyde is leading the way in this initiative in Europe, and the University of  Barcelona initiative proves that. Let us roll it out across Scotland and send the benefits further.

As the First Minister said, the huge problem with the system arises when people are not removed speedily and so become part of our communities. He will also remember the fact that the Home Office declared an amnesty back in 2003 for families in such situations. When he speaks to the Home Office about his proposed protocol, will he also seek consideration of an amnesty for families who have been in Scotland for some time and who, through no fault of their own, are torn away from the country that they now consider their home?

When I close a debate, I normally respond to arguments that I have heard. However, it is more important today to lay out some of the facts. Fact number 1 is from the International Olympic Committee. It says: "Although most" national Olympic committees "are from nations, the IOC also recognises independent territories, commonwealths, protectorates and geographical areas. There are currently 202 NOCs, ranging from Albania to Zimbabwe." Of those 202, 13 represent states that the UN does not yet recognise. They include American Samoa, Aruba, Bermuda, British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Cook Islands, Guam, Hong Kong, Netherlands Antilles, which is a devolved Netherlands region, Puerto Rico and Taiwan. The Olympic charter requires a national Olympic committee to have a jurisdiction that covers the country that it is in. Fact: the Commonwealth Games Council for Scotland already covers Scotland and provides the structure for teams to compete in the Commonwealth games, so there is no reason why it cannot co-ordinate an Olympic team. We need at least five national sports federations that are affiliated to their international counterparts to be members of our national Olympic committee. We can count them off easily; I counted 25 without an awful lot of bother. When the idea was suggested in the summer, the Executive said that the decision was up to the International Olympic Committee—but we must ask it first. The committee will not run to Scotland and say, "Please form a national Olympic committee because we want to give your country funds to promote sport and to involve young people more." It is sad that the Executive has not even approached the committee with a view to considering the options for Scotland. The minister who is responsible for sport stressed yet again the need for young people to be involved in sport and for Scotland to aspire to medal winning and excellence. I will look back at the 2004 Olympic games. Slovakia, with a population of 5.4 million, had 35 competitors. Ireland, with a population of 4 million, had 48 competitors. Finland's population is 5.2 million and it had 53 competitors. Denmark's population is 5.4 million and it had 92 competitors. Scotland's population is 5 million and it had 22 competitors. Ireland had more than double the number of competitors that we had, although its population is  1 million lower than ours. How on earth does that encourage our young Scottish athletes to aspire to greatness? I still fail to understand why even to consider the option is such a problem. People from all parties in Scotland could get behind the idea.

There is nothing wrong with that, but it would be so much better if Scottish athletes could win medals for Scotland in the Olympics as they can in the Commonwealth games. Even the First Minister realises the importance of standing for one's own country. Following the 2002 Commonwealth games, Jack McConnell said: "I know that flying the flag for Scotland is a particularly special moment for our sporting stars. These winners can become role models for young Scots to participate more in sport". Prior to that, the First Minister had said: "By raising the profile of sport and showing just what Scotland can achieve on a world stage, these athletes will also provide inspiration for our sporting stars of tomorrow." Think of the inspiration that might be provided if our athletes could win Olympic medals on the world stage. Think of the encouragement that young Scots could be given if their schools and local sports clubs could tell them that they have the chance to march into Wembley in 2012 under the Scottish flag as part of the Scotland team. That is the kind of aspiration that we could aim at. I am at a loss to understand why that is seen as such a problem.

I am absolutely certain that, if there were separate Olympic teams for Wales—there is a move for a Welsh team, too—and Scotland, all the teams on the islands that form the UK would support each other. I see no problem with that. However, the healthy competition that would ensue from Scotland, England and Wales having their own Olympic teams would be good for everyone on these islands. I also find it sad that sportscotland, which is supposed to nurture sporting talent and promote sport in Scotland, has taken the view that it has taken. Despite stating that "Scots should have the opportunity to aspire to the highest  standard of participation that they desire", sportscotland seems to be unwilling to live up to the ideals of participation that it espouses. I ask the Executive to give our proposal serious consideration rather than to dismiss it out of hand as some kind of SNP political plot. Some 78 per cent of respondents to a recent survey, which was carried out by the campaign that is now up and running, agreed that Scotland should field its own Olympic team. In every radio programme that I have heard discuss the issue, the overwhelming majority of contributors have agreed on the need for a Scottish team. Therefore, the Executive should at least discuss the option as a possibility rather than reject it out of hand. Let us consider seriously whether this country could aspire to compete on its own, in partnership with the other countries of the UK, as we move forward to the 2012 Olympics.

Will Colin Fox give us his views on the talented athletes scholarship scheme and the fact that, of the 107 athletes on the scholars programme for 2012, only one is based in Scotland?

Does the member agree that, although Chris Hoy is such a talented athlete, we have no training facility in Scotland to encourage others to follow in his footsteps?

Will the member give way?

Does Mr McGrigor accept that talented athletes from all over the world train in different places all over the world? Does he also accept that the facilities in the UK are owned as much by Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland as they are by England?

I welcome the information that Marlyn Glen and the minister have just given. The police force is implementing a gender equality action plan. I wonder whether it is being monitored by the Executive, whether there are any outcomes yet  that can be discussed and whether consideration will be given to introducing something similar for ethnic minority recruitment, retention and promotion.

Is it you?

I find this a difficult debate, because there is just so much to talk about and not enough time to do everything justice. "Culture" is such a catch-all word. It covers television, classical drama, opera, folk and traditional music, jazz, dancing and ballet. It is difficult to define what culture is: one person's idea of culture might be another person's idea of absolute horror if they had to sit through it for a couple of hours. The Cultural Commission put in a lot of hard work—and, gosh, what a huge document it came up with—to try to define culture and somehow to create a route map to reach that destination. Culture is something to which everyone seems to  aspire—every man, woman and child in the country will apparently be rejoicing in their love of and participation in culture. I am not all that convinced that that is realistic, admirable intention though it is. I am also not convinced that we can be too prescriptive about culture—telling people what they will learn to enjoy. I remain to be convinced that legislating for cultural rights will take us beyond the initial euphoria of saying that everyone has a right to culture. Nevertheless, I remain open minded. The role of government, both national and local, is to ensure access to cultural activities of varying kinds, as well as to ensure that awareness is raised of the different aspects of what we call culture. There might well be a lot of people out there who would enjoy certain things but never get the chance to participate in them or to see whether they like them. One of the keys to that, which comes out strongly in the commission's report, is the education system, which is where we should begin. I like the idea of a permanent, nationally consistent culture co-ordinators scheme. Christine May talked about Fife in that respect. Some of the cultural co-ordinators that we have had have done a great job in raising awareness among schoolchildren of the potential for performing and for just enjoying. Schools are doing a lot just now—some teachers are doing an awful lot—as are our national companies. A primary school in East Kilbride has Scottish Opera come along every year. I am privileged to have gone along a couple of time to see the sterling work that Scottish Opera does in communities, which does not often get mentioned. The issue is about taking culture—I am starting to dislike using the word—or the arts into schools and letting people see the opportunities for participation and enjoyment. However, it is also about ensuring that schoolchildren are taken out of school, whether as part of curricular or extracurricular activities, to all different forms of culture. That might involve visiting Kelvingrove Art Gallery and Museum, which I did many times when I was at school—I know that other members did, too—visiting the national museums to see the national collections or learning how to use libraries. All those things start to form children's views of culture. Recommendation 11 in the education section, on page 76 of the report, asks "That a national strategy for educational materials, visits and experiences supported by companies and institutions across Scotland and co-ordinated by Learning Teaching Scotland be developed." That is sound reasoning and logic and we can move forward with it.  Local authorities have a big role to play. I would love to see in every town an arts centre or theatre—a physical presence for the arts that is used for all types of culture, whether storytelling, literature clubs or performances. People in every community should have somewhere where they can enjoy culture at a reasonable cost.

I am just winding up. Raising awareness must go right through the education system from primary schools to secondary schools and into further education. I make a plea for us to fund theatre companies such as 7:84—Wildcat used to do this as well—which go round schools and education establishments and into communities with political messages. We have to fund that and get folk thinking and stimulated politically. If they are stimulated politically, they will be stimulated in all other walks of life. It is far too easy to say that the companies are going against the establishment. I think that there is a bit of that, but I know that the funding for 7:84 is at risk. It has done things that I think are pretty awful, too, but surely theatre should be about challenging perceptions and making people think a bit differently. I will finish there, much as I could talk for ever, even though I thought that I would have hardly anything to say when I stood up.

Will the minister give way?

The twins here. Does the minister think that it is a positive experience for the children in Drumchapel to have their friends dragged away from them and to be unable to see them any more? I have had e-mails from some of those youngsters, who cannot understand why that is happening. Is that a positive impression of Government in our country?

I am grateful to the Greens for having the debate, which is yet another debate among the many that we have had in six years about what is being done in our name to asylum seekers and their children in this country. We must keep the issue at the top of the agenda, because it has been ratcheted up and the situation is getting worse. Robin Harper spoke eloquently and at length about the Vucaj family's case, which again brought the issue to the public attention. However, such situations have been happening for years, over and over again. It is all very well for the minister to tell us that the Executive is doing wonderful stuff with asylum seeker children who live here while their cases are being heard and their appeals are going through,  but it can only be wrong to let those children live as part of our society and then send them away years later. The children may even no longer remember the place to which they are being sent, either because of their age or because they have managed to block out the horror of what their life was before they came to our country. All of a sudden we hear talk about what the wonderful Executive is going to do. Last night I received a parliamentary answer—printed today—about that. It is the usual mealy-mouthed stuff: "Responsibility for immigration and asylum ... rests with the Home Office ... The Executive is in regular dialogue ... on a wide range of issues."— [ Official Report, Written Answers , 22 September 2005; S2W-19063.]  This morning, we wake up and discover that, while that parliamentary answer was coming to me, Jack McConnell and whoever else was sitting with journalists, trying to bail themselves out of the situation that they have got themselves into by allowing such things to happen to children in our country. Robert Brown can say all he likes about the constitutional agreement and how that is what people voted for back in 1997, but that was before children were being dragged kicking, screaming and terrified from their beds in the middle of the night. I believe that if the Executive went to the people now and asked whether they thought that it was acceptable that that was going on, and told them that the Executive could do nothing about it, people would vote very differently for who was governing their country. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton mentioned the Children (Scotland) Act 1995. I have been asking for years what the Executive has been doing to ensure that the Home Office complies with the terms of the 1995 act. The answer that I get is: "It's the Home Office's responsibility. It's nothing to do with us." I do not believe that for a minute. The law that applies in this country under the Children (Scotland) Act 1995 applies to every single child in this country. Is the Executive really saying that there is a little piece of Scotland—wherever an asylum-seeker family happens to be—that is not Scotland and over which the Executive therefore has no jurisdiction? If that is the case, the Executive had better think again about what kind of Government it is running. Many have gone on about Christine Grahame and her decision to abstain from voting on the Executive amendment. I completely agree with her on abstaining, because the Executive has been abstaining for years from any responsibility. Let us consider what the Executive is saying in the amendment. It is saying that it will "continue discussions ... with a view to agreement that the Home Office will work closely with services for children and young people before ... removal".  What is that? That is nothing. That is no more than the Executive trying to dig itself out of the hole that it has been put in by the strength of public opinion on the issue. I will tell the Executive what it should do: it should take a stand. It should say to the ministers in the Home Office, and all ministers at Westminster: "It's not happening here. We're not doing it." The Executive should use the Vucaj family as the benchmark and tell the ministers: "They're not going anywhere. They're staying here, because they are part of our country. They are the fresh talent that we are looking for."

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the minister give way?

I did Mark Ballard the honour of reading his motion last night, but I am afraid that I never got round to the Green party manifestos. However, I read the motion and listened to Mark Ruskell's speech with interest. As Jim Mather said, the SNP, too, has reservations about the reliability of GDP as the sole indicator of a country's growth and well-being. We hear a lot about sustainable development, which surely includes human development, and the fact that it should underpin all Government initiatives both nationally and internationally. Although the United Nations' human development reports update the eight millennium development goals annually, only one of those goals relates directly to the economy and it is about strengthening partnerships between poor countries and rich countries. I looked at what the European Commission has been saying. The Lisbon European Council developed a set of structural indicators that are designed to measure progress towards the  European Union's goal, which is: "to become the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world, capable of sustainable economic growth with more and better jobs and greater social cohesion." That is the key. When we are trying to grow a country and its economy, that growth should be about quality of life. Even the United Kingdom Government has examined closely different measures of economic growth and well-being. The Sustainable Development Commission has welcomed the UK Government's commitment to deliver new indicators to measure the nation's well-being. The commission is right to say that we need a radically different approach to measuring economic progress, because environmental and social goals should be included and jobs should be safeguarded. Income and GDP should not be the sole components of a nation's happiness. We all know that good health, stable families, meaningful work, secure neighbourhoods and strong communities are all vital components of personal and collective well-being. The UK Government Cabinet Office has examined a study on life satisfaction as an example of an indicator of sustainable development. That works on the concept that increases in GDP—the traditional indicator—do not necessarily lead to greater quality of life for citizens. The Executive's amendment says that growing the economy is a top priority. I suggest that the population's well-being should be the top priority. Such matters can be considered in tandem. In the report that the UK Cabinet Office has considered, economic growth—if measured as GDP—looks good and shows a steady rise from 1970 to 1997. However, the life satisfaction figures are static. People are not necessarily happier and do not feel a greater sense of well-being just because the GDP happens to look good. I would like that to be taken on board and I would like the minister to say whether the Scottish Executive has tapped into what the UK is doing in that research. Everyone knows that everyone in the SNP believes in independence for Scotland.

I do—truly and deeply. My vision is of a radical approach in our country. Independence would allow us to measure our country's growth not only purely in economic terms, but in how our people feel and the well-being of our citizens. I urge all members to consider that for Scotland and its people and to move forward accordingly.

I was greatly impressed by the Environment and Rural Development Committee's report and by the speech that Sarah Boyack, the committee's convener, gave. The report goes into detail on many aspects of climate change and pulls  together all the information for those of us who do not deal with it day to day. I read the report with interest and some disquiet. Sarah Boyack quoted the stark warning from the Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution, which is on page 1 of the report. It is worth restating: "If we go for business as usual ... we are destined for something unimaginable."—[ Official Report, Environment and Rural Affairs Committee , 26 January 2005; c 1545.] Roseanna Cunningham showed how some people have already faced the unimaginable horror of what climate change can do. However, it is not all horror. The next paragraph of the committee's report says: "A massive possibility for change exists at government, business and individual levels, given the right policy levers and leadership." I urge the Scottish Executive to promote that possibility for change. It should start from the top—the Government—and work down to business and individuals. It should use the right policy levers and show leadership. The committee and many knowledgeable commentators have pushed for a national target that will allow for sectoral objectives and a strategy to achieve them. As WWF Scotland says in its commentary on the report: "The Scottish Executive's response" is "that they are still very much against the key measure—an overall climate change target for Scotland." I do not understand why that is the case. WWF Scotland says: "Without this demonstration of political will Scotland is bound to fail to make an equal contribution to the UK's Kyoto Protocol target of a 12.5% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2008-2012." As Sarah Boyack said, the issue is not only about Scotland; it is not only about our sitting here wondering how climate change affects us. Everything that the developed world does has knock-on effects on people in poorer countries. We have already seen the awful effects that there can be, but things will get worse. I was interested in what Maureen Macmillan said about the many things that can be done. Many small initiatives could do with support from the Government at the top. In asking for a route map, she reflected what the Environment and Rural Development Committee's report states. On page 63, the report says: "At all levels individual citizens and business people need a route map for how we can move towards a carbon-free world. High level government action is clearly required in many policy areas."  It states: "there are many ways in which significant contributions ... can be achieved by individuals (with little cost to the public purse) if they are effectively engaged in the process." Being "effectively engaged" is the key. As the Scottish Parliament information centre briefing note states, in our country, "none of this is new—most people understand the messages that increased energy use and consumption are bad ... but the key is making it easier for them to make more sustainable choices." That is where radical leadership is required. In paragraph after paragraph, the committee's report urges radical action from the top to encourage everyone else. Some solutions may be difficult for people to implement, but the Government's job is to make decisions about what is necessary for the greater good. The report is important and could be the key to the way forward. However, there is not enough time to discuss the implications and potential solutions that are noted in it. Members have called for much greater debate and discussion, which I, too, would welcome. The Executive's response has been somewhat disappointing in the light of the report's radical nature, but the response does not have to be disappointing. We could move forward.

Of course the Scottish National Party welcomes the bill as one of many pieces of housing legislation that have been passed since the Parliament began in 1999. The housing improvement task force must be praised for the amount of detailed evidence that it considered in forming its view on how we should proceed with Scotland's housing. As is reflected in the committee's report, one of the most important things about the bill is the significance of the culture change that will be required of owners to allow the legislation to be used in the intended spirit and to make a real difference in Scotland's private sector housing. It is important to have information campaigns and monitoring processes in place so that we can ensure that the legislation is acted on.  We also have to consider this country's view of the private landlord. Not all private landlords are bad; there some very good examples of private renting in this country. Of course, we always hear about the bad private landlords—indeed, in my career, I have had experience of extremely bad ones. There is a problem that must be addressed. The citizens advice bureaux said in evidence to the committee that, in the past year, one in every 10 issues brought to their network was about housing. That amounted to 43,000 housing cases, of which 4,600 related to problems with housing conditions. I do not have the figures, but I can almost guarantee that most of those problems would have been with private sector housing. As the minister said, it is estimated that there is £5 billion-worth of disrepair in the private sector. That problem must be addressed. We have made progress since the late 1970s and 1980s, when housing action areas and housing associations came on to the scene to address the major problems in tenemental housing—at the time, some people were living in real slums. We have moved on from then, but we still have slums, albeit of a different type. We have to deal with problems such as dampness in houses that were built by the public sector in our inner cities and peripheral estates. A new issue has arisen in the private rented sector since the introduction of the right to buy. We all know that, as the minister said, some people who exercise their right to buy either do not take on board or do not receive the information that will enable them to recognise that they have obligations towards their properties. That is also the case when such houses are privately let. Where I live in the East Kilbride constituency, there is a big issue around the private rented sector in ex-right-to-buy houses. That leads me on to local authorities, how they have to deal with the problems, their powers and the implementation of this far-sighted legislation. One of the worries expressed by the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and by Edinburgh, Glasgow and other councils concerned the financial and human resources that are available to them to deal with the new legislation. In the past few years, the Parliament and the Executive have placed an awful lot of new obligations on local authorities, under the Homelessness etc (Scotland) Act 2003 and the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001, for example. I am concerned that we are not providing sufficient resources to ensure that all that well-intentioned legislation is properly implemented. One strategic housing function relates to the change from housing action areas to housing renewal areas, which is to be welcomed. However, there are issues about resourcing. Local  authorities will have to be fairly proactive if the bill is to be properly implemented. That is the only way in which big strides can be made in improving our housing stock. The tolerable standard will be slightly upgraded. I will not talk much about that, except to say that the committee heard a lot of evidence that, as part of the tolerable standard, it would be better to consider a satisfactory level of thermal performance rather than thermal insulation. I will leave my colleague Rob Gibson to talk about that. Rob Gibson will also discuss remote and rural areas, where the private rented sector is a huge issue. There is a problem with getting tradesmen to carry out the work identified and required by local authorities. We also need to consider whether it is possible to carry out such work in some of the building forms and styles in rural areas. The committee was reminded of some of the constraints that agencies such as Historic Scotland put on owners who wish to do up historic properties. We generally welcome the revisions to the repairing standard. However, the committee and others recognised the need to strike the right balance and to achieve improvements in the private rented sector without that having a detrimental effect on the supply of houses in that sector. We do not want to say to landlords, "This is going to be so difficult for you that it is not worth your while, so just sell your property and move on." The private rented sector is a necessary part of the overall housing picture in this country. I was heartened by the minister's response to what the committee said about disability issues, about which Sandra White will speak in greater detail. I am interested in the intention to consider ring fencing funding. The committee did a good job on that issue and I am glad that the Executive has taken on board what we said. It is obvious that rights for disabled people in social or private rented sector housing have not been properly addressed in relation to the operation of adaptation grants, for example. This is our chance to get the system right and to move forward towards having equal access to housing for everyone in our society. I know that I am running out of time, but I want to mention the single survey. Of course, my party welcomes the proposal—it was our policy—but the issue must be explored in more detail. As I listened to evidence, I became more sceptical, although I have not changed my view that the survey is the only way forward. However, there is a bit more work to do. The pilot scheme did not work very well—there is no point in going into all the possible reasons for that now—so the issue has to be considered again. There are also issues to be investigated about costs.  On right-to-buy properties, I am still of the view that they should not be exempt from the bill's provisions, especially if we are seeking to standardise procedures. We have all heard horror stories from our areas of people buying their property under the right to buy only to find out later that the property is defective. Similarly, two or three owners down the line, people who have paid market value for their property sometimes find out that their property is defective. If we are seeking to effect a true culture change in the way in which houses are purchased and sold in this country, everyone should be on a level playing field. I conclude by noting the committee's recommendation on national guidance and local flexibility, which was an issue that came through at various points of our stage 1 consideration. It was important that the minister echoed our recommendation in his opening remarks. Local authorities need to be able to look to national guidance to help them to implement strategies for their areas, but we need local flexibility, because it is clear that our country's communities are varied and that there are different housing needs in different places. That brings me back to where I started. If national guidance is to be adapted for local communities, resources—finance and workers—will be necessary. I ask the minister to take on board the issue of funding.

I am grateful to Jackie Baillie for securing the motion for debate today. It gives me the opportunity to speak yet again, as I have done over the past few years, about a group of people who feel that they have been let down by the excellent practices that have come in with "The same as you?" I am referring to the elderly carers of adults with learning disabilities, some of whom are in the public gallery tonight. As I have said before and will continue to say, the very good intentions of "The same as you?" cannot be denied. However, there have been losers: the people who have cared for their sons and daughters for up to 50 years and who, to be honest, just need a break. Caring for young adults with learning disabilities is exhausting. Although I could talk about the lack of respite care, which is an issue in this regard, the main issue for those people—I can talk about the Murray Owen carers group in East Kilbride—is straightforward. All that they want is for their sons and daughters to be settled and adequately looked after before their mums—it is usually women—and fathers, in some cases, can no longer look after them or, indeed, are just not there to look after them any more. Quite a few carers say that help is provided only when things reach crisis point. I cannot think of a crisis that could be worse for someone with an intellectual disability than to come home from their learning centre one day and find that their mam is no longer there. That is often the time at which social work steps in, which means that the first real care is given when someone with an intellectual disability finds that the person who has looked after them all their life is no longer there. That is a terrible thing to put someone through. It is also a terrible thing that we have elderly carers, some of whom are over 80 and yet are looking after big hulking men and women who require physical help and mental stimulation.  There is a wonderful United Kingdom study, which was carried out by Jane Hubert and Sheila Hollins. It focuses on people with intellectual disabilities and their elderly carers and explores some basic questions about physical difficulties. The study asks how a woman of 75 can be expected to ensure that her son of 50 has a bath or a shower every morning before he goes to his learning centre. Every day is a brand new day. If the son does not want to get into the bath, how can his mother be expected to cope? Mental health issues are also involved. Sheila Hollins says: "Psychiatric disorders, including depression, affective disorders, anxiety disorders and delusional disorders, are more frequent among elderly people with intellectual disabilities than among the general elderly population." We all know that people with some forms of learning disability age quicker and that dementia can set in at a much younger age. We are leaving elderly people to cope with that. Many carers feel that they are not getting help from anywhere. For example, South Lanarkshire Council refused point-blank to meet me to discuss the issue, even though I wanted to represent about a dozen families. We must talk about the issues and get things sorted for those people. I am sure that Jeannette Kelly, who is vocal about the issue, will not mind my saying that we have been talking about the issue for three or four years, during which Jeannette has not got any younger; she is getting less able to cope all the time. Surely we can find a way of ensuring that Jeannette's daughter, Vanessa, is settled somewhere safe where she feels happy and content before Jeannette is no longer able to look after her. I have asked ministers before to meet me on the issue, on which I have genuine concerns, but that has not happened. I ask the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care to meet me and perhaps a couple of members of the Murray Owen carers group to discuss the issue.

I have some sympathy with Fiona Hyslop. How much more can we say about this subject? I came to the debate thinking, "What on earth can I talk about this time?" because we have all aired our views. I decided to listen to what was said and comment on it—I suppose we could call this a closing speech halfway through the debate, so I apologise to Stewart Maxwell. The first thing that I noted was that the minister was at pains to emphasise his point about a culture of respect and responsibility. It is right that we have to cultivate self-respect and personal responsibility, but what seems to be missing from the debate is the point that everyone should respect what other people decide to do with their lives. A culture of respect should work both ways. A few members have mentioned choices. If people are making informed choices, which I believe should be the central tenet of any sexual health and relationship strategy, society should respect those choices, as long as their exercise is not harming or oppressing anyone else physically or mentally. I would like there to be more emphasis on mutual respect for people and their choices. I was interested in the progress that the minister was talking about and the stakeholder events that were held in February and March. I was also interested to hear that the health boards have now submitted their clinical service plans. However, I am concerned about the need for additional specialists in the field and the fact that that need might not be met in all areas of Scotland. Some of my constituents talked to me recently about the lack of sexual health services in Lanarkshire and about their inability to be very vocal about that because of embarrassment about speaking out about such matters. I am glad to hear that the health boards will have executive leadership. I am also glad that the national sexual health advisory committee has now been formed. I noted that it is going to be a group of stakeholders, and I looked at the membership published in the press release. Is  there any room on that committee or on any of its sub-groups for people from civic Scotland and the voluntary sector in this field? I do not necessarily mean those who run Caledonia Youth or other services; I mean people with direct experience of using such services. Recently, I was on a radio programme talking about sexual health. There were two young girls on the programme, one of whom was a teenage mum and one of whom was not because she had exercised her choice for contraception. I was so impressed at the sense that was spoken by those two young girls and I wonder whether the minister agrees that there is room for that kind of representation on the committee or on one of the sub-groups. The minister said that he talked to young people when he was formulating plans for the committee so I am pretty certain that he will have picked up on that and I hope that he will think about it. It is excellent that the minister has decided to chair the committee himself. That is a mark of its importance. I know that we are five or six years on from when the need for a sexual health strategy was first mooted and there are concerns about that. However, we are where we are and we should move forward. Shona Robison mentioned the social aspects of the issue. That bring us back to the need for joined-up government. As Fiona Hyslop mentioned, we need to ensure that there is cross-departmental working on the issue with the Minister for Education and Young People, Peter Peacock. The social aspects involve low self-esteem and lack of choice and aspiration, especially among young women in some areas. Those are huge issues. Again, I hope that our social policy will reflect the needs that are highlighted as the sexual health strategy advances. On the Tory amendment, I agree with Mike Rumbles—much though it goes against the grain to say so—in that I am concerned about the suggestion that we should have no national sexual health advisory committee and that we should publicly affirm the primary responsibility of parents. As other members have said, some parents are unable to address these issues and some youngsters find it difficult to talk to their parents.

The need to remove the stigma about such matters is an issue, as Susan Deacon explained very well. However, we also need to address reality: some parents are not good parents. To be straightforward, some parents are pretty rubbish. We cannot simply write off all the youngsters of parents who cannot hack it. As well  as parental and individual responsibility, there must be a responsibility on the state for education and health. If I thought for one minute that, just because somebody was raised with a mum and dad in a happy family, everything would be hunky-dory, I would say okay. However, that is not the case and we need to face that. Patrick Harvie highlighted the cut in funding for Caledonia Youth. I ask the minister to explain what he intends to do about that. Nanette Milne spoke about abstinence plus. As others have said, such models do not work. Education about choices is what will work. As I have said before—I hope that the minister can reassure me on this point—the educational materials that go out to schools must put as much emphasis on the responsibility of boys as they do on that of girls. Too often, the responsibility seems to fall on the female in relationships. Boys need to realise that, basically, if they do not want to be a dad and take on all the responsibilities that go along with that, they need to take sexual precautions because it is 50 per cent their fault if the girl with whom they have sex ends up pregnant. Finally, as I am aware that I am running out of time, let me say simply that the amendment in the name of Shona Robison is important because we need reasonable timescales for the implementation of the strategy and action plan, along with progress reports. I hope that the minister will accept the SNP amendment.

Will Mrs Milne give way?

I, too, welcome the principles of the bill. I am disappointed about the provisions relating to misconduct, because I think that we are storing up problems for the future. I cannot understand why we cannot continue to refer to "mismanagement" and "gross mismanagement", rather than to "misconduct" as a collective term. However, that is how the process works—we made our arguments and we were beaten on the issue. The bigger picture—the bill as a whole—is much more important, which is why I am disappointed that Scotland's charities bill will not be agreed to unanimously. It is pretty shameful that poor Mary Scanlon has been left by herself to face the embarrassment of what the Conservative party is doing today. I guess that's life. I give a broad welcome to the bill and hope—I am sure that it will—that it will work for the charitable sector in Scotland. Monitoring by OSCR, the Executive and Parliament will be necessary and will ensure that the bill works for a long time, to the benefit of charities in Scotland in the future.

We object.

As Mary Scanlon says, there is a difference between misconduct and mismanagement. What the terms mean to potential trustees and the general public is important. I do not accept the argument that misconduct and mismanagement mean the same thing, and I believe that the vast majority of people do not think that they mean the same thing. I do not care about all the talk from the civil servants and the semantic dancing that is going on here. As far as I am concerned, if someone is accused of misconduct there is a perception that they have knowingly done something wrong. I ask every MSP to consider what their own position would be if they were a charity trustee who was reported as having been guilty of misconduct. They would have the press all over the place, looking to see whether they had filched money, taken a holiday abroad or whatever. Mismanagement is a different thing. Someone who has submitted their accounts a day late has mismanaged and pays the penalty for that. Misconduct is completely different. I refuse to accept that the might of the civil service down the road could not come up with an acceptable way of reflecting the unanimous view of the Communities Committee.

During the voluntary sector debate on 19 May, the Minister for Communities said: "The current distinction between core and project funding is regarded by all the partners, including SCVO, as unhelpful."— [ Official Report , 19 May 2005; c 17116.]  The Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations has since said to me that that does not explain its position. Will the Minister for Communities reconsider his statement and respond to me, perhaps by letter at a later date?

When someone believes that their nation should be free, they examine free nations in their continent and further afield. Like many people in the SNP, I decided some time ago that Norway was the kind of nation that I wanted Scotland to be. Norway is independent, humanitarian and its citizens are respected throughout the world, often by the least advantaged people and communities. When I was in East Timor in 1999, I found that Norway and the other Scandinavian countries were much respected by the people there. Unlike the United Kingdom, the United States, Australia and other countries, Norway was not seen as part of the problem—Norwegians were seen as helping East Timor to attain its freedom and justice for its people. Therefore, I hugely admire Norway. In particular, I admire Norway's international development work. For the past 50 years, it has been a prime mover in international development co-operation and a major donor. Alex Neil mentioned the fact that Norway's contributions as a proportion of its gross national product already exceed the UN's recommendation. As a result, it is unlike Scotland which, as part of the UK—John Swinney mentioned this earlier—is nowhere near meeting the UN's recommendation. In fact, we have short-changed the developing world over the past 35 years by £76 billion and the figure will rise until we match the recommendation. Norway introduced duty-free and quota-free access to its domestic market for all goods—except weapons—from the least developed countries. It has an active debt relief policy and there is the Norwegian Investment Fund for Developing Countries. The Norwegian Government considers it important that Norwegian policy does not hamper efforts to reduce poverty in developing countries and it regularly undertakes reviews of all its policies so that they can be adjusted, if necessary. I want my nation to aspire to that and match such efforts. Norway makes a major contribution to UN operations, particularly on peacekeeping. We have all heard of the Oslo accords and Norway's work  on the Palestinian-Israeli negotiations. It has continued with that work despite the many setbacks that there have been in that region. Norway and her Scandinavian partners have also developed the concept of a civilian peace force, which I would dearly love to be developed in Scotland. Civilian rather than military input to mediation and conflict resolution has much to offer. As I said, I want Scotland to be a nation like Norway. I salute the example that has been set by a small nation that contributes way above its weight in world relations. I thank the ambassador and ask him to take our thanks back to Norway for the example that it sets.

We have been told that the Commission for Africa report will be used to inform the G8 discussion. The conclusion of that excellent document says: "Bold comprehensive action on a scale needed to meet the challenges can only be done through a new kind of partnership. In the past, contractual and conditional approaches were tried, and failed. What we are suggesting is a new kind of development, based on mutual respect and solidarity, and rooted in a sound analysis of what actually works. This can speed up progress, building on recent positive developments in Africa, towards a just world of which Africa is an integral part." The most important of several extremely important statements in that conclusion is the reference to "mutual respect and solidarity". We should not treat Africa as a charity case. Africans are equal partners—if not the more important partners—in the project to advance their continent. However, it is not all one-sided. After all, the developed world has a powerful self-interest and moral duty with regard to this matter. Actions are required on both sides. For a start, donors must support African countries' priorities instead of imposing their own pet or special  interest projects on them. Some countries must broaden the participation of citizens, improve accountability and, in some cases, root out corruption. Donors must back up their promises with action and funds, dismantle trade barriers and address unfair agricultural practices. African countries themselves must reform bureaucracy, both internally and across the continent, and simplify their trade tariff systems. Another important aspect of the Commission for Africa's conclusion is the reference to aid that is "rooted in a sound analysis of what actually works". Poverty is not, and should not be, an industry and aid should not be a method of levering in influence. Aid and debt relief have led to success stories, which should be celebrated. For example, Tanzania, which is one of six countries to have completed the current debt relief programme, received $3 billion in debt relief. Almost overnight, an estimated 1.6 million children returned to school. In Uganda, the level of debt service payments has dropped and the number of young children attending school has increased from 2.3 million in 1997 to 6.5 million now, which means that enrolment has more than doubled to 94 per cent. In Mozambique, as a result of debt relief, 500,000 children are being vaccinated against tetanus, whooping cough and diphtheria. Finally, in Cameroon, a comprehensive national HIV/AIDS strategy was launched with help from debt savings. There are good examples of African Governments and people moving forward—it is not all bad news. There have been some really good developments between Scotland and Africa. I have been particularly impressed by a University of Dundee distance learning programme that has benefited Eritrea and Kenya by training nurses to a level at which they can work in their communities. As a result, the nurses are not tempted to move away and work in the UK and other western nations. I am a great believer in training women, particularly those with children, because they stay in their communities and can contribute to capacity building and good aid projects until it is valid for other countries to give direct aid to those Governments. At that point, the systems are in place to ensure that people are really empowered. For example, the Department for International Development used to fund small projects on the ground in Tanzania. However, at the moment, aid goes directly to the Tanzanian Government because there is transparency and it is clear that the aid is being dispersed to the people. We must learn from successful African projects and consider similar approaches.  I started off by talking about a new way of thinking in relation to sub-Saharan Africa. However, Africa is part of a wider world and there are still huge problems elsewhere, such as poverty, lack of trade justice and conflict. In fact, there is more conflict than ever before and that conflict now directly impacts more on civilians than on the military. Kofi Annan estimates that nine out of 10 casualties of conflict are civilians. Many of those problems are exacerbated, if not caused, by the G8 countries and their allies. I am thinking of trade barriers, wars, turning away when it suits our interests and the arms trade, particularly the small arms trade, which is particularly relevant to the African situation. One of my hopes is that the aspiration to create a new way of thinking, which was voiced by the Commission for Africa, will inform the countries of the G8, who will spread that new way of thinking across the world and that that will have an effect on the way in which nations interact and make progress. That new way of thinking is long overdue and I believe that, if the G8 summit produces tangible results in terms of a new way forward for the world, people in Scotland will be glad that the summit was held in this country.

As the minister knows, some systems are already running over capacity for historic reasons, which  means that there will be a split between costs for upgrading and those for expansion. Has agreement been reached between ministers, Scottish Water and the developers as to how those costs will be split?

Further to Karen Gillon's point about the importance of empowering women, does the First Minister agree that it is important to enable women to give their communities the services that they need? Those services should be defined by the communities themselves rather than be imposed from outside. Have there been any discussions about DFID giving added-value funding to the seedcorn projects that the Scottish Executive will fund through the development fund that has been agreed?

I am not a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee, but I am impressed by the way in which the committee carried out its inquiry. From what I have read and from what my colleague Sandra White has told me, I am also impressed by the way in which the minister and the committee came together to work out the issues. We have ended up with a very good piece of legislation. Listening to the evidence, which is harrowing even to read, must have been difficult for the committee but, as Elaine Smith said, such difficulties bear no comparison with those faced by the courageous people who came forward to give that evidence. They have my utmost respect for standing up for and speaking out on behalf of those who suffer. I noted Nora Radcliffe's constructive remarks on the consultation on the bill, and I expect that the Executive will take those on board. I am glad to hear that asylum seeker children in Scotland will have protection. Of course female genital mutilation should be recognised as a ground for asylum. I know that many members will keep pushing for that recognition under the current settlement.  I am glad that the bill is to be passed, but creating legislation will not of itself solve the problem. I note the Equal Opportunities Committee's comments on the need for the bill to be backed up by education and awareness raising, not only within the communities in which FGM is practised but among the professionals who deal with those communities. Legal and cultural training is needed—for men as well as for women, as Sandra White noted. As Elaine Smith said, the Somali women's action group may be able to play a role in disseminating that training, which should be adequately funded. Monitoring the legislation and the on-going development of guidance are very important. I note from the minister's letter that he hopes that Dr Hepburn will be instrumental in developing guidance. I look forward to hearing from the members of the Equal Opportunities Committee about how they believe the legislation is progressing.

Is there a national home-ownership percentage target? Will the Deputy First Minister ensure that provision of high-quality social rented housing  remains paramount so that providers can meet the needs of people on waiting lists, so that householders can have real choice, and so that our communities, urban and rural, can be properly maintained and supported?

A short while ago, I looked up to see that the youngsters who had been sitting in the gallery were leaving. No harm to any of us, but I thought, "There was the youth of our country and they must have been bored witless sitting up there listening to us talking." I hope that that does not put them off seeing what happens at the youth congress in August. I see that more people are now leaving—perhaps that is because I got up to speak. It is difficult for folk in our age groups to say things that are meaningful to youth, although that does not mean that we should stop trying. In his opening speech the minister mentioned individuals from different countries, which gives me the opportunity to mention something that I think is wonderful: a couple of the delegates at the  youth conference will be from East Timor—the world's newest nation, which has just entered its fourth year of independence. That is particularly special, because in such countries young people have suffered badly and have been political from a young age and aware of all sorts of issues of which children in our society are not aware. It is marvellous that we are welcoming young people from all over the world, from different circumstances and societies. The opportunity for the 120 delegates from the UK to learn from their experiences is immense. We hear all the time that young people are not interested in politics, given the lack of voting among the young. However, I believe that, as others have said, it is party politics that they are not interested in—which perhaps goes back to how I began my speech. With the rise of internet communication, we have seen young people get involved in issue politics. The millennium development goals, international development and aid have captured young people's imagination and young people are running with them. I am convinced that if the youth congress in Hawaii in 1999 had set the millennium development goals and been given the action plan for them, we would not be sitting here a third of the way in saying, "We're never going to meet the targets in 2015," which we are not. The enthusiasm that young people have, coupled with their lack of disillusionment, which sets in when people get older, means that they will just get on and do things. We hear people saying that certain things are impossible, or that certain amounts of money cannot be raised, but that is not true. We should listen more to young people, who have enthusiasm and take what we might sometimes call simplistic approaches, because they would get things done. As somebody said at the Commission for Africa conference last week, we managed to raise billions of pounds to go to war with Iraq pretty blooming quickly, so how come we cannot raise the money that is needed to lift Africa out of poverty? I was interested in Lord James Douglas-Hamilton's speech for reasons other than what he had to say about fair trade. Perhaps I am being disingenuous, but might I interpret his call for nations to take control of their aid budgets as being an indication that Lord James is joining the recent moves of some Tories towards independence? Certainly, Scotland could take control of its aid budget. Even within the devolved settlement, Scotland could have control of its aid budget and make a contribution above that which has been committed by the Executive. Sylvia Jackson said that she was at a Baptist church on Sunday. It must have been a Baptist weekend, because I was at a Baptist church on  Sunday as well. She said that the role of the churches in joint action on issues such as the millennium development goals and in encouraging initiatives such as the youth congress is huge. Regardless of whether one is religious, one must accept that the role that the churches play is fantastic. A lot of young people work in churches. The youth group of one of the churches in Strathaven, where I live, does tremendous work in its partnerships with Ethiopia in relation to international development and—due to Strathaven being Scotland's first fair trade town—fair trade. Jamie Stone mentioned the recognition of world events by young people. This year, South Lanarkshire Council hosted the national Holocaust memorial and remembrance ceremonies. I was taken by the fact that almost everyone who presented at the various events that the council held was a young person. Everything was extremely well done. The level of understanding and compassion of the youth of South Lanarkshire that was evident at those events was amazing. I can see Michael McMahon nodding. He attended many of the events and, evidently, he felt the same as I did. Last week, during the debate on the voluntary sector, I said that the Executive's intention with regard to project Scotland is admirable, in that the project makes it easier for young people to do voluntary work and get involved in their communities. I would like the remit of project Scotland to be extended to include partnerships with people overseas. As has been mentioned, we are now building a partnership with Malawi, which is great. However, would it not also be great if we could use project Scotland to help young people from Scotland to go to Malawi to work on various projects there? I think that Elaine Murray said that our young people are the leaders and policy makers of the future and we should encourage them to volunteer in the way that I have described. The motion says that the Parliament "welcomes the opportunity that the congress brings to promote Scotland on the international stage." Of course that is to be welcomed, but the congress is also about what Scotland can give back to the world. Scotland could do a lot on the international stage in a fairly straightforward manner. The minister mentioned eastern Europe and conflict resolution and I would point out that Scotland has already been the setting for conflict resolution meetings for the nations in the Caucasus. In that regard, it is interesting to note that Peace Child International is helping to facilitate the congress. It would be wonderful if, while the congress was going on, we could consider the establishment of a centre for peace and conflict resolution in Scotland. After all, as John Hume said when he retired from the  European Parliament, there should be a European centre for peace. We should use the youth congress to make a bid for that centre to be housed in Scotland. I cannot think of a better way of promoting Scotland on the international stage. I want to mention the G8 summit—as other members have—which will take place prior to the youth congress. Bob Geldof issued a challenge to the First Minister at last week's Commission for Africa conference. He said that if world leaders will not change their attitudes before coming to Scotland, they should be told not to bother coming. I do not agree with that. If we try right up until the last second, they just might change their minds. However, the First Minister, backed up by the Parliament and the people of Scotland, should give leaders a hard time while they are here. They should be told that they can and should make changes. We should try to force the hand of everyone who is motivated to act and get something done. That would be a wonderful thing for Scotland to do before the youth congress and would give the congress a boost in progressing its aim of achieving the millennium development goals.

Does that make Mary Scanlon ineligible for the world youth congress?

Can the member give me an example of a country in which unrestricted free trade has spread social justice?

I welcome what the minister says about the measures that he is taking, but I fundamentally disagree that core funding is a move backwards. I suggest that the vast majority of volunteers who are trying to run small organisations on shoestrings would agree with the SNP position.

Will the member give way?

Does the member agree that organisations that put money aside because they want to build capacity, buy equipment or increase their asset base are disadvantaged, because local authorities often cut the funding of organisations that have money in the bank, which means that there is no incentive to be prudent?

I share Robert Brown's concern and he makes a very good point. I was also concerned to read today a press release from the SCVO about research by the University of Strathclyde. The research found that councils were insisting on cuts to conditions and pay among the employees of voluntary sector service providers, so that the council's costs would be kept down when they bought in the services. Does Robert Brown share that concern? Annie Gunner states:  "When providers complain about this, they are told that they are in a market, and this is how markets work, which I would have thought is a scarcely credible position for a government committed to social justice." We should consider that issue.

On the delivery of public services, if social enterprises are to become part of the economy, they must be able to develop by tendering for public services. Does the member share my concern that, according to the Scottish social enterprise coalition, social enterprises face a series of barriers in competing for public contracts because of risk aversion and because of contracts being scaled up in a way that favours large organisations? Does he agree that social enterprises should be able to get involved in that market?

Does the member agree that where such organisations provide services and deliver ministerial and local government policy objectives, they should be adequately core funded?

I would rather join a club.

I admire the minister's attempt to display psychic ability, but I have to say that she got it wrong. Although I will move the SNP amendment, I will also be consensual; there is nothing in the Executive's motion with which the SNP disagrees. We are discussing a huge sector and I appreciated the minister's comments about how we can have a debate such as this without its sounding cuddly. We have to recognise the importance of the social economy to the general economy of the country. After all, according to Communities Scotland—which heads up futurebuilders Scotland—the social economy is worth about £2.2 billion to the Scottish economy and employs about 100,000 people. It also involves 700,000 volunteers in more than 50,000 organisations. One issue is that we must recognise what the social economy is. The Executive has acknowledged that by feeling the need to clarify in its motion the contribution that the voluntary sector and the social economy make. Folk in the voluntary sector sometimes do not recognise themselves as being part of the social economy, which is a measure of how diverse the voluntary sector is. The sector ranges from the one person who helps out in a buddy scheme as a befriender or who cares for someone, to the people who work in social enterprises.  Social enterprises often emerge from the traditional voluntary sector and often share the values and some of the characteristics of voluntary organisations, but there is a difference between the two. Social enterprises are different from traditional voluntary work and small-scale voluntary organisations because, as is stated by the Scottish Social Enterprise Coalition, social enterprise is about the "integration of business aims, methodologies and behaviours into their organisations" and social enterprises seek to create profits that are ploughed back in to communities. Not all voluntary organisations look to create profit: the raison d'être of some is to provide services, so profit does not come into it. The Executive's motion mentions quite a few good on-going initiatives, such as futurebuilders Scotland. I have followed the futurebuilders strategy and I ask the minister to say how progress is going, because it seems to me that futurebuilders got off the ground a bit more slowly than was intended. At first it was said that it would run from 2004 to 2006, but now everyone is talking about 2007. Will futurebuilders go beyond that? Key aspects of making such initiatives work are their development and their sustainability. Too often, initiatives are stopped before their full value becomes apparent. One of the main aims of futurebuilders is regeneration of disadvantaged areas. I am concerned that we are not placing enough emphasis on people and that we are not giving sufficient recognition to the fact that many smaller voluntary organisations that are not social enterprises contribute to regeneration throughout the country by operating in the voluntary sector and by making quality of life better for many people in terms of their physical, mental and emotional health. I suggest that that leads to the ability to create wealth. If health is not included in such measures to start with, communities will not be able to move on and create wealth. As I said, I would appreciate a statement about how the futurebuilders Scotland investment is progressing. I know that the first stage of applications for the first range of projects has now closed. When will the process be opened up again for stage two? The volunteering strategy is also mentioned in the motion. We are talking about social enterprises, but they start with volunteers. I was interested to read a submission from Community Enterprise in Strathclyde. Although we hear good things from Communities Scotland and have heard good things from the minister today, there is still scepticism about how futurebuilders is working. Community Enterprise states:  "It has become, almost by default, yet another time-limited grant scheme that will no doubt support some interesting organisations and activities, but will not shift either the social economy or the public sector very far towards embracing a culture of investment instead of dependency." I would appreciate the minister's views on that, because obviously not everyone in the sector is convinced by what is happening. Project Scotland is a good idea. We always welcome initiatives that help young people to become involved in their communities. I hope that the initiative will be expanded into other areas in which the Executive is involved. When I read the press release about the scheme, I wondered whether projects could be tied in with our international strategy in order to allow our young people to find out what life is like on the other side of the world. Let us use the Scotland-Malawi partnership that we are all talking about to help people in both places. The Executive is talking about allowing volunteers who are on placements to continue to receive benefits. That is important, but we could go further. The reality is that most people who take up voluntary placements can do so with the comfort of knowing that when they come home they can slot back into their job, family or support network. It is difficult for a person who is homeless and who has no support network to go away to volunteer and then come back. I ask the Executive to address that, too.

I wanted to mention more good stuff, but as I have only one minute left I had better skip much of what I was going to say—I bet that Johann Lamont is glad about that. I do not understand why the Executive does not support the Scottish National Party amendment. We all know that, over and over again, voluntary organisations ask for core funding that will allow them to continue their activities. Such organisations provide huge services to local authorities and to the Executive, but much of the time and effort that could be spent on providing services is spent on running around daft, looking for a scheme that might give them money. Organisations that provide services on behalf of local authorities and which accord with the Scottish Executive's aims and policies should be core funded so that they can provide those services properly. Such organisations are part of the social economy and if we do not value their contribution we do a disservice to the volunteers who work in them. I cannot support the Green amendment and I am surprised that the Executive supports it. The  Executive always talks about finding Scottish solutions for Scottish problems, but the approach that that amendment calls for could create more delays by adding another layer and tying our strategy in with that of the Department of Trade and Industry. Let us just get on and do something for Scotland. We can start by telling voluntary organisations, "Yes, you're valued. We'll give you the core funding that will allow you to work with us to deliver what is required." I move amendment S2M-2825.1, to insert at end: "to include measures to ensure continued and stable core funding for voluntary organisations that are expected to deliver ministerial and local government policy objectives."

To what extent have existing whole-stock transfer organisations met their business plan new-build completion targets?

First, I apologise on behalf of my colleague Andrew Welsh, who asked me to do so because he had to leave the chamber for an urgent appointment. The motion that has been lodged by the Executive can meet with no disagreement from anyone in the chamber or in the country. The debt of gratitude that we owe to all the veterans who served their country in world war two is immense. I am pleased that we are having this debate to record that gratitude again in the Official Report and to give the recognition mentioned by the minister not only to the individuals but to the organisations that assist veterans and work tirelessly on their behalf. I was interested to hear about the on-going programme of veteran-related work, because it is true that there are still difficulties with perceptions of neglect and, in some cases, actual neglect. For example, the ex-personnel of Christmas island have an on-going campaign and of course there are on-going debates about gulf war syndrome. All the contributions have been extremely interesting, as have some of the personal stories that we heard. Christine Grahame talked about a friend of her father's and about Mark Hirst's grandfather, and Karen Whitefield talked about a member of her family who was directly involved. Those personal stories bring home the absolute horror of war when we sit and listen to them. Jamie Stone asked how we can bring it home to children, and when he said that I thought back to my own childhood. I was born in the mid-1950s and I did not really have a conception of what war was about. I remember—in fact, it is one of my earliest memories—sitting and watching a television programme that those of my age group and older will remember. It was called "All Our Yesterdays". I can tell by Johann Lamont's smile that she remembers it. It featured stark black-and-white figures who talked about the war, and there was a clipped BBC-pronunciation presenter—whenever I listen to James Douglas-Hamilton, I remember that TV programme. It was like stories that did not quite seem real. It did not really touch us at all. I was interested in what Carolyn Leckie said about the war poets, because I had to study them at school. I am not a great poetry lover, but there was one poem that made me think for the first time about war in a different way from all the glory stuff that we often heard about. I think that it was by Wilfred Owen. I cannot remember the name of the poem, but I have never forgotten the first line, the  first three words of which were, "Our brains ache". That was a powerful image to me as an adolescent, thinking of that level of pain. One thing that I learned when I started reading about the war was that the second world war was a very, very just war, because it had a concrete reason for people going to fight an enemy. That enemy was the offensive politics moving across Europe at that time. The second world war was, of course, preceded by the Spanish civil war and the contributions that were made by the international brigades, from our country and others, in the Spanish civil war have to be recognised as well. Irene Oldfather is right to say that we have to guard against that happening again, because these things are still there in Europe. Whatever problems anybody has with the European Union, at least by having it we are recognising where these things are growing and we are able to take action to fight against them. Karen Whitefield, Andrew Welsh and John Swinburne spoke about the efforts that everyone made during the war. Everyone who is involved in war makes some sort of effort. I pay tribute to the foreign nationals who were interned during the war in the north of Ireland, the Isle of Man and Orkney, the majority of whom were Italians. I am talking not about those who went on to be deported but those who came back home to their own families and communities in Scotland during the war. They contributed to the war effort of the entire civilian population because they felt that they were in it for Scotland and were fighting against the same enemy against which the rest of the country was fighting. Donald Gorrie mentioned the United Nations, which grew out of the League of Nations after the second world war. As Irene Oldfather said in relation to the European Union, international organisations that preserve partnerships between nations are vital and must be kept. We can talk about the corruption that exists in the UN and how that institution must be reformed, but let us never forget the importance of having international organisations that strive to preserve peace. Scottish people are very international in their outlook—they are internationalists—so although the motion is about acknowledging the ultimate sacrifice that Scots made, I want to pay tribute to those from other countries who fought on our behalf in the war. Those countries have their own veterans. More than 1.5 million Indians were in the services and we all know about the legendary tales of the Gurkhas. Labour market shortages meant that 800 forestry workers from the tropics were brought to work in the Scottish Highlands. Of the 300 West Indians who flew for the RAF, 90 received medals for bravery. Britain's west African colonies in Gambia, Sierra Leone, Ghana and  Nigeria served as staging posts and military bases during world war two. When the French colonies in west Africa were freed from Vichy domination, the west African British troops who were no longer needed in such great numbers for Home Guard duties were moved to Burma together with some of the east African brigades. Today, I was fascinated to learn that, in all, some 166,500 Africans were involved in helping to defeat the Japanese. All those people fought for freedom against the tyranny that would have triumphed in Europe had we not managed to stop it. I will read out a quote from the Royal Commonwealth Ex-Services League, which asks: "What made 5 million people from the Commonwealth volunteer to fight the Second World War alongside the 6 million British Forces? Who were these people and what motivated them? They were people who believed in freedom and were happy to fight alongside" us "to make this World a safer place ... They came from all over the Commonwealth, a million from Canada; 2.5 million from the Indian sub-continent; from South Africa, Australia, New Zealand, the Caribbean, the Far East and from across Africa." Some of those people have become new Scots; the members of their families are now second and third-generation Scots and believe themselves to be truly Scottish. Sadly, we still have wars, as Chris Ballance mentioned. We have wars within, between and among nations. There is a vast amount of conflict going on in the world. We must pay tribute to those who still fight in conflicts and lay down their lives on our behalf. It is not just regular soldiers who go to the front line; there are peacekeepers all over the world who act on behalf of the UN. There is also the Territorial Army, which goes to front-line conflict situations alongside the regular Army. The other day, I was disturbed to learn from the radio about the number of TA volunteers who need to go for therapy because, in the aftermath of war, they are suffering from post-traumatic stress. The 14-year issue was mentioned. I pay tribute to the members of the TA, who work very hard to defend this nation. We are at war at the moment, although now is not the time to discuss that in any great detail. We are saluting the veterans of a past war. Regardless of political views around the chamber, we should and could all say that we hope for an end to the conflict that our countries are involved in as soon as possible, so that we have fewer veterans to salute in future.

To ask the Scottish Executive how the criminal history system replacement project is being funded. (S2O-6627)

Will the minister tell us whether the funding has come out of the capital or the revenue budget? Will she also clarify something that she said earlier to my colleague Stewart Maxwell? Did I hear her say that she would consider contracting out the IT services?

I prepared for this debate by looking at Scotland's criminal justice plan. I was immediately struck by the introduction to the plan, which states: "Justice is at the heart of safer, stronger communities. Our justice system underpins strong communities where the values of fairness, tolerance and respect can flourish." Too often, we are guilty of agreeing with such statements without looking at what lies behind them. I agree that justice can be at the heart of safer communities, but what of the inclusion of the word "stronger"? What about the flourishing of fairness, tolerance and respect? I suggest that another phrase—social justice—should be included in the introduction. That is at the heart of the process, which is not purely about the criminal justice system. Roger Houchin, a former governor of Barlinnie prison, called in January of this year for a rethink of justice policy to reduce the offences that are punishable by prison, not just to solve the prison overcrowding problem but to help break the clear link between poverty and crime. His study revealed that a quarter of all prisoners come from just 53 of Scotland's 1,200 council wards—the 53 most deprived wards. Half of those in jail come from the poorest 13 per cent of council wards. In the same month, Audit Scotland released a report showing that half of all those who are released will be back in two years, and that drug rehabilitation programmes, despite the assertions of availability, were failing to reach prisoners. Less than half of those with a problem had received treatment. I commend a book by my colleague Kenny MacAskill, in which members can read Roger Houchin's fascinating article. One of the points that Roger Houchin makes is that part of the reason for the growth in the prison population is that it allows the rest of us to divorce ourselves from the discomfort of having to engage with what he calls our underclass society, which the preponderance of prisoners—young men aged around 23, from the most deprived backgrounds—inhabit. One in nine men from deprived areas will be in prison during their 23 rd year. There are those who deny the link between poverty and crime by pointing out that crime rates increase most quickly when affluence growth is at its greatest. However, poverty is relative and cannot be framed as absolutely as that. Poverty in a society has nothing to do with bank balances; it has everything to do with being able to provide for oneself and one's family the parts of life that allow  one to be normal in the society in which one lives, rather than being shoved aside and made to feel that one is not part of it. I certainly do not agree with the theory that all property is theft, but it is not too far wide of the mark to describe the lack of facilities for normal living as a crime against society. The question then is: who is committing that crime? The Administrations that we have had at Westminster over the past few decades have contributed to that crime through the individualism that they have espoused—it is only the individual that matters. We start to look at poverty almost as if it is a crime and as if it is the fault of the individual that they are underprivileged—there is no such thing as society. Sadly, the present Labour Government does nothing to reintroduce the values and philosophy of collectivism. It has become almost a crime to be poor. I think that the crime is allowing poverty to cause such divisions in society. I believe firmly that criminality cannot be addressed until deprivation is addressed, and that that can be addressed only when we are all prepared to look it square in the face and call it for what it is. That does not mean that I am an apologist for criminals—I fully accept that there are some right bad swines of all ages out there and that, in some cases, there is no alternative to incarceration. However, it is time that we thought about the principles that underlie the Kilbrandon report and use them for adult justice as well as in the children's hearings system. We should sort out the problem and not try to hide it. Having said that, there is some good stuff on which we can build among what the Executive says on the way forward. I was interested in some of the key elements that were noted in "Supporting Safer, Stronger Communities: Scotland's Criminal Justice Plan" for success in dealing with lower-level offending. Immediacy is one of the four elements and that is crucial. Visibility and accountability in the criminal justice system as a public service are important, because people feel a bit divorced from the system. I am sure that we all get complaints from folk who do not know why charges were dropped because nobody ever came back to tell them what had happened when something with which they were involved ended up in court. That is crucial, but so is the last element, which is active community involvement through a range of roles, often as volunteers. That brings me back directly to one of my biggest bugbears, which is the fact that volunteers contribute so much to society. Volunteers save the Government a fortune. Let us look at funding voluntary organisations to do the job that they do really well. We must core fund them and let them get on with it. Let us take the opportunity to have a  radical rethink of how we fund those volunteer agencies, nationally and at local government level.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I will check the timings in the Official Report tomorrow, but it seems to me that ministers have taken an inordinately long time to answer questions. As a result, only five health questions have been asked. I ask the Presiding Officers to look into that and to come back at some future time to tell the chamber what length of answers is acceptable.

I welcome the opportunity to debate the subject; I also welcome the motion in general. I particularly endorse the call for necessary political action by the world's Governments. I would like the United Kingdom to take this year's opportunity to lead by example. At the beginning of the debate, Margaret Ewing spoke about how we will not achieve the millennium development goals, judging by current progress. So let us have the UK lead the way by immediately implementing the 0.7 per cent of GNP target. I would love to see this Parliament lobby the UK Government to achieve that target in the year in which the G8 meeting takes place in Gleneagles. In reality, the UK's pledge to pay 0.7 per cent of GNP is 35 years old, so it is no great shakes that the Chancellor of the Exchequer now says that he will meet the target some time in the future. After some 35 years, the Government is spending only half that amount on aid. I ask members to think about this: since making that pledge in 1970, the UK Government has underspent its aid budget and short-changed the world's poorest by £76 billion. We owe that to the undeveloped countries. If we are serious about leading the way, let us start by promising something extra. It would be good if we were leading the way.  I have loads to say, but I assure the Presiding Officer that I will look at the clock all the time while I run through these points quickly. On the role of women, which was mentioned by Susan Deacon, I firmly believe from my limited experience of visiting underdeveloped countries that women are key. We must educate girls and women, who can pass that education on to their children. Women lead civic society in all the underdeveloped countries. The saying that men talk but women do may be a cliché but it is often also a reality. We need to fund women from the bottom up. I also want funding to be given to small initiatives. We are good at pointing out all the big things that need to be done, but small initiatives in countries and communities are what really help things to happen. Such initiatives can also bypass corrupt Governments, which people always cite as an argument for not delivering aid. We also need communication strategies. Let us consider the use of community radio, mobile phones and existing solar technology. When I was in the Andean region of Latin America, I was fascinated by the dependence of the indigenous populations on community radio for so much learning. That was absolutely fantastic. I am aware that I am running out of time, but I want to congratulate the NGOs on the way in which they have co-ordinated their actions in the make poverty history campaign. Such coming together is not new, although it is wonderful that it is very formalised this time round. However, the NGOs have been co-ordinating for years in initiatives such as the jubilee 2000 campaign. Oxfam and all the other organisations have always worked together towards the goal of eliminating poverty. While I am on the subject of the jubilee 2000 debt campaign, I want to mention that we need to revise some of the debt relief stuff. The way in which we currently administer export credits is an absolute nonsense. We need to look at that again. We also need to consider other initiatives. I am not convinced about the use of gold bullion, which Donald Gorrie suggested, but whatever happened to the Tobin tax? I bet that loads of members were once signed up to that idea. Perhaps we should reconsider such a tax on currency transactions. Finally, I must mention—as it is also a local issue for me—the campaigners of the jubilee 2000 drop the debt campaign, who will do a wonderful cycle around the UK that will culminate at Gleneagles. Those folk have done such things for years. They have been at every single summit since the one in Birmingham in 1998. For the record, I can say that although I will not be able to cycle with them I am happy to sponsor them.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action has been taken following the debate in the Parliament on institutional child abuse on 1 December 2004. (S2O-6237)

We are almost five months on from that letter, in which the minister made commitments to redact files for public inspection and provide support for those who wished to access them; to hold discussions on the law of limitation; to establish a short-life working group, which was supposed to be set up early in 2005; to appoint an independent analyst; and to provide financial support for the in-care abuse survivors group. It was agreed unanimously in the chamber that the survivors of institutional child abuse had been ignored for too long—for two years, in fact—by the Executive after they submitted their petition. Will the minister confirm that action will be taken soon  and that those people will not be ignored any longer?

Stewart Stevenson took us back to 1999, when the Parliament discussed women in prison, but before any of us was elected to the Scottish Parliament the Scottish Office carried out a review on the matter. In 1998, it echoed the Prison Reform Trust in saying: "The number of women prisoners who actually pose a grave danger to the general public can probably be counted on the fingers of one hand." In its conclusions, it noted:  "less than 1% of female convictions are for violent offences." The report also noted: "Women's offending frequently relates to drug abuse and is often rooted in poverty", as the Minister for Justice has confirmed seven years on. The life history of many women offenders has been detailed by previous speakers. At this point, I would like to say that I am not denying that at times there are women who require custodial sentences. Today, we have heard a lot about shoplifting as an example. Occasionally there are shoplifters who deserve to be put in prison because their behaviour is not caused by poverty, and they can be women as well as men. We should not get too sentimental about the subject. However, the evidence suggests that too often women who are perceived as offenders are in fact victims. Stewart Stevenson mentioned fine defaulting in relation to prostitution. I have had chats with women who work as prostitutes and they spoke about the vicious circle that they are in. They are fined for being on the street, but they have to go back on the street to be able to pay the fine. That is another debate, but there is a relevant point in it for today's debate. The ministerial group on women offenders, which reported in 2002, was set up in response to the Scottish Office review that I mentioned. In reading the group's report, I noted that although there is an upward trend in prisoner numbers, the number of convictions has decreased. Are sentences becoming harsher? If so, why is that happening despite the recognition of the issues that surround the incarceration of women offenders? I am pleased that alternatives to custody are now on the agenda. The 218 time-out centre initiative in Glasgow seems to be one part of the answer and I look forward to the analysis of its work when it has operated for an appropriate period of time. As has been noted, a further part of the answer is prevention, but realistically there will always be a need for reactive measures as well, to discourage repeat offending. That is to the benefit of the whole of society because, after all, more women offenders than male offenders have dependent children living with them and studies have shown that such women are likely to be lone parents. That is where the SNP amendment comes in. We agree with the motion, but we also seek "the necessary resources for the Scottish Prison Service, local authorities and voluntary organisations to enable them to make their contribution to achieving" the goal to which we all aspire.

Absolutely. That is one of the issues that I was talking about. We have recognised the problem for a long time but we are still not seeing tangible results. Perhaps we need to front load resource to encourage and enable the recognition of the services that can properly be used. We should consider core funding of voluntary organisations that can help. All sorts of issues are involved. Not just voluntary organisations that deal with drug abuse need to be used. We also have organisations to support families. Some women suffer from terrible stress, so perhaps we should fund groups such as Stresswatch Scotland. Perhaps we should look for organisations that are staffed by ex-offenders, who can consider what can be done to encourage people to leave the terrible mire that they are in, which causes repeat offending.

I will give way in a moment. The report by HM prisons inspectorate of the inspection of Cornton Vale in 2004 shows that 80 per cent of prisoners have a history of mental illness and 90 per cent have addiction problems. Whatever we have been doing is not working, so we must start to take an innovative approach. If we can provide pump-priming funding and examine ways to make a difference, we will have long-term benefit, as will the women and their families and, ergo, the whole society will benefit. It is too easy to keep looking at statistics and saying that we must do this or that. We should turn the situation on its head and view it from other directions so that instead of having another debate in the next parliamentary session and, despite all the good intentions, talking about the issue in the same way, we will be able to return to report that there has been true progress and genuine improvement. I am terribly sorry, but I cannot give way to Jeremy Purvis now.

Does the minister acknowledge that water and sewerage infrastructure issues are as relevant on brownfield urban sites as they are in rural areas?  Does he acknowledge that even when new developments are built where houses have been before, there are development on-costs in relation to infrastructure, because of previous overcapacity and historic maintenance problems? Will he take on board the point that such infrastructure has to be funded to keep down development costs and, therefore, rents?

Does George Lyon therefore see the point of decisions being made locally about whether shared equity housing should remain as such in perpetuity instead of being made available to be bought and thereby lost to that market?

I suggest that the reason why the Executive has agreed to review the situation next year is that it realises that those measures do not go far enough. I call again for the extension of the measures to housing associations to be scrapped.

We acknowledge the wide range of policies that is outlined in "Homes for Scotland's People". Some of those policies are very similar to the policies of my party—we have discussed them many times before in the chamber. We welcome the Housing  (Scotland) Bill, which deals with the private sector. As a member of the Communities Committee, I look forward to hearing the evidence as we head towards the stage 1 debate. I have been very impressed by the work of the housing improvement task force in developing the legislation. Since its inception, the Parliament has agreed myriad policies and initiatives relating to housing, all of which have been well intentioned and long overdue. Yesterday, when I was in Perth to listen to pre-legislative evidence, I thought to myself, "What on earth happened with Scotland's housing before the devolved Parliament?"

I certainly will.

There we are. Members did not know that they were getting a double act today. The Executive has a tendency to believe that, once something has been announced, it will just happen, as if the problem has already been solved. Sometimes the Executive does not realise that the practicalities can be difficult. For example, there can be good legislation on homelessness but not enough local authority resources. Local housing strategies were announced four years ago, but how many have been approved? In that regard, I return to an idea that I have spoken about in the chamber before: having the right to a house does not actually put a roof over a person's head. Some items within "Homes for Scotland's People" are aspirational but worthy of further practical consideration. I was extremely interested in the consultation document on shared equity when it came out, because I have felt strongly on that subject for many years. In her speech, to which I listened carefully, the deputy minister said that the subsidy would be in perpetuity and would be recyclable. However, in "Homes for Scotland's People", I noticed the potential for full buy-out within shared equity. I would like to hear more detail on who will make those strategic decisions. Will the decisions be devolved—as they should be—to local authorities, who know the supply and demand issues in their areas better than anyone? Will local authorities have the right, in partnership with registered social landlords—who will perhaps supply the shared equity—to say, "No, there shall be no 100 per cent buy-out in this location"? I look forward to detailed answers to those questions.  Paragraph 1.5 of the Executive's document contains the aim: "to enable young people to remain in rural communities." In the rural communities in which I have worked in housing, houses are built and then—not far down the line—end up in the holiday home market. In Galloway and Perthshire, for example, that is a big issue. There is an anomaly in introducing shared equity while we still have the extremely cumbersome shared ownership scheme. What will happen to that? The biggest anomaly of all is that the right to buy is still draining the social rented sector of thousands of properties each year. On current projections, the social rented market will lose three houses for every house that is scheduled for construction. That makes no sense. I know that the question of right of buy is up for discussion with the Executive again next year, but I ask the minister to put minds at rest by at least cancelling the extension to housing associations that is due in 2012. I note from paragraph 3.23 of "Homes for Scotland's People" that the Executive feels that "A well functioning housing market will reduce pressure on the need for public investment in affordable housing, while the provision of low cost home ownership can reduce pressure on the social rented sector." The reverse is also true. A well-resourced social housing sector will reduce pressure on those people who feel that they have to buy, who sometimes cannot afford to do so, but who feel that they have no other way of getting a roof over their head. The perception that to own is good and that to rent is bad can, and should be, reversed. The balance has tipped a bit too far, but we can rectify that if the will is there. That is not to deny that there are many people who wish to own but who find it difficult to get on to the housing ladder. That is why properly managed shared equity is welcome. A range of financial packages to assist first-time buyers would also help, as the Scottish National Party's amendment notes. I turn to housing supply. I know that colleagues will deal with the issues of infrastructure and Scottish Water later in the debate. Fine words and good intentions are all very well, but practicalities take over. I received an answer to a parliamentary question that stated that no new approved social rented schemes had been delayed because of constraints imposed by Scottish Water. I find that difficult to accept and presume that the answer was slightly disingenuous; it is probably the case that schemes are not being approved until Scottish Water is sorted out.  Developers of private housing are adamant about the fact that infrastructure delays are likely to continue. I read with interest Lewis Macdonald's comments that, in cases in which demolition had taken place, there would be no need for infrastructure investment when a similar number of properties was to be built. That is another example of the theory not matching the reality. Historically, water and sewerage infrastructure has often been operating over capacity, so Scottish Water will insist on upgrading work before it allows new housing developments—even when houses have been demolished. Does the minister really believe that when the Red Road flats in Glasgow are demolished, it will be possible for the same number of houses to be serviced on that site without any further infrastructure investment being necessary? Talking of sites, I was pleased to hear more about the initiative on the release of land in public ownership. It is interesting that the Forestry Commission is involved, but I would like to know whether the scheme will be extended to the Ministry of Defence, which owns lots of land in Scotland. In situations in which local authorities have engaged in land banking, will the Executive use powers to ensure the development of social rented housing, where that is required? I could cover many other issues that underpin our housing system, but lack of time means that I am unable to do so. In addition to the single seller survey, measures to do with the land register, conveyancing and single title deeds and conditions could make a big difference to how houses are purchased in this country. I might be able to deal with those issues in the future. I move amendment S2M-2585.2, to leave out from "to increase the quantity" to end and insert: "and, while welcoming the Housing (Scotland) Bill, notes that the target of 21,500 affordable homes over three years has to be offset against the 18,000 homes per year sold under the right to buy; therefore calls for the right to buy to be reformed for new tenants, while preserving the rights of existing tenants; further acknowledges the insurmountable difficulties for many young people in a first-time purchase, and calls for the introduction of a range of financial packages to assist first-time buyers, including a first-time buyers' grant."

I begin by declaring an interest as a trustee of Just World Partners and of the Al-Kameli Trust, the former registered in Scotland and the latter in England. The SNP generally welcomes the bill; of course we do. Christine Grahame and I were both on the committee that put together the report. It was extremely interesting and we found the evidence from all concerned highly enlightening. Fiona Hyslop summed up the issue when she referred to the three Cs in describing what we are trying to achieve. They are consistency, clarity and confidence: consistency of treatment by the regulator; clarity of interpretation by those operating charities; and confidence for the public that they are supporting or donating to bona fide charities. That is extremely important. In closing this debate for the SNP, I want to cover some of the issues that have already been raised, but I also want to touch on some that have not yet been mentioned. In opening, the minister talked about OSCR and spoke of proportionate and balanced regulation and co-operation with other regulators. He also mentioned that, under  the bill, Communities Scotland was taking over some regulatory functions from OSCR. I know that there will be co-operation and a reporting mechanism, and I look forward to hearing more about how that will work, because it is important that all charities are registered and monitored to some extent by the central agency, which will be OSCR. Talking of co-operation, I would like to say that I believe that that is what committee members of all parties should do. When members are unable to attend an event, they should have confidence that their fellow members will report back to them accurately. I found the sniping on that issue—by both Mary Scanlon and the convener—extremely petty and demeaning of themselves and of the committee. Tricia Marwick is very keen on the independence test, and other members mentioned third-party control and how we have to be careful about independence for all charities. We know that the national collections, for example, will be able to preserve their charitable status, because something will be done to look after them. However, we have to be careful about local authorities and arm's-length organisations. Although most of us have confidence in most local authorities, there have been instances when that confidence has been rocked and Tricia Marwick mentioned one such instance. We look forward to discussing that in more detail at stage 2. On the charity test and on charitable purposes, the benefit of the public and the common good, the minister said that we need a set of purposes that reflect Scotland's needs. I was pleased to hear him say that we do not necessarily need to match what is done elsewhere in the United Kingdom, because what we have should be what Scotland needs. However, the committee has suggested that we could consider amendments at stage 2 to reflect more truly the objectives of the charitable sector in Scotland. Patrick Harvie gave a couple of examples of what the committee discussed: the broadening of religious purposes and the reconsideration of the relief of poverty. The RNLI asked the committee to consider adding the saving of lives to the preservation of health and well-being. Scott Barrie mentioned charity trustees and the definition in the bill of misconduct. I know that he felt quite strongly about that at the committee, as did I. Many other members also had concerns. David Davidson has missed the point. Section 65(4) of the bill states: "Any breach ... is to be treated as being misconduct in the administration of the charity." The word "misconduct" implies more than bad practice, for all that civil servants and lawyers can  say that the dictionary definition covers a range of things. The perception is that if someone is found guilty of misconduct they have been at it: they have had their hands in the till or they have deliberately done something wrong. Scott Barrie is right to say that that provision could put people off serving as a charity trustee. I would like the terminology to differentiate between problems that arise from incompetence or are unintentional, and problems that are intentional or caused by misdemeanour. That change should be straightforward and simple. I look forward to that discussion. That brings me to public benefit, which has been the most contentious aspect of the discussion today. I am at a loss as to why Christine Grahame's amendment has been so contentious. First, it addresses the colleges. We heard comments from both Fiona Hyslop and Cathie Craigie on the problem of further education colleges. The committee was concerned by the submission of the Association of Scottish Colleges that unless something is done to preserve their charitable status they could lose £13 million in tax relief. The minister did not mention what he is going to do about the matter, so I look forward to hearing about that. That covers the first part of the SNP amendment. I do not see why that is contentious, nor do I see why the second part of the amendment is contentious. It does not mention independent schools, although Christine Grahame mentioned them in her speech in response to the SSP amendment and when she gave valid examples of what could arise under the bill. It is worth repeating that paragraph 150 of the committee's report clearly reflects what is in Christine Grahame's amendment. Paragraph 150 states: "ensuring that only those organisations which have as their overriding purpose the provision of a benefit to the public should qualify for charitable status." It also calls for a "greater emphasis on the need to meet the public benefit test on the face of the Bill." The SNP amendment is exactly what the committee has recommended. I fail to see the problem. The SCVO was held up as a marvellous organisation, which it is, and thanked for its contribution to the stage 1 consideration. It agrees that this is an important point and its submission states: "SCVO believes that the provision of explicit criteria of public benefit is critical to the effectiveness of the Act". It suggests:  "The Bill should provide that 'only those organisations otherwise eligible for charity status which have as their overriding purpose the provision of a benefit to the public should qualify for charitable status'". I suggest that every member of the Communities Committee, which compiled the report, should support the SNP amendment. I urge all other members to do the same.

Will the member give way?

First of all, I should point out that I have attended meetings on behalf of the SNP and the Communities Committee and have visited many private schools. Secondly, does the member really believe that if Fettes College lost its charitable status it would close its doors?

Some years ago, I read an Alice Walker novel about female genital mutilation. It was a story about a girl in Africa who was mutilated in that way; at that time, the procedure was not given the name of FGM. Although I remember being horrified when I read it, at the back of my mind was the thought that that sort of practice does not happen; I thought that it was just one of those things that is put into a story. However, when I was elected to the Parliament, I started to learn more about FGM. I was pleased when I heard that the Equal Opportunities Committee was to scrutinise the bill. As much as anything, the scrutiny has been an awareness-raising exercise for people in Scotland, with Elaine Smith as reporter meeting the Somali women's action group and reports coming out from the committee. We should all know about a practice that is likely to become more prevalent in our society, as the world moves and immigrants and asylum seekers come to Scotland, many from the countries where FGM is still carried out. I have followed with interest what happened at the committee and Sandra White has also kept me informed. I was therefore interested to read the  committee's report and will take a personal look at some of its recommendations. The first recommendation about which I feel strongly is recommendation 12, which says that the World Health Organisation classification system should be adopted in the bill. Type IV FGM, as defined by the WHO, is mutilation. It might not involve someone taking a knife and cutting to the same extent as under other definitions, but "the introduction of corrosive substances ... into the vagina to cause bleeding or for the purpose of tightening or narrowing it" is surely mutilation—there are no two ways about it. I ask the Executive to reconsider the definitions that it is using in the bill. I agree with the committee recommendation that the Executive should specifically exclude reduction labioplasty, which is a practice that is happening across western society. Recommendation 14 says that the Executive "should specify in the Bill the particular procedures which it wishes to remain outwith the scope of the Bill". Although I agree with what Sandra White said earlier on the subject, as the debate has moved on, I also have sympathy for the minister's view that that might cause problems. I am open-minded on the subject. If an amendment is lodged to address the recommendation, the debate can only be healthy and all of us will learn more from it. I agree whole-heartedly that there should be no age limit in the bill. I also agree that reinfibulation should be defined. I note that, in evidence to the committee, the minister said that he felt that the definition was implicit in the bill. I am not sure that that is enough; the definition should be stated explicitly in the bill. I turn to the crucial question of information dissemination both to the professionals who require it and to the communities that are affected. The people we are dealing with in those communities are coming to Scotland from countries where 98 to 99 per cent of the women are mutilated in this way. There is a strength of culture in those communities about FGM, which transcends religion and country boundaries. We are talking not about mothers who want to be cruel to their children but about mothers and other women in a society—and even men—who believe that FGM is in the interest of the young girl. That is a very hard cultural barrier to get over and it is crucial that we get information into communities that the practice is wrong. We also need to tell young women and girls how they can get help if they suspect that FGM is going to be done to them. A 12, 13 or 14-year-old has to know where to go if her parents tell her suddenly  that she is to go to Somalia for a two-week holiday. If the girl fears that the reason for the visit is to have FGM done to her, she should know where to go to get the visit stopped. With the honourable exception of the minister, it is interesting to note that no men have taken part in the debate. Also, with very few exceptions, no men have been in the chamber to listen to the debate. I do not want to have a go at the guys, cross party, but issues that affect women or involve violence towards women are often seen as women's issues. However, FGM is not a women's issue; it is a human rights issue that is about people in our society who are forcibly mutilated.

I agree with the thrust of what Elaine Smith said, but the issues should transcend gender. All issues are women's issues and men's issues, especially when they involve abuse of human rights. In educating communities that carry out the practice, which they see as the cultural norm, we must involve men. Given that such communities are often patriarchal, no matter how many educated women say that the practice is not right and that people should not put up with it, the prominent men in those societies need to say that, too, before it is taken seriously. Education must first be disseminated to the males; they must be taught that the practice is completely unacceptable, which will then pass through families to the women, after which we can start to move on. Nora Radcliffe mentioned Elaine Smith's comments about men. One crucial point that Elaine made was that we will make progress only when men stop demanding mutilated brides. We must push for education for men. As Sandra White said, the Executive might be worried that cross-border issues may arise if we use different definitions from those used at Westminster and expand the scope of our bill beyond that of the legislation at Westminster. I agree with Sandra that we should get the bill right. If Westminster wants to amend its legislation to bring it up to the same standard as ours and if that is better for the people who are affected, that is fine. We should care not about the ease of legislating but about what is best for the communities that are involved. One crucial issue is information for medical staff. A few members have mentioned the booklet by the specialist midwife Comfort Momoh, who came to the committee. Like Marilyn Livingstone, I urge the Executive to take on board the issues that are  raised in the booklet, which is well written and informative. I would like to hear from the minister what resources will be put in place to ensure that health professionals know exactly how to deal with people who come forward after suffering such abuse. Like the committee, I am worried that the fact that only one doctor will be able to decide whether a procedure is valid as an exception under the mental health provision could be abused. The Executive should take on board the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh's point that two doctors should give an opinion on such matters. The committee's report states that the Deputy Minister for Justice "did not think that there was a loophole and that the requirement for two medical practitioners to agree on a procedure would ... 'introduce unnecessary complications, and ... unnecessary delays.'" However, complications are not unnecessary if we are making absolutely sure on a matter as crucial as mutilating someone's genitalia. Further, it would not involve a particularly long delay to get a second opinion from a doctor. I urge the Executive to rethink its view on that issue. Like Elaine Smith, I would like asylum seekers in our country to be afforded the same protection as everyone else and think that they should not be discriminated against in any way. I give absolute support to what we are trying to do, which is to firm up and make clearer the law that was made in 1985. I am sure that all members will work positively towards getting the bill through the Parliament as quickly as possible.

Why, if everything is so rosy in our country, are so many people leaving?

I thank Christine May for bringing the debate to Parliament. It is important that every year in Fairtrade fortnight we should have a debate about fair trade. A long time ago—I think it was three years ago—I sponsored a debate on fair trade when Strathaven, where I live, and Aberfeldy in my colleague John Swinney's constituency were declared Scotland's first fair trade towns. Both of us considered it an honour to speak in that debate. Strathaven has gone from strength to strength since then. The small market town in Lanarkshire has become a model for other places in South Lanarkshire to follow. In fact, next week at the council offices, Hamilton—the biggest town in South Lanarkshire—will formally declare its fair trade status and receive its certificate. South Lanarkshire Council has not only done a lot in its council premises for fair trade, but has been a tower of strength to all groups in the area that want to promote fair trade.  Christine May mentioned that yesterday she met youngsters from primary schools in Strathaven and Avondale. One of the big strengths in Strathaven is the schools programme that we have instituted. We have seven primary schools and one academy in Strathaven and the surrounding area. I am very proud to announce that next week the Fairtrade Foundation will present Sandford Primary School with a special initiative certificate as Scotland's first fair trade school. [ Applause. ] I agree—that deserves a clap. Chapelton Primary School and Kirklandpark Primary School are close to achieving that status as well, and the other four primary schools are on the way. Some of the sixth year pupils at Strathaven Academy are determined that by the time they finish their exams and leave this year, it will have been declared the first fair trade secondary school in Scotland. A special initiative certificate was awarded because the Fairtrade Foundation had no criteria for fair trade schools. It had not got round to putting the criteria together, because the movement had grown so quickly that it had focused on keeping on top of towns, villages, councils and universities. It is a first for Strathaven that we have set the criteria for fair trade schools in the UK. Fair trade is a priority. Raising awareness of fair trade is included in the national five-to-14 curriculum as a topic within environmental studies and citizenship. It is great that the schools in Strathaven have taken that on board. They have set up fair trade groups within all the schools, which include representation from pupils, staff and parents, and they run a fair trade tuck shop. Also, the schools will actively promote fair trade products in the provision of school meals, which ties in with what Christine May said about promoting fair trade in all public places. Well done Strathaven, for blazing the trail yet again for Scotland and the UK.

I am sorry, but I do not agree with it.

Will the member take an intervention?

I am sorry to interrupt Cathy Peattie in full flow but I think that she has slightly misunderstood what I said. I certainly think that the forum's funding should be public but it should come from the Parliament. It should be top-sliced from the Parliament's budget, so that the funding for the forum is seen to be impartial and completely neutral of the Government of the day.

This Parliament was founded on four principles. The principle of openness means that our deliberations here in the chamber and in committee should be as widely seen as possible, with no one having difficulty in finding out about them. The principle of accountability means that this Parliament belongs to the people of Scotland and should have to report to the people of Scotland for the actions that it undertakes. Similarly, that principle means that the Executive should be accountable to the Parliament and, thereby, to all of Scotland. The principle of equal opportunities means that we should strive to ensure that everyone has a chance to work with and in their Parliament to advance Scotland, and that there should be no equivocation as a result of differences. Finally, the principle of engagement with the Scottish people means that the Parliament belongs to all of us, not just to the politicians who work here for a short time, and we should always remember that. Those are precious and valuable principles on which the electorate voted to create, or recreate, this Parliament in 1997, and they should underpin our democracy now and in the future. We should all be looking to protect and expand the opportunities that exist for people to become involved, driving those principles forward just as they should be driving us forward. There should be no reversing and no cutting back on the very foundations of the institution that we are privileged to work in. The work done by the Scottish Civic Forum has adhered to those principles, ensuring that our Parliament does in fact belong properly to us all. I point to the forum's work in ensuring that briefings on the work of the Parliament are available to all, pushing forward the openness part of the agenda.  The same is true when it comes to providing briefings on the legislation that is being proposed. The forum encourages groups and individuals to engage with the legislative process, and its network of local co-ordinators has been highly successful in my area and in other areas. The forum actively encourages responses to consultations, allowing those with an interest to have their voices heard. In other words, the Scottish Civic Forum is driving the public engagement that we keep hearing that all politicians want. Perhaps, indeed, it is engagement with the political process, rather than the party-political process, that will drive voter turnout back up. Perhaps the Scottish Civic Forum, properly resourced, could be the vehicle that helps to reignite the spark of public political debate and enthusiasm here in Scotland. For example, the forum's discussion on discrimination has been so successful in terms of participation that it now has its own website. How often do we say that we want to encourage public participation and how often do we actually manage to get a response? How much does the Executive spend on its consultations and what are the general response rates there? There is no doubt that the Scottish Civic Forum has been determined in its efforts to drive forward the founding principles of the Parliament. The model is so successful that Ken Livingstone's London Administration has copied it. I do not always agree with Ken Livingstone, and he has not had his troubles to seek recently, but there are times when he makes the right decisions, and this is one of them. There has also been interest in the work of the forum from around the world. Like many others, at meetings in Europe and further afield I have expounded with pride on the Parliament's power-sharing principles—the Public Petitions Committee, the Scottish Youth Parliament and the Civic Forum. My most recent overseas visitor was Wilbert Rozas, a municipal mayor from the Andes in Peru. The Civic Forum met him at length and explained in detail the work that it does. He was astounded. He has gone back to Cusco and will show our model of public participation all over his region of Peru. The plenary sessions of the Civic Forum, which we should host regularly and encourage, have allowed individuals and groups that are active in civic society to use the Parliament to debate the issues that are most important to them. I remember well the Civic Forum debate in the chamber on the Mound on the first anniversary of the Parliament. We should expand the activities of the forum to  bring it more and more into the lives of the people of our country. We should allow it to go further in advancing the principles of the Parliament and use it as a vehicle to reverse the cynicism and apathy that people feel about politics. Why does the Civic Forum face a cut in funding from its major funder? I do not believe that ministers want the forum to be quiet and go away. We may be political rivals, but I have a bit more respect for members of the Executive than that. I do not believe that it would be more comfortable for ministers if the Civic Forum was not there and I do not believe that the forum has made life overly difficult for any minister. In fact, some people have suggested that the forum works for ministers. Of course, I believe nothing of the sort but I can understand how that perception could come about when the forum is, in large part, funded by the Government. I appreciate that some people think that the forum should stand on its own feet but, unless someone can show me where the funding can come from to replace central Government funding, I say that we would be sold short. To expect the forum to bid for work in order to stay afloat compromises its neutrality and impartiality. Democracy does not come cheap; nor does mass participation in democracy. If we believe in democracy we must also believe in paying for it. I believe that the Parliament should take over the funding of the forum. That would take it out of the realm of party politics and make it far more a part of Scotland's civic life. We have a duty to everyone in Scotland to ensure that that is done and that the vision that we started with back in 1997 is kept alive. We should strengthen and extend the work of the forum and expand its funding and its functions. To do that, we have to put its funding beyond doubt: for me, the Parliament has that responsibility. I know that, at the time, Scottish Office lawyers said that that would not be allowed under the Scotland Act 1998, but I am not convinced. We must remember that the Scotland Act 1998 works the other way round: what is not expressly prohibited is allowed. It is interesting that schedule 2, paragraph 4(1) states that "the corporation"— that is, the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body— "may do anything which appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of or in connection with the discharge of its functions." My argument today is that it is our responsibility to ensure that the work of the Civic Forum is carried on and closely aligned with the work of the Parliament. If that is our responsibility, it is  practically the corporate body's duty to fund the Civic Forum. I hope that when we leave the Parliament, whether through defeat or retirement, we want to leave a legacy behind us—something that we have achieved. I would say that strengthening civic Scotland to ensure that it can work alongside Scotland's Parliament is a pretty good legacy to leave behind and that we should work towards that.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to increase the supply of social rented housing. (S2O-5467)

I was interested to read the letter in The Herald from the Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development, who said: "a significant element of demolition and rebuild on sites which are already served with infrastructure" would "not need new strategic capacity." Can the minister confirm that he will not allow new-build developments on sites where houses previously stood to be delayed by Scottish Water?

I welcome the minister's remarks about the negative portrayal of asylum seekers and the associated fanning of anti-Islamic sentiment, but I suggest that the rhetoric around the UK Government's national security plans encourages the phenomena that Marlyn Glen talked about—fear of those who are not like us and fear of the unknown. As others have said, I am absolutely certain that locking up asylum seekers, throwing them on to the streets of our cities and referring to them as bogus or illegal immigrants or as economic migrants contribute to that negativity. Rosie Kane, Elaine Smith, Patrick Harvie, Christine Grahame, Cathy Peattie and other members have all spoken of the fresh talent that we already have here in Scotland. There are a great many skilled professionals awaiting Home Office decisions on their asylum applications. Why are we not allowing those people the dignity of working and taking advantage of the contribution that they can make to our services? I hope that, under the fresh talent initiative, the First Minister is lobbying hard at Westminster—perhaps on the quiet, without our knowing—to allow the Government here in Scotland to make such decisions, to the benefit of us all. The Executive has done well with its racism strategy, over which it has power. The Scottish refugee integration action plan is an example of that. Another example is the push to combat institutional racism. We still have a long way to go, but even the Parliament's recognition of the fact that institutional racism exists in our society is a big step forward compared with where we were a few years ago. However, I have concerns about the results of a report that the Commission for Racial Equality published in 2003, but which I looked at only lately. The report monitors the Race Relations (Amendment) Act 2000. In March 2002, the Scottish Parliament approved new duties that were designed to help authorities better to meet their general duty under the act. Public authorities were asked to publish a race equality scheme by 30 November 2002. Education authorities were asked to publish a race equality policy by the same date. The report covered 77 Scottish public authorities: the 32 local authorities; 32 education authorities; five central Government and related agencies; and eight police forces. Albeit that it was published a year ago, I found some of its findings worrying, including the finding that 89 per cent of  public authorities said that they had difficulty in meeting the duty. They reported substantial difficulties in allocating resources and prioritising the work. Only one education authority sent in an REP that largely met the requirements of the duty. The majority of local authority schemes only partly met the duty—all of them required more work. Only one public authority had a fully developed plan of action to improve access to information and services. Will the minister give the chamber a further update—if not today, fairly soon after the debate—on the current status of public bodies in meeting their statutory general duty under the act? I will address the amendments to the motion. I defend the right of Opposition parties to lodge amendments to any subject for debate. We have far too many subject debates—the sort of debate that does not allow us to get into the meat of the thing. Members' views do not really get heard in those debates; we are unable to put forward our party or group point of view. As Sandra White said earlier, the SNP will accept—I say "accept"; I wish that we were in a position to accept amendments. The SNP will support the amendment in Rosie Kane's name. The SSP amendment says many of the things that the SNP group in the Parliament has been saying for some time. Right at the beginning of my speech, I said that current immigration and asylum policy undermines the Government in Scotland. I am happy to support the SSP amendment. I turn to the Tory amendment. If I picked up correctly what the Conservatives were saying, they lodged the amendment because the fresh talent document does not mention racism or immigration policy. The Conservatives might have a point, but we cannot support them, because the last lines of their amendment say: "a fair system of immigration control is necessary in order to promote good race relations." There is something very strange about that wording. It echoes some of the comments that the Tories' UK leader has made about control, quotas and tearing up United Nations conventions. Members on the Tory benches might think that it is acceptable to tear up United Nations conventions, but SNP members cannot go along with that. It is a bit rich for Jamie McGrigor to moan about a political party using Scotland as a pilot project. Talk about rewriting history.

No, thank you. Mr McGrigor did not allow any interventions during his speech.

Oh, did he? Go on then.

I am terribly sorry, Mr McGrigor. If I am in my last minute, I will quickly move on. I welcome the fact that we are to have more one Scotland, many cultures television adverts next week. Back in 2002, the then Minister for Social Justice had John Swinney, our party leader at the time, and me along to discuss the adverts and to show us the content. The view at the time was that everyone should move forward on the issue with the same agenda. This issue, above all others, crosses all party divides. A similar initiative would be welcome today. I started talking about language and its effect. I will indulge myself—

A word that I have issues with—which was not used much today—is "tolerance". This should not be about tolerating people; it should be about total acceptance of other people. I would not like anybody to be tolerating me—

Will the member give way?

What right will the commission have for ensuring the protection of human rights at Dungavel immigration and removal centre?

To ask the Scottish Executive how it will reform the way in which the land register operates. (S2O-5383)

I thank the minister for a thorough answer. Will she confirm that the land register is in chaos? How many people in Scotland do not have a proper secure title to their property because the land register is so slow and inefficient? What is the average time for registration of title?

I come to the debate as one of those souls that Kenny MacAskill talked about who have no legal experience and who have not had the great honour of serving on one of the justice committees. I come from the point of view of someone who, over the years, has had dealings with and has thought about the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service. I am pleased about much of what the Lord Advocate said this morning, because it touched on many of the problems that the public perceive with the system. The criminal justice system and the Procurator Fiscal Service have hardly changed in 300 years, yet, if we consider the booklet on the 2003-04 review of the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service, it appears that quite a lot has changed in the past five years. However, there is a bit further to go. I was particularly pleased to hear the Lord Advocate's announcement on the disclosure, where possible, of the reasons for a case not proceeding. That is a great step forward, which will be welcomed by everyone. In the almost six years since I was elected, there has been much disquiet about that point. I add, though—and I would welcome feedback on this—that I have an issue with the general lack of information for victims of crime. I say that from my experience of being a witness twice in different cases over the past five years. They were only at Hamilton sheriff court, not the supreme court that Jeremy Purvis was fortunate enough to attend. On one occasion I was a victim of crime, and therefore a witness, and on the other occasion I was purely a witness. I still do not know the outcome of either case. In the case in which I was a victim, I do not know whether the chap was prosecuted, because nobody told me. In the case in which I was a witness, I do not know  the result. That is not for want of trying to find out. The cases did not affect me badly, but for someone who has been badly affected by crime to feel that they are completely left out of the loop must be psychologically difficult. I would like the Lord Advocate to respond on that point. It could be that action is already being taken in that regard. I was impressed with the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service 2003-04 review booklet—there are a many good things in it. I was pleasantly surprised to note the many achievements described in the "Building Public Confidence" section, such as the equality advisory group—equality being a subject that the Parliament has always felt strongly about. That is welcome. The openness of hosting visits for young people from non-professional backgrounds to try to interest them in the profession is good stuff too. The partnership with the Ethnic Minorities Law Centre is excellent, as is the fact that guidance has been issued on race crime. That is another issue about which all MSPs feel strongly. Building public confidence is what it is all about. That is important, because the perception is that the legal profession is a law unto itself and that it does not care about the people it directly affects. The most important part of the review booklet is the "Continuing Reform" section at the back, because progress is still being made. It is important that there are more staff members but, as Stewart Stevenson mentioned, morale is equally important. Any service is only as good as the people who work in it. Staff morale is very important. The modernisation of information technology is extremely important too. I wonder whether the Lord Advocate has any idea how much paperwork has been saved since the IT system was put in place. I can hear the Solicitor General saying, "Lots." That is good news. It was useful to read about the pilot youth courts in Hamilton and Airdrie, and the victims of crime pilot schemes that Jeremy Purvis mentioned—one of which is in Kilmarnock—that enable people to write in describing the effect that a crime had on them. I would like to know how those pilots are progressing, whether they will be expanded and when they will report back. All in all, I welcome the reforms that were put in place in 2001. They are progressing well, and I hope that they will continue to make good progress. However, the core of such reforms should always be building public confidence in the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service, because, while much has been achieved so far—I congratulate the Justice 1 Committee on that—there is still a long way to go in that area.

Obviously, the infrastructure capital works and the 120,000 new homes target are welcome, but I am concerned about local provision. If the developer is paying, I am concerned that that will have a knock-on effect on what registered social landlords can provide and will upset the balance between low-cost home ownership and affordable rent. Indeed, there could be an on-cost for tenants' rents and for first-time buyers. In respect of strategic development, I wonder whether the minister has considered service sites to speed up the provision of housing, as new town development corporations did some decades ago.

To ask the Scottish Executive what effect increasing private finance initiatives/public-private partnership costs have on the budgets of national health service boards. (S2O-5214)

Will the health minister acknowledge the ratchet effect of fixed-payment PFI/PPP projects on a tightening budget? Will he also acknowledge the Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform's confirmation that internal rates of return to shareholders in those project companies are between 13 per cent and 16 per cent? In particular, however, will he undertake to investigate why delivering such revenue streams for the private sector has become a function of the health service?

Will the minister give way?

The people whom I mentioned—the Murray Owen Carers Group—feel as if they have been hitting their heads off a brick wall for more than two years. Despite the fine words, the glossy brochures and the good intentions—I am  not having a go; I accept that there are good intentions—people are being missed out. Will the minister commit to meeting the group to gain a personal understanding of the issues?

While Mr Sheridan was speaking, I was reflecting on the irony of our having debated closing the opportunity gap last week when we hear proof yet again that the gap between the rich and the poor is widening all the time in this country. Today's debate is about older people. I will focus on one sector of the elderly population: elderly carers, who are mentioned in the Scottish National Party amendment and who are referred to in some measure in what the Executive's motion says about the contribution that older people make to our communities. I can think of no bigger contribution than that which is made by elderly carers. In Scotland, 500,000 people are carers and most of them are over 55 years old. Those figures come directly from the Scottish Executive's website.  A couple of years ago, Help the Aged commissioned a study, which was carried out by the University of Kent, called "Caring in Later Life: Reviewing the role of older carers". It painted a bleak United Kingdom-wide picture and, despite there having been enacted under devolution some legislation that affects carers, all would agree that we still have a long way to go. That study found that more than half of older carers suffer from a long-standing illness or disability. It revealed that three quarters of the older people who live with the person for whom they care receive no regular visits from the health service, social services or home-care agencies and that more than half of them put in long hours of intensive caring on very low incomes while suffering from serious health problems. One third of those carers said that they had never had a break, and carers aged 75 or over were more likely to provide intensive care than those between 60 and 74. That brings me to another UK study, which was carried out by Jane Hubert and Sheila Hollins, about people with intellectual disabilities and their elderly carers. I will focus on that topic, because I have met many people in my region who are in that situation. The majority of people with intellectual disabilities—or learning disabilities, as they are also called—in the UK live at home with their families, usually with their parents or, more commonly in later life, with one parent, usually their mother. That raises many issues. For parent and for adult son or daughter, there is a physical issue. When a person is getting older, something as basic as mobility affects significantly how well they can care for the person whom they love so much. Mental health is also an issue: "Psychiatric disorders, including depression, affective disorders, anxiety disorders and delusional disorders, are more frequent among elderly people with intellectual disabilities than among the general elderly population." I quote from the report that I mentioned, because the researchers say it better than I can. It is clear that aging carers and their adult children will have a complex set of individual and joint needs. The needs of an older person with intellectual disabilities may conflict badly with those of an elderly parent. I have had the privilege of meeting the Murray Owen Carers Group, which is a group of elderly carers of adult children with learning disabilities in East Kilbride and I have heard some of their stories of the very basic difficulties that they face. For example—this is about a lady I know—how is a woman of 80 supposed to cope with the fact that her son, who is over 40, refuses to get into the bath or shower in the morning? That is very difficult, in both a physical and a mental sense. The stress is enormous.  There are also worries about bereavement when it comes to elderly parents. For people with learning disabilities, the loss of a parent—especially the sole surviving parent—is so much worse than it is for the average person, because they can find it so difficult to understand that their mother is no longer there one day when they come home from the learning centre. People in that situation can often be excluded from the rituals and processes that are associated with illness and death. Although they are aware that their life has suddenly changed, they sometimes do not understand why. Couple that with their having to move into a strange environment, which might be an institution or some kind of accommodation that they share with other people or another family. They might instead stay in the same house; I know someone in that situation. A person can end up staying in the same place, with a visit two or three times a day from a carer or from assorted carers. Such a change in a person's life must be absolutely awful for them to cope with. Planning must begin long before that point is reached. I would like the Executive to consider that seriously. The Murray Owen Carers Group has submitted a public petition, because it feels that despite implementation of "The same as you?" whose good intentions the group does not knock in any way, there are many hidden families whose needs are not being addressed because everything is focused on taking people from institutions—quite rightly—and putting them back into the community. I ask the Minister for Communities or the Deputy Minister for Communities to meet me and representatives of the Murray Owen Carers Group. I am sure that the group represents people from all over the country who are in the same position. Let us see whether we can make a difference to the lives of people who contribute so much to our communities here in Scotland.

I, too, am pleased that Adam Ingram has secured the debate because, as Margaret Jamieson said, it allows us to examine the wider aspects of Burns's legacy. We now have, for example, the annual Burns festival, which is funded by the tourist board and grants from Ayrshire's councils and Scottish Enterprise Ayrshire. I do not know the financial ins and outs of the situation and whether the festival has been financially viable or loss leading in its infant years. I am not convinced that the best people for the job are running the show—that is another debate—but I am convinced that Ayrshire should, on behalf of Scotland, be promoting Robert Burns and his work in every way possible. The Burns festival is truly important. We should capitalise on it and build on it. In Ayrshire and in Scotland as a whole, we should show pride in everything related to our national bard. Alex Neil mentioned Shakespeare, who is England's national bard. Shakespeare's birthplace and places associated with his legacy are never neglected or allowed to fall into disrepair—there is no argument about that. We have to show pride in Burns, his poetry, his philosophy, his egalitarianism and his sterling service to our culture in collecting and promoting traditional song. Kilmarnock, which is part of the area that I represent, is the birthplace of the first edition of Burns's poetry, which is a wonderful legacy for the town. As Margaret Jamieson said, public subscription built the Burns monument in Kay park in Kilmarnock in 1879. Sadly, the monument was neglected over the years and in 2004 was destroyed by fire. The monument must be saved. East Ayrshire Council has a duty to save it on behalf of the people of Kilmarnock. The Scottish Executive has a duty to assist if required, through whatever means possible, in preserving and promoting the heritage of Scotland's national bard on behalf of the people of Scotland. If the will is there, the means can be found. I look forward to hearing what Historic Scotland's plans are. What is not needed is for the Burns monument merely to be patched and repaired and preserved as a shell. I do not believe that Robert Burns would have wanted sterile monuments to be created in his honour. I think that the man would truly have appreciated a focal point and a centre for the living, breathing and wonderful culture of our  country, to which he contributed in his time. That can be done. People and local groups have the knowledge, the capability and the experience to realise such an ambition. For example, the highly respected and successful Living Tradition in Kilmarnock has contacts all over the country and all over the world and its staff have a practically infinite knowledge of traditional cultures and how they are best preserved and promoted. We should be listening to those people, rather than always seeking top-down solutions. Robert Burns was a man of the people. His legacy is maintained by folk from all walks of life. I ask both East Ayrshire Council and the Scottish Executive not to be "wee, sleeket, cowran tim'rous" beasties, but to lead on the project to restore the Burns monument in Kay park, first through a commitment to save it and, secondly, by listening to those people who can provide ideas and enthusiasm for its future use and its place on the Ayrshire Burns trail.

As Christine Grahame said, we have had this debate three times before. It is a worthwhile debate and it would be worth having if we had any huge improvements to report or any big initiatives to announce. I am not convinced that that is the case today and I am disappointed because I hoped that it would be. It strikes me that all the discussions and debates that we have about this subject are about changing baselines and involve a bit of obfuscation. However, having said that, I will try to be fairly constructive. We started off with the minister telling us about 100,000 children being lifted out of relative poverty since the 1997 baseline. If I remember rightly from way back, we started out with a 1999 baseline for relative poverty. That was changed and, suddenly, the figures started to look better. There was a bit of obfuscation at that time. We now consider absolute poverty in relation to a 1997 baseline, which makes things look good because, if I remember rightly, we were told that 47 per cent of children have been lifted out of absolute poverty. However, when we consider that the figure was based purely on the 1997 baseline with retail prices index increases, I suggest that it is pretty meaningless. We used to have 29 milestones with subsets of targets that were measured each year and published in the social justice annual report. The last report was in December 2003, so I ask the minister to let us know when we can expect the next one. Now, we have six objectives and 10 targets. I would like the minister to explain to me and others what the benefits of the change in the method of measuring and monitoring have been. Can he assure my colleague Brian Adam, who asked, that he is confident that he can justify the monitoring and measurement of the new targets to the satisfaction of the Opposition parties, which exist to hold the Executive to account? The minister went on to speak about concrete policy decisions and actions, but the only points that he made were about Johann Lamont's financial inclusion action plan. That is fine, but it is all very familiar—I seem to have heard it all before. In reannouncing the measure, I wonder why we have not been told how much has been achieved by the plan that Jackie Baillie put in place, I think, when she was minister. That plan incorporated the credit union initiatives that Donald Gorrie mentioned. Where are we on that and has there been an improvement? Employment initiatives have been spoken about. That is fine, but work is no guarantee of alleviating  poverty if there are no wages. Someone can still be in poverty when they are working. That goes back to what Sandra White said about the benefits trap. An initiative that was taken to alleviate poverty among disabled members of our society was the new deal for disabled people. According to the Capability Scotland briefing that we received today, Government research shows that such schemes are not achieving their aim. For example, in two and a half years, less than 20 per cent of those new deal participants have gained and sustained employment. Why have we not heard about that? As I have said, we must measure and monitor these matters. Whatever we disagree on, we can at least agree that people have basic needs and that poverty will be alleviated if those needs are met. I have mentioned employment; as far as health is concerned, I point out that the premature death rates in 29 of the 32 Scottish local authorities are higher than the average for England and Wales. We can alleviate poverty and give people quality of life through the provision of housing. However, we heard today that 150 housing developments in Glasgow have been put on hold because of poor water infrastructure. Such an example shows that everything to do with poverty is cross-cutting and that every policy must be poverty proofed. The minister must reassure us on this matter. Are departments working with each other to consider every way of alleviating poverty or are they considering the matter in isolation, even if they do not mean to? Again, I return to the issue of monitoring and measuring. I end by asking members to support the SNP amendment. As Christine Grahame pointed out, even the Joseph Rowntree Foundation has suggested that a modest redistribution of wealth is required. Without parliamentary powers over macroeconomic, tax and benefit matters, we might make small progress and take baby steps towards helping some people in some pockets of our society, but we will not achieve the ultimate aim of eradicating poverty for everyone unless we have the means of doing so.

Is the minister concerned that, with all the emphasis on local priorities and circumstances, this local community was not consulted before the decision was taken?

I apologise that I will have to leave the debate to go to something else. I wanted to ensure that we noted the great value of older volunteers in other places in the world as well as at home. Just now, Christine Grahame mentioned some fantastic work. Organisations such as Beso and Voluntary Service Overseas actively encourage people with skills to go out to give long-term or short-term help to others who are less fortunate.

The minister says that he will encourage others to do the same as the Executive is doing. Does that mean that, under the remit that he will have, he will have no power to compel them to do so?

I speak in the debate as a former member of the Public Petitions Committee who was there for part of the time that the long, sorry saga of the petitioners who seek to have their case recognised by Parliament was unrolling. Michael McMahon outlined perfectly the story of the time that it has taken. Other members have referred to the lack of response from the Executive to letters that they wrote—I had the same experience. The extent of the abuse that we are debating first came to my notice when people in my area contacted me after reading a Sunday Mail article in June 2003 in which the First Minister said that he had ordered a study of the Irish model of addressing institutional child abuse to find out how such issues could be addressed in Scotland. That was followed up by nothing. It was well over a year before the issue got going. With respect, I suggest to the Executive that raising people's hopes that something will be done, then dashing them by not responding to letters and not even responding to a parliamentary committee is no way to conduct business.  Some of what the Minister for Education and Young People said was good news. I am glad that there will be meetings with INCAS; the dialogue must be kept up. However, I am concerned about a comment that was made about files. I am not a legal body, so I would appreciate clarification when the minister winds up. He said that some institutions had agreed to open files, some had already done so and others had agreed to engage in further dialogue to progress matters. Does that mean that some are saying that they will not open their files? Do we have a way of compelling them to open files and of urging apologies similar to the one that the First Minister gave today? The minister and I attended a Public Petitions Committee meeting in September 2004. Although I was not a member of the committee, the convener allowed me to attend and to speak. The minister gave three reasons why he did not think that a public inquiry was the way forward. First, he asked whether an inquiry would prevent further abuse. We have heard a lot about that in the debate and there is unanimity in the Parliament and throughout society on the need to prevent as far as possible any abuse in future. However, that is not the issue; the issue is the survivors of institutional child abuse and their campaign for a public inquiry. The survivors are saying to us, "You didn't listen to us then; please listen to us now." Secondly, the minister asked whether a public inquiry would help to meet the needs of survivors. He said that some people might prefer that the issues were not raised in public. There might well be such people, although I have not met or heard from any of them, but there might be many more who would be willing to come forward to tell their story if a public inquiry were held, because the fact that such an inquiry was being held would indicate that their experiences matter to the rest of us and that they are worth listening to. People's shame and guilt might be alleviated if their stories were validated through an open and public inquiry. Thirdly, the minister said that there is public interest in the matter and that the public "need to be reassured that such abuse cannot recur; that lessons have been learned".—[ Official Report , 29 September 2004; c 1049.] However, the public must also acknowledge that abuse happened on a fairly horrendous scale. That is apparent from the cases of the people who have been brave enough to come forward, whose claims deserve to be validated. The public must know who those people are and what happened to them and the public must understand that they are ordinary people like you and me, who ended up in a situation that any of us could have ended up in. Sadly, there are appalling perceptions about those people. Someone once said that many of the kids in care were misfits and delinquents, and some  people believe that the claims are not true and that those who make them just want to make hay while the sun shines so that they will receive financial compensation. We must say to the public that there was a collective failure of society to deal with the problem and that it is society's collective responsibility to acknowledge what happened, to recognise society's responsibility and to try to make reparation wherever possible. If the people who suffered think that such reparation could be provided in part by a public inquiry, the onus is on the Parliament and on Scotland to listen to them and to hold such an inquiry. I am not sure why people keep saying that an inquiry would be inappropriate. Public inquiries have been held in Canada, Australia and Ireland, so what is wrong with us? Why cannot we address the matter? We have not heard the results of the study of the Irish model that the First Minister announced. What were its findings? Did they suggest that a public inquiry was not the right way forward for Scotland? If they did not suggest that, I, for one, believe that more must be done to justify not holding a public inquiry.

I welcome the Executive's motion and its on-going commitment to the eradication of domestic violence. I also agree with the SNP amendment, two points in which I want to address. Point 1 is that research has found that one in five young men and one in 10 young women believe that violence against women is acceptable in some cases. We should all bear that horrifying statistic in mind. Point 2 is the recognition that violence against women is an international issue, as Cathy Peattie eloquently outlined. Violence against women is not confined to any particular political or economic system, but is a phenomenon that cuts across boundaries of wealth, race and culture. Indeed, women's role in the world is based on a fundamental belief in societies of the non-importance of women compared with men. Indeed, the UN Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women acknowledges and confirms the basic tenet that "violence against women is a manifestation of historically unequal power relations between men and women, which have led to domination over and discrimination against women by men." The use of women as a weapon of war, in either internal or international struggles, is a monstrous manifestation of that unequal power relationship and of gender violence. There are far too many examples, but I will cite just a few. In the Democratic Republic of Congo, there has been systematic rape and torture of at least 40,000 women and girls during the past six years of civil conflict. In Darfur in Sudan, girls as young as eight are among the victims of mass rape and women as old as 80 have been taken hostage and used as sex slaves. It is estimated that, during the genocide in Rwanda, up to 0.5 million women were subject to rape, including gang rape, sexual torture and mutilation. The cross-party international development group of the Scottish Parliament was privileged to hear recently from a Rwandan lady who told us of her experiences and of the staggering facts about HIV and AIDS in her country—seven out of 10 of the abused women are now suffering from that condition. A recent  Amnesty report states that, although we are 10 years on from the Rwandan genocide, prosecutions have been few and far between. That is an indictment of not just that country, but us all. However, the issue is not all about Africa, a distant continent. Closer to home, in eastern Europe, the world witnessed the same kind of violence towards women as a weapon of war. Similarly, we continue to see trafficking, as Pauline McNeill, Shiona Baird and Rosie Kane mentioned. Indeed, at times trafficking is, sadly, perpetrated by those who are expected to protect the women. The SNP supports all initiatives to address the issue and to support the victims. The on-going effects of mass violence are beyond the imagination of any of us. No matter what happens to women anywhere in the world, they have to get on with life; they have to cook, clean and raise the children, even where they are stigmatised by their societies because of circumstances that were way beyond their control. I have seen some of the results for women who have had to live with such violence. I have friends in East Timor who suffered rape and sterilisation by external aggressors. In Peru, I was privileged to meet some of the victims of the civil war—community activists who were violated both by insurgents and by Government forces during the struggle simply because they were trying to improve the lot of ordinary people, as women do all over the world. Cathy Peattie is right to say that Scotland should be playing a part in the global campaign to stop violence against women wherever it occurs. However, we can do that with any force and credibility only if we recognise and deal with our own culture of violence against women, in which one in five young men and one in 10 young women believe that violence against women is acceptable. Elaine Smith and I are involved in a Tanzanian project with the British Council. The women MPs from Tanzania whom we meet are absolutely astounded when we talk to them about domestic violence in Scotland. They are amazed to learn that, in a country that they see as being democratic and forward thinking—Scotland's condition is something that they aspire to—people suffer from domestic violence to a degree that is not that far removed from the degree to which people in Tanzania suffer from it. We should be amazed as well and we should be doing everything that we can to support the Executive in what it is trying to do. I have no doubt about the sincerity of the Executive in relation to this struggle and I confirm my whole-hearted support, as well as that of my party, for it in that regard.

The minister is right when he says that the sexual health strategy has taken some time. We have been talking about it in the chamber for the past five years, it is more than a year since the expert group published its report, and it is almost nine months since the consultation closed. Will the minister please be definitive about when the results of the consultation will be published and when the strategy will be published and brought before the chamber?

To ask the Scottish Executive what investigation it has carried out into the spreading of sewage sludge on land and the environmental implications of such operations. (S2O-3744)

I thank the minister for that answer. To preface my next question, I recently visited such an operation in Breich and was pleasantly surprised at how successful it was. However, juxtaposing that with all the publicity that there was about Blairingone, does the minister agree that one of the main problems is that people do not understand the distinctions, are not being told about them, are worried about planning consents and have a suspicion about health? Would it not be better if SEPA, the Scottish Executive and councils were much more proactive in letting people know the differences between schemes and what exactly is going to be put into their area?

To ask the Scottish Executive in what circumstances a patient on a national health service waiting list would be given a financial inducement to use private health care. (S2O-3745)

I know that the minister is aware that Lanarkshire NHS Board has offered such an inducement in at least one case for a condition that could have been treated easily and cheaply in Scotland if the clinical procedure had been approved here as it has been approved in England. The main thrust of my point is that in such cases people have been offered a certain amount of money—a few thousand pounds—towards the cost of treatment, depending on their funding the rest, and—

They have to pay out the money and then claim it back. Does that promote equal access to health care for all?

rose—

I declare an interest as a fellow of the Chartered Institute of Housing. There have been three main themes in the debate: homelessness; the right to buy; and new builds and infrastructure. First, I will refer to the minister's speech. There is a commitment to increase the provision of affordable houses, amounting to 21,500 houses over the next three years, but 5,000 of those houses are for ownership. In Scotland, where ownership levels are rising higher than they are anywhere else in western Europe, we keep on going down the ownership route. At one point—it seems like many years ago—Wendy Alexander declared a housing ownership target for Scotland. Is that one of the few targets that the Executive has not abolished in the past few weeks? I understand that there are people who want to own their own homes and I understand that that choice should be there. There is a need for low-cost home ownership initiatives, but I would like to see an initiative to ensure that low-cost home ownership properties would remain in perpetuity as low-cost home ownership properties, rather than the initial subsidy being lost and those houses ending up being sold at full market value. That can be done if the will is there. I look forward to seeing the fine detail of the minister's shared equity plans. What finer example is there of the initial subsidy being lost than right to buy. That policy has been with us for some time and the provision of 5,500 affordable rented homes a year must be set against the on-going loss of 18,000 homes a year through right to buy. I find it interesting that Labour members are proud of the fact that they decreased the discounts for right to buy. That was quite good, but those members are the same people who extended the right to buy to take in post-1989 housing association tenants. The landlords that successive studies have shown to house the most vulnerable people have their stock reduced, so waiting lists rise and affordable housing stock for rent reduces: 5,500 houses have been built, but 18,000 have been lost.

Does Murray Tosh accept that, in the area where I live, ex-right-to-buy houses are owned by private landlords who charge rents of above full housing benefit levels, while people are told that they have no chance of getting a council house for 15 years? For housing associations there is, of course, a 10-year delay and there are pressured areas. There is also a rush of housing associations applying for exemption through charitable status. It would have been far easier not to have extended the right to buy in the first place. Given that there are fewer decent affordable rented houses, it is obvious that there will be increased homelessness. I welcomed the Executive's legislation on homelessness because it has admirable intentions, which I think that we all share. However, giving someone the right is not the same as giving them a house. Such aspirational rights must be resourced and I do not believe that that is happening adequately. Members have mentioned examples of that. Two planks of Executive housing policy have an implementation date of 2012—that is eight years away. First, under the Homelessness etc (Scotland) Act 2003, every unintentionally homeless household will be eligible for permanent accommodation. Secondly, housing association tenants who did not previously have the right to buy will be given that right. I am concerned about the impact of those policy planks on the supply of affordable housing in Scotland in the long term. Is on-going research providing any steer on that? Is the target date of 2012 in the Homelessness etc (Scotland) Act 2003 likely to be met? After all, there are still families with children in bed and breakfast accommodation even though the previous Minister for Communities pledged regulation to end such use of B and Bs by the end of this year. Is that pledge on target? Many members have discussed the infrastructure difficulties—and whether they are real or imposed—that are a strategic element of housing provision. I agree with Murray Tosh's view on the importance of housing market areas rather than reliance on local authority areas. We can all give examples of little pockets in those wider areas where the problems are huge. Murray Tosh and Fergus Ewing raised the issue of funding infrastructure provision. They are right to say that we require strategic direction on that,  as well as on the planning system in general. Although, as Murray Tosh said, housing associations and developers may sometimes fund, for example, sewerage provision beyond the needs of their own project, that should not be taken into account in the unit cost because it would have a direct impact on rents, which would rise very steeply to meet the costs of that infrastructure. I ask the minister to give full consideration to all those matters. We are pushed for time, so I quickly mention the amendments. We cannot support the Conservative amendment, which talks about housing association tenants having "greater rights"; that is a basic error, because housing association tenants do not have greater rights. The Conservatives seem to be calling for an end to council housing and a full-scale stock transfer. We cannot cope with the current speed of transfers, let alone an acceleration. We like most of the content of the Green amendment. We are a wee bit concerned about the amount of encouragement and praise that the Greens are piling on the Executive, but we agree with the broad thrust and ecological element of their amendment and we are minded to support it. I ask members to support the SNP amendment.

Does Patrick Harvie agree that, regardless of all the talk about the right to buy being about choice, people in his position have ended up having no choice except to become home owners?

I do not think that Karen Whitefield's parents are much younger than mine were, and I am old enough to remember a generation that aspired to a council house in a decent area and got a decent council house in a good area. That is what the right to buy erodes, because the good houses in the best areas have been bought up under the right to buy, in some cases by the grandchildren of those who lived there for years on end. The picture that Karen  Whitefield paints is certainly not the way that I remember things being.

I am terribly sorry, Presiding Officer. Does Karen Whitefield agree that decent council housing was much more available to generations before ours?

Does the member believe that houses that are bought under the right to buy are still valuable assets to the community when they are owned en bloc by private landlords or when family members have bought them for holiday homes, for example?

Does Mr Aitken accept that that level of involvement, control, responsibility and rights can also be achieved within council ownership—for example, through the co-operative model that Glasgow City Council used some years ago?

Will the minister take an intervention?

I will be brief, Presiding Officer. I think that everyone in the chamber agreed with the First Minister when he said that we ought to share in, and contribute to, the world around us—of course we should. Keith Raffan said that the Opposition must offer proposals. Nicola Sturgeon certainly did so, but I will offer another one. Scotland can play a major role in Europe and the world by having the vision to promote peace and stability. In his final address to the European Parliament, Nobel peace prize laureate John Hume called for the creation of a peace and reconciliation department. To stress the importance of such work, he called for an EU commissioner who would be dedicated to the task of conflict resolution. What better vision is there than that of assisting the process of conflict resolution in global trouble spots? What better place to site a centre dedicated to such work than here in Scotland? Scotland has long contributed to peace efforts in troubled parts of the world. For example, at the end of last year, my Westminster colleague Angus Robertson MP helped to broker a major conference in his and Margaret Ewing's constituency. Parliamentarians from Armenia, Azerbaijan and Georgia attended to try to help resolve disputes in the south Caucasus. That is a model for what Scotland and Europe can work towards achieving. As a small nation, we could play an important role in building peaceful and stable international relations. We are, after all, a nation involved in a process of self-government that has already secured significant constitutional change in a peaceful and democratic fashion that many people admire and cite. I believe that our reputation for democratic and peaceful constitutional change means that we could be established as a force in aiding conflict resolution, even with our current regional status. Imagine what we could do if we were independent. I agree, of course, with Nicola Sturgeon's amendment and I urge members to vote for it. Among other things, the amendment asks for "the establishment of a distinctive presence overseas to promote Scotland". I believe that we can have such a presence and that we can bring overseas people here by the establishment in Scotland of a European centre for peace and reconciliation. I ask the Scottish Government to promote that vision.

Does Elaine Smith also recognise that the Parliament does not have to powers truly to promote equalities, because they are a reserved matter?

Ken Macintosh said that no one is questioning the fact that it is best for children to be breastfed where that is possible. I agree. The question today is: by what route should we meet the targets? To reflect what Elaine Smith said about compulsion, it is a fact that, in the field of equality, more than in any other field, we do not achieve anything unless we legislate for it. The equal pay legislation is a case in point. I think that we have had that legislation for 40 years but, even so, women are still paid a lot less than men in percentage terms. It is disingenuous to pretend that we do not need to do anything. I point out to Nanette Milne that we are not talking about creating a branch of the police force—the breast police—who will run about so that folk can report any violation. Deputy Chief Constable Mellor said: "I sense that the creation of a criminal offence in this bill seems to be principally a symbolic act."—[ Official Report , Health Committee , 11 May 2004; c 866.] He accepts that the existence of an offence on the statute book means that people start to change their culture. That is what the bill is all about. The bill that Elaine Smith is promoting will never change attitudes if it does not have some teeth. I mentioned equality legislation, but that is reserved to Westminster, so we cannot do anything about it here; Elaine Smith has not been able to go down the anti-discrimination route. It is a credit to her and Mike Dailly of the Govan Law Centre that they have come up with something as sensible as the bill that we are today considering at stage 1. Section 1 of the bill does not affect Scottish licensing law; it does not say that any breastfeeding mother or anyone who wants to feed a baby with a bottle of milk can breenge into any premises and have the right to do so there. It does not "prevent a business from excluding breastfeeding on its premises where the lawful custom or practice is to exclude children generally." The bill is about places where children and babies already go and are entitled to go. It is about the right of a child to be fed in that way.  It is interesting to read the World Health Organisation's international recommendations, which influence the targets that are set in this country. Not all the initiatives are possible, as Tricia Marwick said, but we can work towards achieving some of the targets that are reproduced in the policy memorandum to the bill. The Executive has started to go some way towards achieving those targets, but there is still a long way to go. A bit more uniformity is required in the funding for the promotion of breastfeeding, but I think that all members are willing to work towards achieving that end. I see that time is running out, so I will move on.

You do not say that very often, Presiding Officer. Okay, I will have a rant. As Carolyn Leckie mentioned when she picked up on the issue that David Davidson raised about the powdered milk that was promoted in NHS premises in this country, it is ridiculous that powdered milk is still promoted in non-developed countries. It is all very well for Nanette Milne to say what she did, but we all know that some companies actively tell mothers in non-developed countries that breast milk is bad and that powdered milk is good. That is all about the companies promoting their products and their profits. Given that we are considering today whether the Parliament should legislate to provide rights in this country, I hope that all members will agree that we should take an interest in promoting fairness in that respect in undeveloped countries as well. It is a strange anomaly that powdered milk, which must be mixed with water, is actively promoted in countries in which one cannot be sure that the water supply is safe for drinking, let alone for mixing with powdered milk for babies.

I agree that that is absolutely ridiculous. Of course the World Trade Organisation's rules are ridiculous and bizarre. We are talking about ensuring equality and fairness for people in this country, but we should extend that by pushing our Governments to promote equality and fairness all over the world. Dealing with mothers and babies is surely a good place to start.

How are the discussions going on development funding being moved into local authority departments and what progress is being made on those departments' co-ordination with housing associations to meet need?

Jamie Stone said that people who were at school with him would fall about laughing at the idea of his speaking in a debate on sports. I can tell him that  my colleagues have been falling about laughing all week at the idea of my speaking in this debate. I think that it is a punishment for something that I have done wrong. I never enjoyed sport as a child. In fact, I hated it. I thought that it was absolutely awful. I have great sympathy for children who do not enjoy what we call sport. Earlier, Ted Brocklebank said that it was silly to say that sport is not competitive. I think that that is the nub of the issue. We have to make a distinction between competitive sport for athletes and activity, which can cover all sorts of things that are not competitive sport. People can be active and fit without taking part in sport.

I cannot think of anything that I would hate to do more than that, but I agree with Mr Brocklebank's point. I should say that, despite not going in for competitive sport, I was quite a fit child and can still touch my toes.

Some other time. Jamie McGrigor and Margaret Jamieson talked about alternative ways of thinking of activity and sport that are outwith what generally happens in terms of compulsion in schools and so on. There are lots of different ways in which children and adults can be active and become fit. Frank McAveety talked about increasing the participation base. As many members have noted, however, that means doing some work in relation to facilities. Mark Ballard and John Swinburne talked about parks and green spaces. Indoor facilities are also important. The selling off of school playing fields and the reduction in the size of school playgrounds is a problem that we need to address. Sylvia Jackson and Michael Matheson talked about PPP projects in relation to ensuring that facilities were in place for communities to use. We hear that, in some cases, those facilities are being made available, but we need to consider revising existing contracts to improve the situation. Michael Matheson mentioned the TASS initiative that runs south of the border. I have read about it and it strikes me as a sensible initiative that does not cost that much. It is designed to make it easier for young people to continue to pursue sporting careers after leaving school instead of letting that raw talent go to waste. The success that we have  had with Scottish athletes and Scottish sports shows that we have a lot of raw talent in this country. However, only some of it is being tapped into.

I am sure that that is true and I suggest that the scheme could be revised with input from people who have studied the situation in detail. The SNP agrees with Dennis Canavan's amendment, to which Margo MacDonald also spoke, because we believe that the issue comes down to resources. We can talk all that we like about the many improvements that can be made without extra resourcing but, if we really want to meet the targets that have been put in place, we will have to make resources available. It is interesting that the national governing bodies of sport that are funded by sportscotland have had no increase in funding in five years, because sportscotland does not have the necessary resources. That brings me to the London Olympics bid, about which we heard from Michael Matheson and Margo MacDonald. Yes, it would be grand if our athletes could go and take part in the London Olympics, but sportscotland has said that, if it loses more than £40 million from lottery funds because of the London Olympics, it will have to end programmes that provide support to grass-roots and elite sport in Scotland. We have to consider the issue carefully. We await with interest further details of the funding arrangements for the implementation of the Olympics bid. Some of what Elaine Murray said interested me, but I think that she has misunderstood the motion that is before the SNP conference. It is interesting to note that, at its conferences, the SNP takes motions and amendments from its members and forms policy on that basis. We do not go to conference with motions that will definitely become policy. The motion that Elaine Murray talked about will be debated, along with every other aspect of our policies. Elaine Murray took the SNP to task for not mentioning the Executive's commitment to ensuring that there are two hours of compulsory sport a week in schools. However, much more is missed out of the Executive's motion than is missed out of the SNP's amendment. For example, although the physical activity task force had four strands—schools, homes, workplaces  and communities—the Executive has mentioned only schools. Our amendment is much broader and more closely reflects the studies that have been done. I will finish by agreeing with something that Elaine Murray said—one out of three ain't bad. She spoke about the volunteers who spend a great deal of time participating in sport in communities and helping others to do so. They do a lot of grand work without pay. Most years, I manage to get along to the East Kilbride sports awards. I am always fascinated by the range of sporting activity that is available for all in my community and I am impressed by the number of people who freely give up a lot of their time every week to help to promote that. I salute those people as well as the wonderful Scottish athletes who have done us proud lately.

You never did.

I welcome Lord Fraser's report, which has endorsed the views that many have held for some time and, indeed, stated in debate and during the inquiry's evidence taking. I took an interest in this project right from the start by asking parliamentary questions, writing letters to the Presiding Officer and so on. I felt instinctively that which was subsequently confirmed: this project was pre-disastered by the time it came to this Parliament, with a relentless rush to get on site with a done deal. Fraser said that construction management contracting was the single, most disastrous factor. All the risk is with the client unless there is proper preparation. Much as I hate to, I have to disagree with John Home Robertson's analysis of why this particular construction management project went wrong. It was never going to work. As Fraser said, the wheels came off the wagon early. There was no preparation and no run-in time, and then the Government washed its hands of it. Consider Sam Galbraith's testimony. He said: "I knew the minute we handed it over to them the costs would go through the roof". That is hardly an endorsement of himself as a minister or of his MSP colleagues. That was Scottish ministers shrugging off responsibility and leaving the Parliament to cope with a disaster that was not of its making. Of course, the spin machine has suggested that ministers were not aware of what was going wrong with the project from its earliest days. That is, of course, rejected by Lord Fraser, who confirms that "There is an abundance of documentary evidence of  officials warning Ministers of the consequences of over-hasty decisions." Why were ministers not listening? If they do not listen, it is easy for them to say that they do not know; it is a culture of plausible deniability. An editorial in The Herald today refers to it as "not so much a climate of secrecy as a climate of cynical control of politics." There has been much talk today about construction management. Although the decision to follow that route was apparently not referred to ministers, it is clear from the evidence of Lord Elder that Donald Dewar understood its importance. Lord Elder describes him as being "seriously distressed" at being unable to question the decision "without impugning the integrity of his entire official team". He was certainly acting with honour to his staff, but what about the Parliament and the nation? I tried to intervene on Helen Eadie when she spoke about Portcullis House and the inadequacy of the Tories in that construction management project. Should Labour have not learned from that and not rushed headlong into speeded-up construction management for the Holyrood project? Fergus Ewing referred to the conduct of the Minister for Finance at that time—now our First Minister. Our First Minister has so far ducked all the questions about the 2 June 1999 meeting. Why did Mr McConnell take part in making a decision that he was not entitled to make? Was he aware of the construction management form of procurement and its risk implications? Why did he wait until the 2003 election campaign to announce an inquiry based on so-called new evidence, when that evidence was two years old at that time? If raising his game does not include accepting responsibility for his failure on 2 June 1999 to protect the interests and integrity of the Parliament and apologising on his own behalf, it stands condemned as no more than easy sloganising. Beyond the Scottish Office debacle, I believe that Parliament made the wrong decision when it decided to carry on regardless rather than to halt to take stock—I said that at the time publicly, I said it to Lord Fraser and I repeat it now. It is ironic to read in the debate at that time that one of the reasons cited for not delaying was a potential cost of £2 million to £3 million. For George Lyon to try to tie in potential pause costs with subsequent delays is simplistic in the extreme. However, the decision was taken, despite the fact that I and others voted against it twice. Following that, the SNP group believed that it was up to all of us to try to achieve the best that we could under the circumstances. That is why we took part in the progress group. After all, we had a member on the  SPCB who had legal responsibility. That is why the Tories' position is so hypocritical: they had a member with legal responsibility who took part in the decision making, but no one at the front line taking the flak. Today, I speak not as a member of the HPG, but for my party. However, I find it unavoidable to blur those lines. I am on record as being a supporter of Miralles's concept right from the start. I was pleased when Alex Salmond asked me to be the SNP representative on the HPG and, despite the flak, overall I do not regret the appointment. I was honest with Lord Fraser and admitted that, despite having some construction experience, I had a lot to learn—but let me tell the chamber, not nearly as much as some people in here have. Perhaps the HPG made some mistakes. Perhaps some believe that we could have done better—I have always been open to discuss these issues with anyone. However, we have been dogged by much rumour, speculation and spurious ranting, some of which had no basis in reality. We recommended some savings, which were implemented, although I admit that they were minor in the greater scheme of things, which was already well under way. I stand by the use of Scottish granite and the refusal to countenance a large pole being stuck under the beautiful cantilever on the Canongate. I certainly stand by the recommendation not to support the deletion of pre-cast ceilings in the public area and their substitution by chicken wire and plaster. RMJM was absolutely right on those matters.

No, thank you. If anyone bothered to take the time to ask how such things work in contracting terms, they would know that it is not as easy as saying, "This material is cheaper, and here is the net saving." Stewart Stevenson alluded to that. They would also know that any change is likely to result in delay, ergo erosion of any potential saving. At the heart of the Holyrood fiasco was the pretence that risks could be managed out, but they never were in this project, and they seldom are in real life. Often there is a casual conspiracy of involved players to underestimate costs at the beginning of public projects. Lord Fraser stops short of identifying such a conspiracy in this case, but the Parliament must put in place robust procedures to prevent anything like it from happening in future. We hear talk of reform of the civil service. I heard what the Minister for Finance and Public Services said today about public procurement, but he does not go far enough. It is not only the  mechanisms that need to be addressed but the culture, root and branch. My final submission to Lord Fraser recommended a piece of research that was carried out by three European academics whose analysis of worldwide public projects is fascinating. It is too detailed to go into now, but if I mention a few of the chapter headings, members will see where I am coming from. The chapter headings include "A calamitous history of cost overrun", "Substance and spin in megaproject economics", and "Dealing with risk". Messrs Flyvbjerg, Bruzelius and Rothengatter also propose instruments of accountability and accountable decision making, and that is where we should be heading. We should ensure the engagement of the public and stakeholders, promote transparency and define regulatory regimes. Let us do so in all aspects of public procurement. Lord Fraser has not yet completed his task—the report is, after all, an interim report. I hope that he will take on board some of the points that I have made. We can and should put the project behind us, but only if we learn from it.

Will Helen Eadie give way?

I am interested to hear about the review. It is nice to be back in a situation where I can monitor it. Will the review also examine some of the infrastructure problems that exist, especially in rural areas but also in urban areas? Will it examine issues such as serviced land initiatives and equity sharing? Will the minister take on the issue of shared ownership schemes, which we should be considering? Those who buy half of their house and rent the other half are at a great disadvantage. Will the review consider ways of creating a better shared ownership scheme for people who want to buy their houses?

I am sorry to have immediately to disagree with Mr Watson. Andy Kerr, the Minister for Finance and Public Services, has already stated: "There is no point in my setting targets for things over which I have no control or influence ... we do not always have the direct levers of control." —[ Official Report , Finance Committee, 27 April 2004; c 1299.]  Mike Watson spoke about jargon and I agree that too often we get into jargon when we talk about these issues. "A Smart Successful Scotland" could be viewed that way. I would like to think of it as a vision, and as part of the vision for "The Framework for Economic Development in Scotland." The vision that is written down early in the document is "to raise the quality of life of the Scottish people through increasing the economic opportunities for all on a socially and environmentally sustainable basis." That is quite a vision. However, to achieve a vision we have to have a strategy. I am not convinced at all that, in the FEDS document, we have a strategy for achieving any of that. I do not think that there is any real thinking about changing the face of Scotland and driving forward the ambitions that we should have in this modern country. There is a commitment early in the document to nurturing the education system, especially higher and further education, which leads on to the research and development that we have heard about. However, that commitment comes from an Executive that imposes tuition fees on students in the form of a graduate endowment—an Executive that has failed to address student poverty and graduate debt. Let us have some big thinking on that issue and a recognition that the system that is being used here is not working. While we are at it, we should have a serious reconsideration of the use of the private finance initiative in Scotland. The evidence from Audit Scotland two years ago told us that the use of PFI to build schools is having a seriously detrimental effect on education budgets and, therefore, on provision. While we are waiting for the nurturing of education to start, we had better hope that we do not have to travel anywhere fast. Our road network is crumbling, having suffered years of neglect; our railways are among the slowest in Europe; and our airways are underutilised. The original FEDS—"The Way Forward: Framework for Economic Development in Scotland"—states that infrastructure underpins economic success. We have to get that infrastructure right. Someone can have the best product in the world, but if they cannot get it to their customers they cannot sell it. The same applies to the communications framework. Of course, we welcome the aim of achieving 70 per cent broadband coverage; but would it not be better for the Executive to aim for 100 per cent coverage and give us some details on when it is going to achieve that, how it is going to bring the Highlands and Islands in and what criteria it is going to use, about which Alex Fergusson asked earlier?

We look forward to the Executive achieving that target—unlike so many targets that we never hear about again. The best that we have heard recently about how we are going to achieve all this has been from the First Minister, who is going to cut civil service jobs and sort out the public sector. That is what we have heard about how the Executive is going to go forward with "A Smart, Successful Scotland". Scotland's economic outlook is really bad. We need an awful lot more than targets that are easy to hit when we look for reasons for the failure that the Executive has achieved by its lack of vision, its lack of firm objectives to achieve and its lack of admission that, without the real levers and the powers that Scotland needs to move forward, it will never achieve anything. We need the levers over fiscal and monetary policy. I was heartened when Wendy Alexander and her colleagues at the Fraser of Allander institute came round to the SNP's way of thinking on a move towards fiscal federalism. I am convinced that that will move us on. Other members—even the Tories—have talked about the need for fiscal federalism and more powers. Susan Deacon has talked about it, and the late—of this chamber—lamented John McAllion has come round to our way of thinking on it as well. I think that the Executive will move forward and agree with us that, without independence, it cannot really make a difference for the people of Scotland or raise their quality of life through all the things that it aims to do.

No, thank you. Some things in the framework document are the germs of good ideas; the problem is that the Executive does not have the ability to carry them forward. Look at what an independent Scottish Government could do with the Inland Revenue and the Department for Work and Pensions. We could co-operate with banks and financiers to encourage business birth and support small businesses that are facing difficulty. We need business support and we need to encourage business birth rates. I cannot find much in the FEDS document about encouraging business start-ups. Perhaps we will get a surprise when the minister sums up. I suggest that, instead of allowing Scotland's wealth to be stripped away by the Executive's policies and the policies of the Government at Westminster, the Executive should really have a vision and look towards it. Let us look at growing the economy so that it filters down and really  achieves something for social justice in Scotland. Only in that way can it realise the vision that it sets out in its statement about raising the quality of life in Scotland.

What is clear from all the speeches is how social work has changed over the years. That is reflected in what the minister said on 6 May: "We need to be clear about what we expect in the early part of the 21 st century, which is so different from the 1960s when social work as we know it today found its statutory basis."— [ Official Report , 6 May 2004; c 8216.]  It is true that, nowadays, local authority social work departments are required to deliver the most extensive and far-reaching agenda since the inception of the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968. With the establishment of the Parliament and the Scottish Executive, we have had a wide range of new legislation and policy initiatives that are, by their nature, accompanied by a substantial volume of guidance and directives. A lot of that work has been in community care, but there is also a major development agenda in children and families services and criminal justice. I had the pleasure of meeting people from a social work department in central Scotland the other day. I was interested to see the main headings of the kind of work that social workers now do and the responsibilities that they have. Under community care alone, they work with older people and people with dementia, with people who have learning disabilities, mental health problems, physical disabilities, impairments or acquired brain injuries, with children and young people who have disabilities, with people with addictions and, of course, with carers. A very wide range of services are now being provided under the heading of social work, and a review is required—it is probably long overdue—so I am very pleased that one will be carried out and I look forward to hearing much more about what it will involve.  I would like to make one point in particular. Scott Barrie touched on it when he said that we should never forget the fundamental principles of the 1968 act, when social work as we know it was set up to act on behalf of us all. When we hear about so many bad things happening in social work, we should remember that an awful lot of good work is also going on. We must not throw the baby out with the bath water, but take note of the good practice that exists and the great things that are already happening and we must try to build on them rather than start all over again. The social work department that I visited was at North Lanarkshire Council and I was greatly impressed by its work, particularly that on supported living. That is the term that the department uses for its approach to enabling people with significant levels of disability to live in their own homes and communities—communities that they know—which allows them to maintain close connections with their families and friends. All those with whom the department works on supported living have individualised care packages and many of them receive 24-hour care in their own homes. What is important about that work is that it shifts away from the concept of fitting people into a service and towards designing services around the unique needs of the individuals. I was amazed to learn that, in North Lanarkshire, 250 people—the majority of whom receive 24-hour care—are in their own fully supported tenancies. Another side to that work is that the arrangements have generated more than 700 social care jobs. The future growth of such work depends on resources. Some say that resources are not the only issue; of course they are not, but they are important because we need the resources to provide individualised care services such as that I mentioned. That is not only about redeploying existing resources to better effect, as many councils—including North Lanarkshire Council—are doing, because it is evident that need outstrips the available resources. We must take that on board. Much good practice exists and we should build on it, but we must also monitor effectively. I am concerned about how the Scottish Executive monitors social work services because, if we measure outputs only in the short term, we are not really seeing the quality of service below that and it sometimes takes a long time—many years, in some cases—to produce the results for which we are supposed to be aiming. Therefore, I would like the ministers to consider how they monitor. The minister mentioned joined-up approaches. I am confident that North Lanarkshire Council has a joined-up approach, and I hope that the Scottish Executive will review its own approach to social  work to ensure that it is joined up. Brian Adam mentioned that already. Who exactly is in control of social work? I am concerned, for example, about the supporting people fund. It is a great initiative, but there are concerns among practitioners that that funding will be cut, which could have a negative effect on the good practice that the initiative helps to bring about in the long term, which cannot be measured just by looking at the performance sheets and ticking the boxes on outputs. I know that that falls under the communities budget, even though the Minister for Education and Young People is talking about social work. I ask him to assure us that the Executive's approach is joined up and that all such matters are being considered in the round.

I am concerned that the minister is approaching the end of his interesting response without addressing the part of the motion that calls  on the Scottish Executive to undertake a review that looks more broadly at peace initiatives in other areas as well as in schools.

I do not think that it is very fair for me to be registered as the person who did not get a clap. Never mind.

I begin by congratulating Chris Ballance on securing a debate on his motion. That is important. I agree with everything that he said. I want to remind members about the setting up of the United Nations, which happened for highly admirable reasons. I will read out a small extract from the charter of the United Nations. Paragraph 3 of article 2 states: "All Members shall settle their international disputes by peaceful means in such a manner that international peace and security, and justice, are not endangered."  Many people in the world would do well to remember that statement. Before I say any more, I will declare an interest. I am a member of the steering group in Scotland of the Network for Civilian Peace Services and a member of Peace Brigades International. That said, I state that I am not a pacifist. As Elaine Smith pointed out, it is too often the case that people who care about peace and who would like peace services to be expanded through education and through the way in which we act in society are written off as people who are a bit naive and who do not know what the real world is about. I am not a pacifist; I believe that a nation has the right to defend itself and I recognise that, now and then, there is a need for a proportionate response in particular circumstances. For me, the key is that such a response should be entirely within international law. There are other ways of resolving conflicts. I do not believe that we in this country have considered properly some of the issues that Chris Ballance talked about or thought about appropriate responses in all situations of conflict. I will now plagiarise the work of Peaceworkers UK, because I could not begin to say things in a better way than it does. I recommend the document that is called, "Tackling Violent Conflict: The Case for a UK Civilian Peace Service", which has been put together by Peaceworkers UK, International Alert, Saferworld, the Electoral Reform International Service and RedR—Registered Engineers for Disaster Relief. It contains a quote from the former Finnish President, Martti Ahtisaari, who said: "We know that force alone cannot create a stable society and functioning institutions. Yet the international community has lagged in deploying adequate civilian resources." That is right. There seems to be a lack of recognition that it is possible to have all different kinds of organisations and forces—not necessarily military—that can complement each other in conflict situations. In addition to the military and the police, we have development agencies and humanitarian agencies. Other bodies, such as civilian peace services, can be added to that list. Civilian peace services are not about people throwing themselves in front of tanks or guns; they are about helping people who are in conflict to come together to find other ways of working out their problems. The parties in a conflict are those who are most directly affected by it. Ultimately, they must be the ones who deal with the conflict. It is not good enough to have other people coming in to tell them what to do. Even though I have huge respect for UN peacekeeping forces, in many situations the people whom they are trying to help view them as a bit of an occupying force. I have heard people  say that they have been "colonised all over again" by United Nations peacekeepers. We have to try to get away from that response by expanding the services that we use in conflict resolution. Unfortunately, the UK Government is lagging behind. I would like to see it play more of an active role in seeing how the UK could contribute as a nation state to European Union targets for civilian peace services going into conflicts. Many European countries are leading the way: Germany has had a civilian peace service since 1999; Norway has established such a service, as has Austria—in 1993; and countries such as the Netherlands, Italy, France and Sweden have created or are in the process of creating such services. I will finish with a quote from Mo Mowlam, the former Secretary of State for Northern Ireland. She was talking about Northern Ireland, a country in which many civilian people work on the ground to resolve conflicts. She said: "This is an important issue which we should give serious consideration to and learn from many other European countries who are already developing civilian peace services." I ask the minister to relay the feelings of the Parliament on the subject of tonight's debate to his colleagues at Westminster.

I wish to oppose the business motion. Indeed, I indicated my intention to do so at yesterday's meeting of the Parliamentary Bureau when the request for a statement on slopping out was refused. On 12 May, the Minister for Justice announced her intention to lodge an appeal against Lord Bonomy's judgment on the Napier case. The Scottish National Party supported that decision, because ending the practice of slopping out in our prisons is long overdue. It is inhumane and degrading and has no place in Scotland. After all, this is the 21 st century and the penal system should seek to rehabilitate prisoners as well as punish them. We should remember that prison officers, who have to supervise slopping out, also have human rights. The Executive should be held to account for its wilful failure over several years to invest in the prison estate. The warnings have been clear and stark. That said, many members—I and others throughout the chamber—who abhor the practice of slopping out, question whether we should financially compensate convicted criminals. That is why it is in the public interest that the judgment is tested in court. Of course, as we all know, despite the statement a month ago, appeal papers were not lodged with the Court of Session in time. We learned today that Lord Cullen deemed that that was an inadvertent mistake and that he allowed the Executive more time to lodge its appeal. The minister and the Executive must have heaved huge sighs of relief at that ruling, because the potential bill of several millions of pounds in compensation payments could exceed the cost of ending slopping out. Of course, if the appeal were lost, the Executive would find itself in the position of paying compensation anyway. However, that would happen after due process of law and not because of the Executive's incompetence. In these circumstances, it is vital that the Executive comes before the Parliament to account for the mistake that was made. I am aware that the Minister for Justice briefly updated the Justice 2 Committee yesterday and confirmed that an internal inquiry was under way. However, the Executive must accept responsibility for its actions and those of its civil servants, and the rights of any employees concerned must be protected. When there is already speculation in the press about how the mistake happened, it is only right that the Parliament as a whole is apprised of the facts and afforded an opportunity to question the  Minister for Justice. Therefore, in the absence of a statement, the SNP opposes the business motion.

Does the minister agree that someone's right to manifest their faith is a basic right?

This is not a mere constitutional objection by the SNP; civil partnerships are an equality issue and we do not feel that the Westminster legislation addresses equality as it should do. Pauline McNeill said that the Labour Government had made the issue a priority, but it is clear from the way in which the issue has been handled in Scotland that the Scottish Executive has not made it a priority. A specific equality issue came to the attention of the Public Petitions Committee and I was horrified to learn about the discrimination that will continue because of this bill. We could stop that discrimination, here in Scotland, if we chose to go for real equality. I asked the minister a parliamentary question on whether the Civil Partnership Bill, if enacted in the form that is currently proposed, would be contrary to the European convention on human rights. The answer I received was: "The Scottish Executive is satisfied that the devolved provisions in the Civil Partnership Bill comply with the requirements of the European Convention on Human Rights."— [ Official Report, Written Answers, 26 May 2004; S2W-8246.]  I am concerned about the non-devolved provisions as well.

Mr Henry's party has been in power for five years in this Parliament but has chosen not to act on this issue. Another very worrying aspect is that this Parliament has to take cognisance of ECHR, but Westminster does not. It seems that we are opening the door for an unscrupulous Executive—I do not necessarily mean the present Executive— to decide, quite calculatedly, to use a Sewel motion if it does not want to face the big issues and does not want to be challenged under ECHR in this country. Such an Executive could just let Westminster do the work. That would not be a good way to work on legislation; we are elected to guarantee the equality rights of all people in this country. This bill does not do that. Same-sex couples will not be allowed to have their ceremony solemnised by a minister of religion, even if that minister is happy to carry out the ceremony. That is just not fair. How can anyone sit here and say that it is equality if same-sex couples are not allowed to manifest their faith in the same way that mixed-sex couples can? Basically and simply, that is not equality.

What about civil marriage? Another difference between Scotland and England is that, in England, a minister of religion can have himself declared a registrar and can carry out the ceremony, but that cannot happen here. We are talking about equalising things across the border, but things are not equal across the border. We heard Mary Mulligan say earlier that property law is very specific in Scotland. Well, the laws that govern this issue are specific in Scotland, too. The way to ensure equality for all—an issue that we keep bumping our gums about—is to fast-track legislation on this subject through this Parliament and to consider what was said by the this Parliament's Equal Opportunities Committee, which was that the bill, as it stands, is not fair.

rose—

Before I get into the meat of the bill, I echo what Pauline McNeill said about single-seller surveys. In the past couple of weeks, I spoke to a young couple who commissioned 16 surveys over the past year but lost out on all those properties. That system is becoming as big a barrier to first-time ownership as anything else is, as Nicola Sturgeon just said to me. I look forward to that being sorted out.  I should declare an interest, as I do whenever housing is on the agenda: I am a fellow of the Chartered Institute of Housing. I laughed when the minister spoke about the service test—I was laughing with the minister, not at her—and whether someone is liable for repairs to a chimney if they have bricked up their fireplace. That reminded me of a time—gosh, it was two decades ago—when Glasgow City Council was pumping lots of money into tenement rehabilitation. I will not say where—

No, because the member will just say that it was the Tories who introduced that policy.

We know that the Tories spoiled everything later. At that time, the district valuer would go round tenements to market value them. In the place where I worked, we realised that an awful lot of the properties had valuations that included storage heaters and showers. We got a bit suspicious about that and it turned out that the same storage heater and shower were being shifted up the street into every flat before the district valuer arrived. That is an old problem. I am a bit disappointed that I am not a member of the Justice 2 Committee, which is considering the bill. In my experience of working in tenement rehabilitation over the years, one of the hardest things to do was to work out who paid for what and how to get money back from people. That was an absolute nightmare. The old tenement law and the default mechanism that was used if the title deeds did not sort out the problem were inadequate, no matter how often people tried to come up with a definitive version in guidance. The bill is welcome and has been a long time coming. I have moaned about that, but I realise that the matter is complicated. We have now produced a good basis on which to make progress. Some of the aspects of the bill that will be considered at stage 2 have already been raised. The tenement management scheme is super, although I would like to examine it more as the bill progresses. To give my personal view—I have the benefit of a bit of experience—I would like the scheme to be firmed up a bit. I do not know about the legalities of the scheme because I am not a lawyer, but part of me thinks that it would be better if we made the scheme a statutory one that replaced title deed provisions. I am a bit worried that when new tenements come on stream, developers will find ways to sidestep the scheme and make things a bit easier for  themselves, particularly if they also have a factoring role. It would be better—again, I am speaking in a personal capacity—if we introduced a requirement for common insurance policies to cover tenement properties. I know that such a proposal has difficulties and I have read the committee's comments on the matter. I do not for one minute presume that I know better than the committee does because I did not hear the evidence. However, although it is difficult to impose a common insurance policy, it is also difficult to ensure that every individual in a tenement has appropriate insurance cover. As there are difficulties with both proposals, I would like the issue to be reconsidered. However, I welcome the fact that the bill insists that insurance must be for the reinstatement value rather than the market value. That is an incredibly important point. Members have not yet mentioned the mediation scheme and dispute resolution, which are important. I hope that the scheme is robust and I look forward to finding out more at stage 2 about how it will be put in place. I thank everybody who has given so much time to put together this wonderful bill.

That is okay then.

The SNP motion clearly lays out our belief both in the primacy of international law and that the war in Iraq is illegal. That is the position that we held when we sponsored the debates in January and March 2003 and it is the position that we hold now. I believe that that was and is the position of most people in this country. That raises questions about the state of democracy in the UK. Many Labour MPs—and Andy Kerr this afternoon—try to justify the decision to go to war last year on the basis that, for the first time ever, a decision to go to war was taken by the Parliament at Westminster and not just by royal prerogative. I contend that the decision to remove Saddam Hussein by force was taken long before then: it was taken by George Bush, who was supported by Tony Blair. The decision was justified by those two men—and by others—through the use of scaremongering, coercion, manipulation of information and deception. As quoted in the The Times on 1 May 2003, US General Wesley Clark admitted that the fight was never just about weapons of mass destruction—whatever the rhetoric. Rather, the war was about the inauguration of a new US strategy for the region. It was about the politics of empire under the guise of the US's view of democracy and freedom—whose freedom is the question that we are now considering. In the UK, before all the backtracking and rewriting of history began, the justification for invading Iraq was the capacity of its weapons of mass destruction. We now know that we were subjected to a lie. What we had was a pre-emptive war—

I say that Campbell Martin is not in the SNP and I suspect that he suffers from a very bad memory. What we had was a pre-emptive war based on dodgy intelligence and generated by Downing Street. It is now seen quite clearly that the people of Iraq and elsewhere in the Arab world seriously mistrust the coalition forces, which is perfectly understandable. No matter how well intentioned the majority of the troops are—that is not in question—the fact is that, quite apart from the documented human tragedies that are unfolding daily, the armies are from the same countries that were subjecting Iraq to long-term bombing campaigns prior to the full-scale invasion. Those armies are also from the same countries that imposed sanctions back in 1990, which ensured that Iraq had one of the highest infant mortality rates on the planet and that one quarter of all Iraqi children were underweight, while one fifth were malnourished. The Iraqi people who lived in the no-fly zone suffered years of death and maiming by the USA and the UK after the first Iraqi war. That action was against UN resolution 688, the forerunner of resolution 1441, which was also interpreted illegally by those whose agenda was already set. The Iraqi people feel as if they have been at war for years and years, not just since 2003. Whatever one feels about the rights or wrongs of the sanctions that were imposed or the rights and wrongs of having gone to war and removing Saddam Hussein by force, there are facts that cannot be denied. It is a fact that the world is now a more dangerous place. It is a fact that poll after poll in this country show that the majority disagrees with the war. It is a fact that thousands of Iraqis have died and that soldiers in all the forces are dying. It is also a fact that Iraqis perceive the US and UK armed forces to be an occupying force. Encompassing all those facts is another: the current situation cannot continue and is untenable. The promotion of future stability in Iraq must be of prime importance, along with the transfer of sovereignty to the Iraqi people. That transfer will be complete when there is a democratically elected Government, but the interim Government, which will have sovereignty over internal security issues, should be able to direct a UN-commanded force. The forces on the ground must be brought under UN command and must not remain under the command of countries that Iraqis view as invaders. Because it was committed to a war without a UN mandate, our military does not have  the legitimacy that it needs to win the peace and, sadly, the US military has lost all legitimacy. Bringing the current forces under UN command would be a start, followed by their phased withdrawal and replacement by forces that are not seen as invaders and colonisers. Although the authority of the United Nations has been undermined by this war, it is the agency that should have international legitimacy. It is, after all, no better than the sum of its parts. We have to send out the message that the basic principles of the UN—the ones upon which it was formed—and its founding charter are still at the heart of our beliefs. We must affirm our support for the UN and for Iraq.

I welcome back the minister and I also welcome Margaret Mitchell who is the only other central Scotland MSP in the chamber.

I take it all back. I also thank the First Minister for attending; I am glad he takes such an interest in Thistle Television. We all know that John Logie Baird invented television, and that he was a Scotsman. There have been attempts to claim the invention for Marconi, who was an Italian. Of course, the long cultural interaction between the Scots and the Italians has led to some great achievements, and it is a well-known fact that the combination of Scots and Italians produces the very best of people. Nonetheless, television was the brainchild of a Scotsman, even if the BBC chose to switch to Marconi's system instead of using Baird's and television owes its existence to Scotland. In my home county of Lanarkshire, we are still pioneering the growth of TV. Although it is a small beginning, there is at least one example of a local television station operating in Scotland. I am referring to the recently established Thistle Television, and I welcome some of its representatives to the Parliament. Thistle Television is Scotland's only local television station and it has a potential audience of 400,000 people throughout Lanarkshire. The opportunity exists to make Thistle Television a pioneer for local TV in Scotland, leading the way for others to follow. I know that there have been other local television stations—such as Channel 6 Dundee and Lanarkshire TV, which previously covered Lanarkshire—but Thistle Television has  the chance to be a trail-blazer for local television. I hope that there will be an expansion of local services throughout Scotland. What can local television offer? Community television can provide educational opportunities—local authority initiatives or projects involving local schools and colleges can be highlighted, promoted and supported via the local TV station. Community groups can have a conduit for their activities and community issues and campaigns can be highlighted. MSPs, MPs and local councillors could take advantage of a ready-made forum through which they could communicate with their constituents, although I must admit that not everyone might welcome that. Local news broadcasts can also be made. Moreover, local businesses can advertise their wares, products and services at a reasonable cost. They can also use their local TV station as a recruiting tool, as can job centres and other employment and recruiting agencies. Local TV can and does offer the opportunity for local people, particularly young people, to learn a trade in the media industry—Thistle Television is already showing how that can work. Young people can use work experience or volunteering to assess whether the media would be a career choice for them as front-line reporters and presenters, technicians, writers, producers, editors, camera operators and a host of other jobs that we do not know anything about. Local TV gives people a fantastic chance to learn about an important communications medium from top to bottom. Of course, in recent years, there has been an upsurge in media studies courses in our colleges. Would it not be great to have more opportunities for our graduates in the media in Scotland? Would it not be of great benefit to our communities to have such skilled people on our doorstep? Many groups, organisations and individuals could take advantage of local television. Local television can be a force for the promotion of the well-being and attributes of communities, a place to air one's views and a means through which to tackle and deal with community problems. Earlier this afternoon, we debated national and local festivals. Those festivals could be covered by local TV, enabling people to have a sense of pride in their achievements. Perhaps the Executive would be willing to take the initiative in advising communities on how to go about setting up companies to run a local TV station. I have a few concerns. The first relates to the funding of local TV stations. Under the Communications Act 2003, we now have the community media fund. However, the value of that fund has dropped dramatically from the initial proposal of £25 million, through a revised proposal of £6 million, to reach the current figure of  £500,000. Most of that money is likely to go to community radio. There is the option to sell advertising space. North Lanarkshire Council and South Lanarkshire Council have both been supportive in providing content for Thistle Television. However, I wonder whether there is scope for those councils to use some of their advertising budgets to support the station and whether the Scottish Executive might also consider supporting local television in that way. Local advertising campaigns could target specific issues in specific areas. It is interesting that Channel M in Manchester is partly owned by the University of Salford. That could be a model to which our universities might look if the funds can be found. Northern Visions is funded in part by Belfast City Council and Channel 7 in Immingham is in receipt of European grants, which require matched funding. My second concern is that the licences available for community TV are analogue licences. At first glance, that does not seem to be much of a problem, until one realises that the United Kingdom Government intends to start switching off the analogue signals. I grant that the deadline for that has been put back several times, but the phase-out process, which is due to begin in two years' time and to be completed by 2010, seems to be firming up. We must consider granting digital licences to community TV stations. I ask the minister whether he is willing to ensure that digital licences are available for Scottish community television stations. My third concern is that the current licences for local TV stations—restricted service licences—last for only four years. BBC and ITV licences operate on a 10-year basis. In order to allow long-term planning by local television companies, the licence period for RSLs should be extended to the same 10-year period that is enjoyed by the big fish in the pond. It is always useful to look at international examples. An example of the successful implementation of community TV is to be found in Denmark. The Danes began the process in 1983 when they broke up the monopoly of the national broadcaster, Danmarks Radio. Community TV has taken root in Denmark and there is now an almost national network of local TV stations. Sweden is also taking access television to its people, with support funding from central and local government. There is now a national and international view that the medium of television has become too one sided and unidirectional under the control of large corporations and individuals. I believe that people want to take back some of the control. I want Scotland—the home of television, after all—to  become proactive in developing local TV stations. There seems to be no reason why we cannot do that. With the right encouragement, we might even find our local TV stations producing the kind of work that can be exported. I have faith in our creative abilities. I hope that members and the minister will agree that Scotland has an opportunity that should not be spurned. We should be doing whatever we can to advance Scotland in this area of the creative industries. I hope that the minister will take some time to think about possible ways of helping to fund community TV in Scotland for the benefit of all our communities.

This morning, I heard for the first time that there has  been reluctance in Scotland to sign up to the plan. I am pleased to hear that some clubs are considering doing so, but why has it taken so long? It worries me that clubs did not sign up right away to something that is so worthy.

Yet again, the SNP has brought a serious debate to the chamber on a subject of crucial importance to Scotland and, yet again, ministers have refused to address the real issues and have simply engaged in scaremongering. Let me be straight: discussing the constitution will not scupper the EU. In fact, at last week's Prime Minister's question time, Mr Blair himself said that the talks on the constitution would offer an opportunity to secure a better deal. A better deal is what the SNP wants—and what every member in the chamber should want—for Scotland. When John Swinney laid out for Tony Blair the terms of the SNP's support for a yes vote on the European referendum—which were, quite simply, that Scotland's interests must be defended—the First Minister again talked Scotland down and said that a deal could not be done. While the First Minister of Scotland is talking the country down, ministers in London are preparing to meet the SNP to find out whether a deal can be struck. Perhaps the First Minister should ask to be an observer at that meeting. He would do better to join talks with the SNP and other people in Scotland to work out the best possible deal for the  country that could be taken down south and discussed with the UK Government.

The minister is misinformed, because Jack Straw's office phoned and asked us for a meeting. Obviously his masters at Westminster have not passed that information on to him, either. That makes it very clear that we do not have a Government in Scotland. We hardly even have an Executive; we certainly do not have an Executive that has the political courage to stand up for Scotland and to stand firm and represent the opinion of Scotland's people. Andy Kerr had some great words about working together and moving forward in Europe, but what is wrong with working together at home to secure the best deal for our country? A Government that really governed Scotland instead of skulking away from its responsibilities would always seek to put our interests first. The offer that has been made on the European constitution and the fact that Mr Blair has said that the talks on the constitution provide an opportunity for a better deal mean that there is plenty of scope for putting Scotland at the front of the queue. The debate is not just about fishing, although that is the red-line issue that really matters to the SNP—without renegotiation on fishing, we will not give our support to a yes vote in the referendum. We should also be talking about the treaty that established the European Atomic Energy Community, or Euratom.

Those discussions have been going on for a long time. Unlike any other party in the chamber, the SNP had a party member right there in the talks on the European constitution, putting the full case. Lots of concessions have already been made, including concessions on energy. The nuclear industry is subsidised by member states and is one of the most damaging industries in the world. It has already left a terrible legacy. Today, we are meeting people from Chernobyl who have been left with that terrible legacy—and yet we are still allowing state aid for the nuclear  industry. Let us talk about that in our discussions with the British Government. For the life of me, I cannot see the justification for our paying to leave nuclear waste behind us while saying that it is unacceptable to support our fishing industry and to give it a sustainable future. Something is very wrong. I say this straight from Scotland's party: we want independence in Europe. We are pro-European. I also say this to Mr Sheridan of the SSP: before he starts going on about internal problems that he seems to perceive in the SNP, he should get his own party straight. I have a quote here from Mr Hugh Kerr, who I understand is on the SSP's list for the elections to the European Parliament. While he was a member of the European Parliament, Hugh Kerr asked the President-in-Office whether he agreed "that the situation in Britain is that not being part of the euro is damaging British industry". We want to take Europe forward but we also want to stand up for Scotland at every stage.

I do not have time. In the referendum, we want to be able to campaign for a yes vote. We believe in the general direction that the constitution will take Europe but, to obtain a yes vote, we will not sell out on our principles or on Scotland's interests. Unless fishing becomes a red-line issue, the SNP will not be able to support a yes campaign. We will stand up for Scottish workers and communities who are facing disaster under the current fisheries arrangements. We urge everyone else who has a say to stand up for those communities, too.

The First Minister is being robust here in the chamber about keeping Scottish Water in public ownership, but he will be aware that the United Kingdom is asking 74 countries throughout the world to privatise their water systems. What representation from this Parliament will go to those negotiations in Geneva to ensure that Scotland's water will not be affected?

I apologise for the fact that I will have to leave the chamber right after my speech. I thank Des McNulty for securing the debate. The speech that he just gave was marvellous and well worth listening to. Des McNulty spoke eloquently about the genocide in Rwanda, which is mentioned in the motion. When I read and signed the motion, I was surprised that the atrocities happened only 10 years ago. It seemed to me that they were a lot further away, although rationally I knew that they were not. I wonder whether that is because we try to bury such horrendous things in the recesses of our minds, because we do not want to acknowledge how recently in our history we allowed something like that to happen. We in the developed countries have a collective responsibility for allowing it to happen. We should take the opportunity to remind ourselves of such things over and over again, so that it is always at the forefront of our minds that we must force those with the power to do so to stop such things before they happen or before they get to the horrendous levels reached in Rwanda and in so many other places over the years. The second part of Des McNulty's motion is about the millennium development goals. I lodged a fairly similar motion that was given a lot of support. We are all looking the same way; we  want to see an end to poverty because we know that it is wrong that most of us live fairly comfortably when there are people living in abject poverty throughout the world. It is not acceptable. Although my motion welcomed the commitment of Gordon Brown and the UK Government to increase its aid budget to 0.4 per cent of GDP by 2006, it is not enough. The World Bank and the United Nations have already said that the millennium development goals to reduce by 50 per cent the number of people in the world who live in absolute poverty by 2015—would it not be great if we were chasing the goal of 100 per cent?—will not be met without a significant increase in development assistance.

I will speak on a personal level because the detail of the IFF has not yet come to our party and we make policy at our party conferences. I will support anything that alleviates poverty in any way. We in the UK, Europe and the rest of the developed world must acknowledge that so much more can be done. The debate is huge and is not just about millennium development goals; it is about tackling arms sales, for example, and all the different issues that adversely affect the lives of people in parts of the world that are less fortunate than our own. Other small countries, such as Denmark, Norway, Sweden, the Netherlands and Luxembourg have already achieved the UN recommended level of 0.7 per cent of their GDP. Indeed, Denmark and Norway exceed it. There is nothing to stop our country meeting that goal, or exceeding it. Keith Raffan raised the issue of party policy. My party's policy is that 1 per cent of GDP should go on overseas aid. Ireland, Belgium and France have already set clear timetables for reaching the UN target by 2007, 2010 and 2012 respectively. They are ahead of the UK. SCIAF recommended that the Parliament should have regular debates about international aid issues and about this issue in particular, in order to track the millennium development goals. If we do that, we might be able to start exerting pressure, instead of putting the horrible things to the backs of our minds and forgetting that they are current.

Does Michael McMahon not agree that it is unworthy of a local council to refuse to meet an elected representative who has been asked to represent about a dozen and a half families in the council area concerned?

Presiding Officer, I will be good and I will be quick. We have heard much talk about the impact that electoral systems have on politicians, but just as important is their impact on the culture of the councils that deliver public services. That culture has a direct impact on those who pay for the services and elect the representatives.  We have been through the McIntosh and Kerley reports. As Tricia Marwick said, for five years we have spoken about the need to reform Scotland's system of local government. We need reform that goes to the very heart of the system. For that reason, both the long-awaited bill and the Local Government and Transport Committee's stage 1 report on it are very welcome. The bill deals with some important issues, not least of which is the clear democratic deficit in local government. The ridiculous example of Glasgow has been well quoted, but I should, in fairness, quote Angus Council, on which the SNP has 17 of the 29 seats despite having received only 47 per cent of the vote. In Central Scotland region, which I represent, three of the four local authorities are dominated by Labour in a way that does not begin to reflect the votes that are cast by the electorate. The result of that, in one local authority in particular, is that senior local government officers shelter complacently behind seemingly immovable majority political groups. I refer to South Lanarkshire Council, which is dominated by a Labour group that has almost 80 per cent of the council seats elected on less than 50 per cent of the votes. Unfortunately, the culture of the local authority appears to be dictated by the chief executive and the other senior officers, who consider it their role to serve the interests of the ruling group rather than the common good. As an elected member in Central Scotland, it is obvious to me that those executive officers find it difficult to conceive of their decisions ever being subject to scrutiny outwith the confines of the council's majority Labour group. That might explain why the local authority has taken anti-democratic decisions, such as leaving half of East Kilbride without a secondary school and asset-stripping the town's land bank.

The minister may say so if he wishes. The electoral system might explain why the council's chief officers and chief executive feel able to prevent voters from having an MSP act on their behalf when they believe that the council is failing to respond to their needs. The arrogance and lack of professionalism of the officers' responses can be explained only by their confidence that they will find favour with their current political masters. The chief executive of South Lanarkshire Council, in his latest letter to me, went as far as to enclose literature that was prepared on behalf of Labour members of this Parliament—it is a nice photograph, Mr McMahon—as if they were some kind of role models for me to follow. Mr Docherty  may well believe that Labour members are good role models, but I do not believe that. The families who asked me to represent them, and whose concerns have been so arrogantly swatted aside, do not believe it either. When councillors and their acolytes no longer regard their position as a job for life but look for ways of improving the lives of people in their areas, we will perhaps see local government in action. We must end the perverse situation whereby the largest minority in an election grabs all the power for itself and uses it against the interests of the people. In Renfrewshire, the Labour Party came second in the number of votes cast but ended up with a majority of seats on the council. Every member present must surely recognise the indefensible nature of that situation, which undermines the standing of local government in the eyes of many of the electorate. I want the message to go out from this Parliament that Scotland's local government is about to be reclaimed by all the people whom it is supposed to represent. That can be done only through a modern electoral system that reflects the diversity of the electorate. I believe that STV can deliver that, so I support the general principles of the bill and the amendment to the motion.

I do not think so, Bill. In general, the debate has covered three themes. The first theme relates to celebrating the achievement of women. Cathy Peattie eloquently did that, as did Rob Gibson, from a different angle. Indeed, I will clarify what Rob Gibson said. He said that legislatures with a greater proportion of women have been proven to have less propensity for violent action. That is a different matter from the aberrations that sometimes lead Governments, which we all know about in this country. The second theme is how we should move forward. That has been the main thrust of the Executive contributions to the debate. The third theme is the nursery nurses. I will concentrate on the second and third themes. The report asks for a single equalities body and states that such a body would need as much devolution of authority as possible if it was to make any difference. I am afraid that I am of the view that, as other members have said, we will not be able to achieve much without the right levers of power. We can all try, and I have no doubt that all members want to try—I have seen evidence of that during the almost five years in which I have been in the Parliament—but that is just not enough. As proof of that, I cite the fact that, 30  years after equal pay legislation was introduced, we still have a pay gap. We still have a long way to go. If even legislation cannot enforce equal opportunity, how are we going to get on with it? All that we can do is promote it.

The member seems to be determined to tease that out of us—I do not know why. Yes, we have a rate: it is half the male median earnings. That raises another issue. The Scottish Parliament cannot even decide what the minimum wage will be in this country—that is exactly the point that I am making. An action point in the report calls for a strategic plan for the reduction of the gender pay gap. How on earth will we achieve that without the powers to do so? Brian Monteith says that MPs at Westminster can do that for us. I am sorry, but I have not seen them bothering their shirts about it for an awful long time. On the third issue that has been raised today—nursery nurses—the SNP amendment very much ties in with the issues that are raised in the motion. All that our amendment asks is that, "in recognition of the problem of low pay for many Scottish women," we agree "that Scotland's nursery nurses have a just claim for a fair, nationally negotiated settlement to their current dispute." Huge efforts were made to avoid a situation in which members might have to vote against the SNP amendment, which, after all, is only about a just claim. Labour members wanted to lodge a plethora of amendments to the amendment. I have read and reread Karen Whitefield's amendment to the SNP amendment, but I still do not know what the heck it means. It says that we should encourage "local authorities, NHS Scotland and other public sector employers to consider specific strategies to tackle the concentration of women in the lowest paid areas of work and to ensure equal pay for work of equal value." It does not mention the nursery nurses; it asks us to encourage people to consider things. That is a bit woolly. I would like it to tell the Parliament to get on with it and to take some action. The position is very confused. At least I understand the amendment to the SNP amendment that Cathy Peattie wanted to be selected today. It asks the Parliament to note that the First Minister said today that "at the right time, there will be a case for a national review". However, when is the right time? Marlyn Glen and Cathy Peattie say that they believe in an  independent review, but last week Euan Robson said that such a review would not happen. When is the right time? Surely it is when we are all here, discussing the report "Improving the Position of Women in Scotland: An Agenda for Action"—I stress that the report is about an agenda for action, not an agenda for encouraging people to consider strategies. Today, we are banging drums for women and showing off our equality credentials. We have accepted the findings of the report. Why cannot we just agree that the nursery nurses, who play such an important part in our society and are so undervalued, have a just claim? I urge members to support the SNP amendment.

Will the minister continue to speak to her counterpart in Westminster, Beverley Hughes, and insist that the most sensible way to allow asylum seekers and refugees to integrate with communities and to make a contribution to communities is to give them the right to work? Work is the only way in which they can contribute fully.

I congratulate Donald Gorrie on introducing the subject for debate, as it is important. I apologise for somehow having forgotten to sign up to the motion, as I agree thoroughly with everything that it says. Two years ago, I lodged a St Andrew's day motion, which unfortunately was not selected for debate. I was prompted to lodge the motion after I attended a Children in Scotland event in Glasgow called "Equal Futures" on St Andrew's day, 2001. The event was attended by schoolchildren from throughout Scotland and was held with a view to building racial equality. At the time, it struck me that it would be great to designate our national day—which, like Chris Ballance, I would like to be a holiday—as a day of celebration of Scotland's cultural diversity. As Allan Wilson said, that is something that should be embraced. I thought that it would be great if everyone could participate in that and if we had a specific time when we could say, "Scotland is very diverse." We have a wonderful indigenous culture, but we can also embrace all the other cultures that are now in our country. I do not think that that view is very different from the meaning behind Donald Gorrie's motion. Donald Gorrie mentioned Scottishness. Most of us feel that and I would hope that people whose families have not lived here for generations can share that feeling because they live here and take part in society. Two or three weeks ago, I was in Wales on St David's day. I cannot remember what date that is—

I thank Margaret Ewing. I was struck by how evident people's sense of Welshness is on their national day. I was in south Wales and I understand that the feeling is much stronger in north Wales. Practically every child I saw that day, from babies upwards—apart from the adolescents, who are at that difficult stage when youngsters do not want to do anything anyway and so completely ignore such things—was walking about either in full Welsh national costume or at least with a cap, for the boys, or a hat, for the girls. All the local shops were selling the costumes, both cheap and expensive versions. I thought that it was wonderful. There was a real sense of Welshness. Schoolchildren were going to school in their national dress and talking about St David and other things that promote their Welshness. I thought to myself, "There's a campaign for this coming St Andrew's day."

It would be great if our kids could do even as small a thing as that in recognition of what their country is and could promote their Scottishness in such a way. I hope that I have given people something to talk about. We should be promoting Scottishness and Scotland in the period around St Andrew's day but we should also be aware of the wonderful cultural diversity that we have in this country and should be trying to find a way to make absolutely everyone feel that their participation is valid.

I am delighted that we are having this debate. The first line of Sylvia Jackson's motion states that we recognise "the valuable role of the Commonwealth". I think that everyone present recognises that. There are few people who do not. I recognise it so much that, even when Scotland is independent, I will be pushing for it to remain part of the Commonwealth. Sylvia Jackson mentioned the number of countries that are part of that great organisation, which comprises 1.7 billion people. A heck of a lot of people around the world are part of the Commonwealth.  The Harare declaration of 1991 called for the promotion of democracy and good governance, human rights, the rule of law, and sustainable economic and social development. Commonwealth members from the developed world should look to those great goals and help the underdeveloped world to attain them. The Singapore declaration of 1971 set out the principle of international co-operation to promote peace and tolerance and to combat injustice, but here we are 30-odd years later and we are still having to aspire to adhere to that principle. Co-operation sounds wonderful—it is how the Commonwealth should be run—but we have to examine the problems with member states over the past few years. Thankfully, Fiji has been reinstated as a full member, but Pakistan is still suspended. Moreover, after we suspended Zimbabwe, Mr Mugabe took it out of the Commonwealth. Although we have a spirit of co-operation, that does not mean that the basic principles that were set out Singapore in 1971 and reaffirmed in Harare in 1991 should be ignored. Nobody should be able usurp those principles. I have particular respect for Mr McKinnon for taking those principles seriously while trying to deal with, for example, the situation in Zimbabwe. He took a pragmatic view of the situation and tried hard to improve matters. Sadly, however, that did not work. Margaret Ewing and Keith Raffan spoke about Africa. We are all aware of the awful problems there. Margaret Ewing summed them up well by saying that some people cannot even get a decent drink of water. Another area of the Commonwealth for which I have particular love and affection is the southern Pacific. I hope to visit many of the islands this summer—I might even end up in New Zealand. I mentioned Fiji, but there is also Kiribati, Samoa, the Solomon Islands and all those places that were once very young members of the Commonwealth and are now very old members of it. Before I say how wonderful they are, I should add that I am a trustee of a charity called Just World Partners, which is registered in Scotland and does sterling work in the southern Pacific islands. The head office is just down the road, in Dalkeith. It is currently working in Fiji on environmental conservation of the coral reefs. We also have projects in Kiribati and the Solomon Islands. Work is still going on even in areas that we do not hear much about nowadays and member states still co-operate to ensure that we can do everything that we can for all of those members that are not as fortunate as some of us are. Keith Raffan mentioned the millennium development goals. One of the best things that the  Parliament could lobby the United Kingdom Parliament about is to try hard to reach some of those goals. We should start by matching the United Nations' recommendations for development aid, especially goal 7, and we should do so immediately.

Was Mr Barrie, who headed up the interview panel, as impressed as I was by the way in which the panel agreed that children should have input to the selection process, which set firmly the idea that the role of commissioner is about listening to children and their experiences? Does he agree that it is crucial that the children's commissioner—who is to be appointed by Parliament—listen to the views of children in Dungavel, who are being locked up, sometimes for months at a time, and that the commissioner bring to Parliament the real experiences of the innocent children who are placed in that situation?

Margaret Smith ably outlined the problems with Sewel motions in the Scottish Parliament, so I will not dwell on that issue. However, I will dwell on the huge impact on the Scottish Parliament's areas of responsibility of aspects of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Bill that we will allow to slip through Westminster.  Public services in Scotland will be affected by what David Blunkett does down in Westminster. We should be discussing the issues that will affect not only services in Scotland such as the police, social work, children's hearings, education and health, but the Children (Scotland) Act 1995 and the welfare of children. If we allow Westminster to take all the decisions, we will be allowing our local authorities to neglect their duties of responsibility for children.

Mr Gallie knows how I feel about that issue. My view is plain and straightforward: Scotland should be independent in Europe and should be able to influence European decisions. I am glad to see that the Executive has taken some responsibility for asylum seekers and refugees in Scotland. About £1.5 million has been spent on support services in Glasgow since the dispersal programme started and a further £1 million is budgeted for it. That is proof of our taking responsibility in Scotland for asylum seekers. However, the fact that failed asylum seekers are being evicted in our communities shows that we should take more responsibility for such people. The Scottish Refugee Council estimates that around 50 per cent of the asylum seekers that we are evicting in Scotland are unable to return to their own country of origin—China being a case in point—even if they wanted to. We are making people destitute and telling them that although we know that they cannot return to their own countries, we no longer have any responsibility for them. To salve our consciences, we tell them that we will take their children if they have any. Meanwhile, we tell the adults, "Away you go and sleep rough." If our next generation of rough sleepers are likely to be failed asylum seekers, how can we say that we do not want to take full responsibility for asylum seekers in Scotland? How can we say that we will hand over, by the method of a Sewel motion, all the responsibility to Westminster? I turn now to the issue of Dungavel, which demonstrates another responsibility that we shirk badly in Scotland. Margaret Smith made the point that we have no reserved children; we do not and should not have such children. However, we are allowing children who are locked up in our country to be the responsibility of the Home Office rather than the responsibility of the Scottish Parliament. We allow the local authority in which Dungavel is located, South Lanarkshire Council, to have  discussions with the Home Office about the welfare of children in Dungavel, but individual MSPs are told, "If you want to know anything about it, away and ask the Home Office because the Scottish Executive is taking no responsibility." That is a huge anomaly, as are all the different aspects of immigration and asylum for which we refuse to take responsibility. That is why the Scottish National Party opposes the Sewel motion. Our position is plain and straightforward. We will continue to oppose Sewel motions until members waken up to their responsibilities.

In her discussions with the Home Office, will the minister relay the general concerns of many people in  Scotland about the inability of asylum seekers to work? Before July 2002, they could seek permission to work. Will she please lobby the Home Office, on behalf of many people here, to revert to that position?

Opening the debate, the minister ably outlined the reasons why we need to take action to protect emergency workers, those who assist them and other workers who deal with emergency situations. There will be no argument about that in the chamber, as we have debated the matter twice before: once when Paul Martin lodged his amendment to the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill just under a year ago and again in a members' business debate. However, today's debate has shown that, although there is consensus on the need for legislation, it will be extremely difficult to produce that legislation. On the face of it, the task seems simple because what is required is obvious. However, the issue becomes more complex the more it is considered. During the debate, I have been keeping a list of the various kinds of workers whom members have mentioned. There are myriad jobs. There are the workers who are easy to think of, such as firefighters, police and ambulance staff. Beyond  them, there are workers in the NHS—of course, it is perfectly valid that doctors and nurses, even those who are not in the accident and emergency departments, should be protected. Beyond them are public sector workers in general: social workers and ticket collectors on trains have been mentioned; Margaret Jamieson mentioned an attack on a gritting lorry; and Johann Lamont mentioned private sector workers who deliver a public service.

Anybody who is going about their work lawfully deserves protection, whatever form that protection might take. There is a clear case for certain defined workers, such as firefighters and ambulance workers, to be included in the provisions that we are discussing. There is nothing more abhorrent than a situation in which people who are going out to save lives find that their lives are being threatened. However, the matter becomes more complicated when we try to include everyone who provides a public service. I note what the minister said about trying to introduce a specific offence of statutory aggravation and the difficulties that are encountered when an attempt is made to extend the legislation to include people beyond clearly defined emergency workers. I know that the matter will be more fully explored when any legislation goes through the committee stage. It is right that that should happen, as there are many views on the matter—we have all received lobbying papers from various trade unions, the British Medical Association and so on. One issue that was raised made me think back to when I worked in housing some years ago. Sometimes, members of staff and I were threatened—quite severely on one occasion—by people who came into the office. We were not emergency workers, but we were providing a public service. What struck me today was that, once we had dealt with the situations, we did not report them to the police but simply talked about them with other people who worked in the same area. That happens a lot. Stewart Stevenson asked what training people who have to deal with the public should undergo for dealing with such situations. The minister and, I think, Christine May mentioned public awareness. It needs to be made plain to the public that everyone has the right to go about their work in safety and that any kind of action against their safety will be severely dealt with. Fergus Ewing, in his usual conciliatory way,  welcomed the guidance that the Lord Advocate has issued to procurators fiscal on dealing with and sentencing people who attack emergency workers. Stewart Stevenson asked whether the results arising from that would be monitored. I ask that we be given at least a view today on how things are proceeding in that regard and on whether the guidance is making a difference to sentencing. Fergus Ewing also mentioned a report in the newspapers about the First Minister. That was a valid contribution. If the First Minister wishes to say that those reports are wrong, he should do as Fergus Ewing asks and publish the letter concerned, so that we can see it. Let us see that his letter did not say that the incident that Fergus Ewing described was a "minor matter", particularly given that the nurse in question was terrified and that the police time that was spent might have been better spent in other ways. If the First Minister implied that the incident was only a minor matter, let him at least apologise and admit that he got things wrong. David Davidson made an excellent contribution about pharmacists. At a meeting with the Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain that I attended recently, the question of the safety of pharmacists came up. Obviously, pharmacists deal with members of the public all the time and the concern was expressed that, given the quite proper emphasis on community pharmacists and on the other services that are being offered, some staff in chemists' shops are being put at even greater risk. Everyone has been saying that there is much more to the issue than we might have thought when we started out with good intentions. David Davidson asked whether there should be security staff—I think that he said on 24-hour cover—at accident and emergency departments in every hospital. That is worth considering, as is Alex Neil's suggestion that there should be enforceable rules about who is allowed to attend when somebody goes into casualty. I have not often been to casualty departments, but I remember once being in casualty in the early hours of the morning. The people who were sitting waiting for treatment, for their child to be seen or for their mother to come out were being intimidated by some of the characters who were coming in to wait for their pals. Margaret Jamieson was right when she told us that some people treat the occasion almost as an extension of their evening out and as a normal part of their social life. I think that it was Margaret Smith who raised the important question of what happens after emergency workers or other public service workers are attacked and whether proper guidelines are in place on the need for counselling  and aftercare. That is another element showing how the issue is much bigger than it first looked when everyone started out down the line of creating legislation to deal with it. A lot of issues have come out this afternoon and I look forward to hearing the Lord Advocate's response. I may have missed this, but I have not seen the timetabling for the proposed bill. I know that the consultation finishes at the beginning of February, but I am not sure when the Executive intends to come back to the chamber or when the bill will be considered in committee. A steer on that would be useful for us all.

I have never been in any doubt that the Executive is well intentioned—especially Tavish Scott, whom I have always thought of as a well-intentioned  laddie. The trouble is that the Executive is stuck in the Home Robertson groove of arguing for the status quo and holds the misguided belief that activity is a substitute for achievement. It is not. The Executive tells us that it is busy in Europe and that it is succeeding, but if it does not tell us what it wants to achieve in the first place, how can we judge whether success has been achieved? The trouble in Europe, generally, stems from the fact that Scotland is not properly represented. Only an independent Scotland will be truly represented and allowed to punch its weight. Even within the devolved settlement, the Scottish ministers do not relay the importance of what Europe means to Scotland. They do not relay that to the Parliament properly; therefore, it does not get relayed to the country. It looks as though our lion rampant barely whispers, let alone roars. We hear tell of great co-operation with the UK, and sometimes we see the eventual results; the problem lies in between, when the Scots view may or may not be getting put forward. The Executive should ask any Scots fisherman whether he thinks that co-operation is worth a candle. I have with me a minute from the December fisheries council in which Ross Finnie is not even mentioned, although Mr George Pullicino, from Malta, is mentioned. From what Nicola Sturgeon said, we know that Malta, an accession state, is only the size of Edinburgh—it is nowhere near the size of Scotland. Europe is not half as complicated as many politicians make it out to be, but they do that because it suits them. Generations of UK politicians have blamed Europe for anything unpopular that has happened. By error of omission, rather than deliberate intention, the Executive is upholding that unworthy British tradition. The Commission produces its work programme every year and updates it every three months to telegraph to member states and organisations what it is doing. The rotating presidency produces priorities for the same reason. The Executive tells us that it is at the heart of Europe, but we do not hear much else. Let us look at the Commission's current work programme. List 1 contains 126 items, of which 68 clearly concern devolved competencies. List 2 contains 147 items, of which 52 clearly concern devolved competencies. Although the other proposals are not strictly devolved under the Scotland Act 1998, they are of considerable importance to Scottish policy. For example, the intention to "Follow up on the Innovation Policy Communication" has considerable relevance to the Executive's strategy for a smart, successful Scotland; however, the Executive has not published any  views on it. I know that the Scottish ministers do not quite understand independence, but I sometimes think that they do not understand even devolution. Under the Scotland Act 1998, it is the job of the Scottish Parliament to scrutinise the Executive. That is impossible if we are given nothing more substantial than soundbites, platitudes, speeches—when forced—and press release after press release. The minister said that he intends much more information to be forthcoming in the future. Is he saying that there will be an annual report to the European and External Relations Committee on the Executive's intentions in relation to the Commission's annual work programme? I understand that that is what happens in the National Assembly for Wales. That is fundamental. Some progress has been made. The forward-look document is useful, as far as it goes, but it is not quite enough. The Executive must go further. We need a European strategy that is built on the Executive's view of the Commission's work programme as discussed by the Parliament. For example, what are the minister's views on the Commission's plan to facilitate the roll-out of broadband? What are the minister's views on the Commission's plans to regulate on violence in the workplace? What are the Executive's plans for cracking down on vehicle emissions? There are hundreds of measures about which we should know the Executive's view, but we do not know what the Executive thinks of any of them. Only with independence will Scotland be able to play a proper role in Europe. However, even under the current settlement, we can and should have influence. The Parliament can start that by supporting the SNP's amendment.

Many interesting points have been made in the debate. The subject is huge and potentially affects everyone in the country, which means that there are varying personal opinions throughout society and among members. I am sure that every member who has spoken on the subject is representative of people who are not paid, as we are, to opine publicly on every subject under the sun. However, it must be borne in mind that there will be views out there that are not represented here, which is why the expert reference group was so important. I suspect, although I do not know, that some of the group's members were parents. That is another reason why wider contribution is important. I am concerned that, as Shona Robison, Carolyn Leckie and Margaret Smith have mentioned, the minister has discounted emergency contraception prior to the full consultation. I was surprised that David Davidson welcomed that stance and then spoke about a hard debate being required, given that the point of going out to consultation on every aspect of the expert group's proposals is to allow us to have a hard debate and make decisions once we are fully informed. I may touch on individual comments if I have time, but I was aware of themes emerging in the debate. One was the importance of the service being rolled out nationally. The minister emphasised the need for an holistic approach and mentioned the current lack of a strategic framework or coherent vision. Shona Robison and many others also stressed that point. Mike Rumbles expressed the concern that the expert group has somewhat ducked the issue of provision through links between schools and clinical services. Des McNulty stressed the need for equality of access to services, both for treatment and for information and education. Patrick Harvie spoke of the recommendation that would place a requirement on NHS boards to make plans for improving links between schools and sexual health services, but mentioned that no reciprocal duty is recommended. Those are big questions about joint working and the stated objective of an integrated, holistic approach. Does the minister have any views about how we can ensure the required equality of access to education and information services? To come back to the subject of making hard decisions, I do  not for a minute suggest that that decision will be easy. In a natural progression from that issue, I move to resources, which have been another main theme in the debate. The expert group stressed the importance of a consistent approach and of providing resources so that NHS boards can implement at least the initial stages of the strategy. The British Medical Association has expressed concern about the lack of clarity on resources. Susan Deacon talked about muscle and money and spoke with some knowledge about how ministerial budgets are implemented and how they work. What struck me in what she said was the fact that no lobby group will fight for sufferers or send us letters about their problems with accessing sexual health services. Everyone has a responsibility to ensure that those people do not suffer because they do not shout loudly enough. That is crucial, because the matter affects everyone. Does the minister have an estimate of the problems that are faced and of the funding that the Executive is prepared to set aside to address those problems? Other resource questions need to be discussed further. The Conservatives touched on the subject. I am not against having a tsar or an advisory committee. I am open minded and I look forward to the results of the consultation and to further discussion. However, we must be wary of increasing bureaucracy and stopping essential resources from reaching front-line services. That is a fine balance that we must get right. The third theme was that of ensuring respect, including self-respect. Christine Grahame spoke about some teenage mums' lack of aspiration. We must work hard to ensure that self-respect and self-esteem are part of our education system, so that people have aspirations. People must also respect others, whatever their chosen sexuality. There should be no discrimination or stigmatisation. On a lighter note, Cathy Peattie reminded me of a phrase that I had not heard for years. What she said was absolutely right. As a teenager, I probably even said, "She's went and got hersel pregnant." I never thought of the matter in the way that Cathy Peattie described it before. That emphasises the joint responsibility of couples who have sex without condoms or who use no form of contraception. For decades, our education has been lacking as it has always placed the responsibility for contraception on the girl and the woman. We must move away from that. We must say, "It is 50:50. The bottom line, young man"—or older man—"is that if you do not wish to have a child or to take responsibility for bringing a child into this world  and for contributing to their upkeep, you wear a condom, regardless of whether the lassie tells you that she is on the pill." The man must take that responsibility. He cannot think for one minute that he can shirk it or run away from it. Gosh—I did not realise how much time had passed. I thought that I would be pushed for time in my speech. I will state the SNP's position on the sexual health strategy. We agree absolutely that a strategy that is based on the principles of respect, self-esteem and equality is the right way to go. Above all, the individual should be empowered to make independent choices about their sexual health. I will give a view that is more personal than party. I am concerned that we could portray the sexual health strategy as the Executive's right to tell people how to run their sex lives. Of course the Executive does not have that right. Nobody has the right to tell anybody else how to run their sex life. We should remember that people have the right to independent thought and that adults should be free to make their own decisions about sexual health and behaviour, provided that they do not hurt anyone else. We need truly to give people informed choices and to empower individuals to make the choices that are right for them. That is of key importance and what we should always bear in mind when discussing the subject.

Will the minister give way?

I have a similar question. I am worried about the use of the term "basic" for the thermal insulation. Will the minister consider going further than that? Would it not be better if we had a far higher standard than basic?

I declare an interest in the subject as a fellow of the Chartered Institute of Housing in Scotland. The report of the—excuse me; I have got new glasses and I cannot read with them on, but I keep forgetting to take them off. My colleagues all look a lot clearer when I have them on. The report of the task force is excellent. I was very pleased when I read it. The recommendations that it contains are those that have many of us have called for over the years, before and after the establishment of the Parliament, especially during the passage of the Housing (Scotland) Bill. However, I have concerns about one thing that the minister said—the fact that we are to have yet another working group on the tolerable standard. I would be glad of some clarification on that when the deputy minister responds. The private sector has been a huge issue for decades and I am pleased that the task force has given it such a level of attention and that the report is of such a high standard. In fact, the issue goes back a couple of centuries, but a particular milestone was the creation of the housing action areas during the 1970s, with local authorities in the driving seat, particularly in Glasgow. That measure dealt with landlords in the private rented sector and owner-occupiers in areas where houses were falling into disrepair. The minister spent much of her speech talking about the home ownership aspect of the private sector. She said that the level of home ownership  is increasing because of people's aspiration to own their homes. That cannot be denied, but I suggest that that aspiration has, over the past few decades, been forced by a lack of decent housing in the private rented sector and a lack of houses in the social rented sector—it has really been forced by the lack of choice. Somebody—perhaps Tommy Sheridan—mentioned the fact that young couples have no choice any more except to get on to the owner-occupation ladder. Mary Scanlon spoke about the wonderful right to buy and the rush to purchase. I suggest that that was more about the huge discounts that were given to promote the aspiration to home ownership than it was about people fundamentally wishing to get on to the property ladder. I was a bit surprised that a Labour member—I cannot remember who it was—defended that position. Indeed, Labour extended the right to buy in the previous session to housing associations. Therefore, Labour has not helped in that area.

I welcomed the changes and the cut in the discounts. However, I did not welcome the extension of the right to buy to the housing association sector, which—morally—should be a sector for affordable, social rented housing; it should not be a step on the property ladder. The private rented sector requires a general housing standard. I was glad to hear the minister acknowledge that the report's recommendation on that would be accepted. Will she clarify whether that will cover individual properties in the private rented sector and whether the Executive will actively promote such a move? That brings us back to the role of the local authorities. Earlier, I mentioned housing action areas and I notice that the task force's report recommends the introduction of housing renewal areas to equip local authorities with the ability to plan and promote better housing quality. Local authorities have, as an Executive publication noted, little systematic information on the private rented sector in their areas and tend not to concentrate on that sector, apart from in relation to revenue and housing benefit. Local authorities do not have a written strategy for the private rented sector. I want such strategies to be actively promoted. We should equip local authorities with the ability to deal properly and globally with all houses in their areas.  The minister also referred to encouraging and compelling owners. That must cover all owners, including owner-occupiers, private landlords and absentee owners, who are an important element of the private sector. Huge problems are often caused because absentee owners have either left their house vacant or rented it out to someone who just pays their rent every month but does not know who or where the landlord is. We must have firm processes in place and it is essential that local authority powers are beefed up for that. We sympathise with Cathie Craigie's point about private landlords and the different elements of antisocial behaviour. Shona Robison said that she would like some aspects of the issue to be taken further. We look forward to the Communities Committee's proposals in that regard and we will monitor the situation closely. Robin Harper and Rob Gibson firmly expressed their belief, which I share, that housing standards should be considered across the board. We should look at materials and specifications. We must stop saying—I am always going on about this—that the initial capital cost is what it cost to build a house. We must move away from an attitude that says that we can get 40 houses if we go down the cheapest route; we should say, instead, that we will have 36 properly equipped houses, because we have beefed up and implemented the standards. We must consider whole-life costs. Again, we should look at the example of Scandinavia. Rob Gibson and Nanette Milne referred to planning and statutory agencies and the barriers that prevent the promotion of housing development in rural areas. That is a huge issue; people are not working together for the benefit of those who need the houses. Tricia Marwick referred to the reduction in housing repair grants over the years. There is a big discussion about whether those grants should be means tested and whether they should be for the benefit of the individual or for the benefit of the greater good and of good housing stock for the future. A couple of members referred to the elderly. It is sad that so many elderly people live in private sector properties that they cannot afford to keep up properly. That is where the great care and repair initiative comes in. Again, I hope that we look at that in the round. We must be ambitious about the tolerable standard. The report contains some marvellous recommendations and an integrated approach is required on all fronts. There is an opportunity to be grasped, and we should grasp it with both hands. However, we need a timetable and a commitment of resources, so, although the SNP supports the  Executive motion, we also ask that members support the SNP amendment.

Will Mary Scanlon give way?

Does the minister recall stating, during the passage of the Homelessness etc (Scotland) Act 2003, that there would be no increase in homelessness applications as a result of that legislation? Will she say what monitoring has been carried out to check that position and what action has been taken to ensure that the waiting time for mainstream applicants for social rented housing decreases rather than increases?

What representations will be made to David Blunkett, the Home Secretary, regarding the implications for Scotland of his proposal to remove from their parents and place in care the children of so-called failed asylum seekers?

Although I acknowledge Shiona Baird's point that  violence against women encompasses more than domestic abuse, I will, like Maureen Macmillan, concentrate on domestic abuse. Indeed, I will do so largely because in the past week I attended the annual general meeting of East Kilbride Women's Aid group. It had been a couple of years since I last attended such a meeting and I was struck by the fact that, as other members have mentioned, those who work in the field of domestic violence and other agencies such as councils and the police recognise that there is more working together and that the Executive and the Parliament are very serious about the measures that they are taking to combat domestic abuse. East Kilbride Women's Aid covers East Kilbride, Cambuslang and Rutherglen and has many referrals—mainly self-referrals—from women. However, I was rather bothered by a statistic that emerged from the AGM showing that, of the 173 requests for refuge places last year, 137 women and 190 children were turned away because of lack of space. I am sure that that situation is replicated throughout the country. As a result, I was interested by the Executive's announcement of its refuge development programme and on-going work on the issue. Such work is extremely necessary. I draw the minister's attention to another matter that was raised at the AGM. I was going to write to the minister about it, but then thought that the debate was an apposite place to raise it. I should make it clear that I do so very much in the spirit of seeing whether we can do something about the problem. South Lanarkshire Council quite rightly applied to the refuge development programme and received £150,000 for two new refuges in the area. The local housing association was asked whether it could acquire the properties and said that it would see what it could do. I should point out that there is a lack of social housing in East Kilbride, but that is a whole other debate. The housing association tried to reach an agreement with a developer about a development that was about to be opened. However, the development is quite small and the developer had already agreed to two units for the hospital discharge programme and a children's home and was not willing to agree to any more non-mainstream housing on the site. That kicked the idea into touch. As neither the housing association nor the council had any other suitable properties, they looked into acquiring a couple of properties on the open market. The idea sounds fine, and it is great that that can happen, but they then hit the next problem, which was more to do with practicalities than with will—after all, everyone has the will to achieve this aim. The problem is that East Kilbride  has a very buoyant housing market. Because the money comes from public agencies, those agencies are allowed to acquire properties only at the district valuer's valuation. Houses in East Kilbride, especially those of the required size and type, sell for a lot more than the market valuation. I suspect that the same thing is happening in other areas and I ask the minister to look into the problem. As I have said, I have no doubt that everyone involved has the will to establish these refuges. The money has been sitting there for almost two years and no housing has been acquired. Meanwhile, in one year, 137 women and 190 children are turned away for lack of refuge space. I ask the minister to look at that situation and see whether some pragmatism can be applied to help with the practicalities of what is a very good policy initiative.

I welcome today's SSP debate on world peace. Many members have been saying that it is ridiculous to debate world peace in only an hour and a quarter. We cannot solve the problem in an hour and a quarter, but if we and people round the world stopped talking about ideals, ambitions and dreams, we would never get anywhere. The SSP has the right to use its debating time for the subjects that it wishes to debate. We hear all the time from the Scottish Executive that everyone has rights and responsibilities. The SSP has the right to discuss world peace and I believe that the Scottish Executive should at least have the responsibility to turn up and listen to the debate. George Lyon gave us a reason why the Executive ministers are not here: it is because they have no position on world peace. Will that same Executive display absolute hypocrisy by turning up at 5 o'clock this evening and pressing their buttons to vote against—

Yes, against world peace—on which they do not have a view. That would be purely so that they do not embarrass Tony down the road by the Parliament saying that it totally opposes what he and his friend, George Bush, are up to. Instead of hearing from the Scottish Executive, we heard John Home Robertson, speaking on behalf of the Labour Party. He is no longer in the chamber either—unless he is creeping round the back somewhere. John told us that the commitment to peace and justice is fundamental to the Labour Party. He should tell the Executive that, and ministers should be here to listen. He should also tell Tony Blair that, because he seems to have forgotten about that fundamental commitment of the Labour Party. John Home Robertson went on to salute the Scottish soldiers, which I think everyone does. He noted that the Lib Dems did not include that in their amendment, and said that that was deplorable, unless it was an error—which George Lyon cleared up. It is also deplorable that the Scottish Executive is not represented here to salute the Scottish soldiers, in line with an  amendment lodged by a member of the Labour Party. The debate moved on. Nicola Sturgeon, Richard Lochhead and others were at pains to express the fact that we are not against the Americans or American ideals; we are against how those ideals have been traduced by the right-wing cabal that now has power in America. We heard references to the American President being democratically elected. Is there anybody here who really believes that, after the debacle that was the last presidential election in the USA? We are against the apparent unquestioning acceptance by the Prime Minister of this country of everything that that right-wing cabal in America says, which has led us into a disastrous war, with disastrous and continuing consequences. I thought that Chris Ballance's contribution on gulf war syndrome and depleted uranium and its effects was very interesting. It would do everyone good to read his speech in the Official Report tomorrow and to come to a view on how we can protest about that particular element of policy. That leads me to the weapons of mass destruction that are located down on the Clyde. If we are seriously talking about world peace, then let us talk seriously about ridding our country of nuclear weapons. The debate obviously goes much wider than Iraq. The problems of Iraq are not the only ones in the world. Let us do some of that talking, dreaming and real radical thinking and move towards looking at world peace. Let us start with a debate on the arms trade and the fact that, for as long as western Governments prop it up, we will never achieve world peace. Please support the SNP amendment.

Did Robin Harper find it bizarre—as I did—that the Conservatives had such a go at the EU, as they openly promote the cause of the World Trade Organisation, for example?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I cannot miss the opportunity to give Strathaven another plug. Members might be interested to know that, when Strathaven drew up its constitution for Fairtrade town status, it had the only fair trade constitution that applied fair trade principles to home producers. Indeed, that might still be the case. That measure is important.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it intends to increase the percentage of electricity generated in Scotland from renewable sources. (S2O-547)

Will the minister reveal the extent of the work and the costs that will be required to upgrade, strengthen and extend the existing national grid, so that the resultant increase in renewable power production can be carried to the necessary markets, such as Shetland and the Western Isles?

The Scotland Act 1998 defined equal opportunities as "the prevention, elimination or regulation of discrimination between persons on grounds of sex or marital status, on racial grounds, or on grounds of disability, age, sexual orientation, language or social origin, or of other personal attributes, including beliefs or opinions, such as religious beliefs or political opinions". It is because of that commitment that the Parliament has an Equal Opportunities Committee. That is a precious, on-going commitment, and we should all deem it important. The Equal Opportunities Committee recognised early on that the existence of the committee should not allow complacency among others. All members of the Scottish Parliament must share the responsibility for ensuring that the spirit of the Scotland Act 1998 is recognised and that policies and practices are put into place to enact that spirit. Therefore, the committee's report and its recommendations on mainstreaming equality will be crucial for spreading the commitment of the Scotland Act 1998 and the Equal Opportunities Committee across the Parliament and the Executive. I would like all nine of the report's recommendations to be acted on. The equality guidelines that are recommended for use by all committees in their work will be extremely useful, as will the equalities checklist for lead committees. The training facility that the report recommends be taken on board by the SPCB would also be useful, because it is often those who believe most strongly that they do not require training who, in fact, need it most. If it were possible, I would go as  far as making training compulsory for everyone who is elected to, or works for, the Parliament. Recommendations 7, 8 and 9 refer to monitoring, to which Christine May just referred. The monitoring refers to both parliamentary committees and the Executive. I would like the monitoring to be formalised so that progress and outcomes can be assessed. During the consultation exercise, Dundee City Council raised monitoring as a specific issue and noted that local authorities and other public sector bodies have to make progress reports on equality matters. The council asked why that should not apply to the Parliament. Why not indeed? Victim Support Scotland and Greater Glasgow Health Council suggested provision for a grievance procedure if a committee were felt not to have addressed equality issues adequately. Again, why not? Perhaps Cathy Peattie and the Equal Opportunities Committee can consider that in the future. Recommendation 6 asks the Executive to include an overarching equality statement in all bills. The Equal Opportunities Committee has been pushing for that from day one, as I remember. However, the report includes a copy of a letter from the then Minister for Social Justice to the Equal Opportunities Committee, in which the minister stated that she thought it would be difficult to do what recommendation 6 wants. I hope that that matter is looked at constantly so that the recommendation can be met in the future. I refer back to the definition of equal opportunity in the Scotland Act 1998 as it is reflected by the committee's recommended definition of mainstreaming. Sadly, we know that discrimination exists in every category that is mentioned in the act's definition. For example, it exists in relation to gender, about which much has been said in the debate; marital status; the rights of cohabitees; race; disability; age; and sexual orientation—the list goes on. The report's introduction quotes the Council of Europe paper on gender mainstreaming: "The greatest hurdle ... can be the absence of political will." I believe that most members of the Parliament have the political will, but I am not personally convinced that without the statutory powers from equal opportunities legislation we can make the necessary difference in the foreseeable future. It is possible to have that right to legislate in a devolved settlement—the Northern Ireland Assembly has it. After all, many of the discrimination issues that have been mentioned in the debate relate to reserved matters. I welcome the report and I will work towards its implementation, but I am seriously concerned that  it may be an uphill struggle. Marlyn Glen referred to hearts and minds. How long will it take before we see results? I feel that it is necessary sometimes to do more—for example, to be aggressive in making demands for what is right. To paraphrase an old saying, grab them by the nose and the hearts and minds will follow.

Will the member take an intervention?

I am to the left.

I do not know whether I will manage six minutes; my voice might disappear.

Before my voice disappears, I would like to say that I very much welcome the announcement and congratulate the minister on at last bringing to fruition a project for which many people have been working for some time. We very much support the motion. We also support Colin Fox's amendment, as we consider it to be exceedingly sensible and we could not put it better ourselves. I hope that the minister will take on board what the amendment says. Members will expect me to say this, but I will say it anyway—I thought that Roseanna Cunningham made some very good points in her speech. One of them sticks out for me: her emphasis on ensuring that we include the traditional arts in our national theatre. That is extremely important. Only  a couple of weeks ago, the Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport and I had a wonderful evening together participating in some of Scotland's traditional arts. However, I suspect that that was not nearly as much fun as what Maureen Macmillan and the minister will share later. It is important that the national theatre takes on board the point that it should represent all the languages and cultures within Scottish society. For example, with reference to my own background, lots of immigrants from Italy have settled in this country and have brought with them a love of opera. I would say that Italian opera is certainly the best in the world. I think that Colin Fox might agree with me, as he is a big opera buff. We have many cultures in Scotland and we should reflect those within our national theatre set-up. Another point that Roseanna Cunningham made and that other members have mentioned is the fact that theatre can happen anywhere; it does not have to take place on a stage or in a building. When Roseanna spoke about the production of "The Enchanted Forest" that she is going to, it reminded me of a production that I went to in Glen Lyon a couple of years ago, called "The Path". I do not know whether any other members went to it. It was a wonderful experience—one of the best theatrical experiences that I have had in my life. That was theatre that took place right through the valley of Glen Lyon. Unfortunately, I did not hear all of Jamie McGrigor's speech—it is not that I walked out on Jamie; I just did not want to drown his erudition with all my coughing. However, I understand from what some members have said that he was a bit ungracious. I certainly think that Brian Monteith was a bit ungracious in his closing remarks, which is so unlike him. Before I left the chamber, one comment I heard Jamie McGrigor make was his little dig at the Holyrood building. The Conservatives seem to have a little dig at it every time they get on their feet these days. Donald Gorrie said that we should perhaps consider the Holyrood building as a venue for theatre. I have also considered that idea. Rob Gibson mentioned that he saw a production of "Ane Satyre of the Thrie Estaitis" in this chamber. Perhaps we should look forward to having a production of "The Four Estaitis" at the new Holyrood building. We could include the press in that.

I think that we will stick to four; it is complicated enough.  Some years ago, I saw a Scottish Youth Theatre production called "The Four Estates" in the Cottier Theatre in Glasgow. That is a wonderful place. Glasgow is an ideal place to create the resource centre for the national theatre. That, too, is welcomed. I pay tribute to youth theatre, because it has come up with some wonderful productions over the years. I have also been at many amateur productions over the years and the talent that is in amateur theatre is immense. There is also special needs theatre—people have set up theatre groups so that people with special needs can express themselves. I hope that the national theatre embraces some of those initiatives. Colin Fox mentioned the fact that many young people will go to music productions, but they will not go to theatre productions. Many excellent theatre productions have been combined with music. One that comes to mind is "Sunset Song", for which Michael Marra did some wonderful music. Such a combination of music and theatre can be developed in an effort to attract young people to the theatre. I will close, because I am finding it difficult to continue as I am losing my voice. I was fascinated by the Scots rap that Elaine Murray mentioned and I invite the minister to conclude the debate in rap.

I always enjoy listening to Phil Gallie because he has such marvellous selective amnesia. He showed that again this morning, when he said that handing powers over to Europe was a kick in the teeth for those who had fought for the Scottish Parliament. I certainly cannot remember any of those who sit on the Tory benches fighting for the Scottish Parliament.

Gosh, okay.

Thanks very much. Phil Gallie also spoke about his worry over the loss of sovereignty. The SNP's concern is that Scotland does not have any sovereignty. Phil Gallie talked about UK sovereignty. I want some Scottish sovereignty. That is what we are all about.

I do not agree with Alex Johnstone's view on that. The constitution is still being considered. We broadly welcome the constitution, but some elements of it give us serious concerns, which were also outlined by Mark Ballard. One thing that bothers me is that, whenever I go over to Europe to speak or to take part in fora, Scotland is termed a region. People say to me, "You are from the regional Parliament in Scotland." Scotland is not, and never has been, a region. Scotland is a country and a nation. The constitution needs to recognise the principle of self-determination, but that is absent at the moment. Whether or not members agree with Scottish independence, they must agree that every nation has the right to progress with the will of the people of that nation. We should not shut one of the doors that would allow that to happen. I hope that everyone in the chamber will agree that Scotland is a nation and that we should have the right to achieve full self-determination as a nation within any constitution for Europe.

I recognise that every nation has the right to move forward. The people of Scotland have the right to reject independence, if they so choose, but they also have a right to vote for it—no matter how many years down the line—if that is what they want. We should not shut off that opportunity by not providing for the right to self-determination in the European constitution. We must also recognise, as Alex Neil said, that people do not feel that they are part of the European Union. Quite often, that is the fault of the way that the Government relates to Europe. On mainland Europe, people feel much more European than we do in the UK. Even Ireland has a much more European feel about it than the UK. I feel strongly that that is because of the way in which UK Governments relate to Europe and because of some of the language that they use about the European Union. I will finish by picking up on what Irene Oldfather said, which I very much agree with, about the aim of Europe being to have a peaceful Europe. I completely and utterly agree with that and, in that regard, I am a Europhile. However, I want Europe to be a force for world peace. The UK does not promote world peace when it looks across the Atlantic instead of looking to Europe. That is another reason why I want Scotland to be an independent nation in Europe. Scotland would benefit from Europe, but Europe would also benefit from Scotland.

Two years ago, the Scottish Executive informed me in reply to a parliamentary question that no planning permission had been required for the change of use of Dungavel House from a prison because South Lanarkshire Council's opinion was that the use of Dungavel House as a detention centre did not constitute a change of use in planning terms. How right the council was. We were all told that Dungavel House was to be a halfway house and a holding centre for those who were in danger of absconding and those who had reached the end of the legal process and  would be deported in a matter of days. That was a lie. The Home Office even changed Dungavel's name from detention centre to immigration removal centre. However, the Home Office did not change the profile of those who are sent there, sometimes for months on end. They consist of people who have not reached the end of the legal process and—as we have all known for two years—families with children. I understand that no family has been detained in Dungavel because they absconded. Families have been taken from their homes and communities and placed in detention while their cases continue. Dungavel is not an immigration removal centre—it is a jail. While we hold this debate, Bushra Sharif—a Pakistani national—is at a bail hearing. She was granted asylum because she suffered serious marital violence; she was living in Bradford, but she was removed to Dungavel because her husband reported her for giving wrong information at her original hearing. At that hearing, she had not explained that, as a Pakistani national, she had been living in Kuwait. She did not do so because she was frightened that her violent husband would be able to trace her. The fact that her life was in danger is not in dispute, so why were she and her children locked up in Dungavel? Was it because of the fear that she would abscond with her three children, who are aged one, six and seven? Why on earth are we locking up such young children? Why does our country choose to do that when laws in countries in mainland Europe do not allow the detention of under-age children? Some other countries set an age limit on the detention of children. There are alternatives to detention, but separating families by taking children away from their parents and putting them into foster care is not an acceptable alternative to the Scottish National Party. Such a proposal is no more than conscience salving for those who do not want to vote for our motion, which says that we should not imprison children. The so-called fear of families absconding is no more than scare tactics, which pander to the worst elements and aspects of our society. Many families over the piece have been granted bail and have gone to live with guarantors in their homes. Some families have since been deported and some have been given leave to stay in Scotland. However, the country is not full of wandering families who hide in ditches and jump into hedges whenever anybody passes by. Surely there is no member who is duped by that kind of rhetoric. Surely there is no member who does not believe that it is worse to lock up dozens of children than to take the slim chance of somebody absconding.  A church publication recently undertook a study that showed that one of the main reasons given by asylum seekers for coming to the UK was that the UK believed in human rights. We all like to think that that is true. Tony Blair certainly harps on about the UK's belief in human rights when it suits him. However, people can talk all they like but it is actions that count. David Blunkett's actions leave me deeply ashamed to be part of the collective responsibility for what is happening in our country. We are all collectively responsible, in this democracy, for detaining children in Dungavel House, ignoring the UNHCR guidelines on persons under 18, refusing to ratify article 22 of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child, and refusing to honour agreed European directives. Even if the least that any of us can do is protest, we should do so. If we can do more—I believe that the Executive can—we should do so. Belief in human rights is not a reserved matter and neither is morality. When I first heard about the Liberal Democrat amendment, I thought that it might be a step in the right direction. However, after closer reading, I now believe that that amendment does no more than talk the talk; there is no guarantee at all that it will walk the walk. Two aspects of the amendment, to which Elaine Smith referred, stick out. One is the part that states: "Decisions affecting children whose parents are to be detained should be made in the best interests of the child". However, that would leave the door open for children to be taken from their parents and placed in foster care. Who would decide that? It could be the Home Office. I am sorry, but I trust nothing that the Home Office does in relation to immigration and asylum, because it has made too many mistakes and done too many bad things. The other relevant part of the amendment refers to ending "a system of detention of children at Dungavel which denies them access to social contact and to educational and other services in the local community". It would be unacceptable to have children taken from Dungavel to a school, only for them to have to say to their friends at the end of the day, "You might be going swimming, but I am going back to jail. You might be going away for the weekend, but I am going back to jail for the weekend. I don't really know why, because my parents have not committed any crime. It's because the Government of this country says I should." I would not find such a situation acceptable and I hope that the Parliament does not find it acceptable. I urge all members to vote for the SNP motion, which says straightforwardly that we should not imprison children in this country.

Will Mr Kerr give way?

The minister accused the SNP of trying to hold things up because of constitutional niceties. Will he accept that if the Executive had supported Shona Robison last year with an amendment to the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982, the regulations could have been implemented more quickly? The Executive used that method when it introduced an amendment to the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982 as an emergency measure in relation to houses in multiple occupation. It was the fastest way to make a difference.

The SNP fully supports the regulation of the sale of fireworks. That was shown ably by my colleague Shona Robison in the previous session in her proposed member's bill. That bill would have provided for an amendment to the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982 to extend local government licensing. That could have happened in Scotland last year and I still do not quite understand why the Executive was not willing to support the bill. The debate that Shona Robison secured at the time showed the huge support that exists across the parties. There were examples from every constituency in the country of why action must be taken. The Fireworks Bill that is progressing through the London Parliament is welcome and will go some way towards addressing our concerns. I congratulate Bill Tynan MP, because I know that he has worked hard on the bill. I have seen the results of his work locally because I live  quite near him. He has been active on regulating the sale of fireworks for some time. However, I also have concerns about the bill and about the Sewel motion. We are always concerned when Scottish legislation is made at Westminster, but we have other concerns, too. We are being asked to approve a bill that will place new duties on various public bodies, including local authorities in Scotland. Those burdens will have financial implications and we should ensure that such implications are taken into account whenever we pass legislation. No financial memorandum is attached to the Sewel motion. I find it hard to be confident that local authorities will not have to carry additional financial burdens without a legal right to reclaim those moneys.

That is something that just cannot be published or examined. Local authorities will have to finance the regulations on a daily basis. They might get money back from licensing, but there are many hidden implications, such as the extra work that local authority officers will have to undertake in licensing and supervision. Then there is the continuing training. Local authorities welcome the new regulations, but they should know that they will have the backing to implement the procedures that are being introduced properly.

Absolutely. No one in this country would say that we should not have regulation of fireworks. Local authorities would not say that and, of course, they welcome the regulations as do all members in the chamber. However, that does not give them a guarantee that they will not have to move money from other services to implement the regulations. Comfort should be given to local authorities that other services will not suffer as a result of the introduction of the regulations. Today we are being asked to allow Westminster to legislate on matters that are within the remit of the Scottish Parliament. We could have dealt with those matters last year, but the motion gives the  secretary of state power to make regulatory statutory instruments in those areas. It seems strange that our ministers not only are not seeking to increase the powers held in Scotland, but are happy to give away and to diminish the powers that we already have.

Can we have some ambition? We must consider what Mr Gorrie suggested last year and what we have been suggesting ever since we entered Parliament. Why cannot we consider reverse Sewel motions? Why cannot we consider bringing back legislation that directly affects people in Scotland? Far too often we pass Sewel motions that allow London to legislate on matters that are within our remit. Let us have reverse Sewel motions. Let us have a bit of ambition and let us have the power to make more legislation here. I welcome the principle and intent of Mr Tynan's bill, as everyone does, but I want it to be implemented as soon as possible and I have concerns about the parliamentary and local authority procedures that will get us to that point.

It is terribly upsetting that I am so easily forgotten, especially when I have even more enthusiasm than Karen Whitefield to speak in today's debate. The SNP welcomes the fact that regulations are being changed to bring Scottish law into line with European law. However, Robin Harper is right—even though we discussed landfill and waste strategies many times during the Parliament's first session, it seems that that was to no avail, because nothing much has changed. Robin Harper is still mentioning people who come up with great waste strategy initiatives but are totally hamstrung in trying to make a difference and are unable to help us to meet the targets that we have talked about. I am glad to hear that the new convener of the Environment and Rural Development Committee is being strongly urged to hold an inquiry on waste strategy. I hope that the next time we discuss waste management we will be able to come up with real solutions to the real problems that exist, particularly in relation to landfill, because the present situation cannot be sustained for much longer. It is all very well to bring in new regulations, but I am not convinced that we are giving teeth to the relevant agencies and the local authorities that must monitor such matters, so that they can truly make a difference. I would like the minister to clarify an issue that came up yesterday. I was told that any landfill sites that were in existence prior to the creation of SEPA remain the responsibility of the local authority within whose area they lie. That bothered  me, because I do not feel that local authorities have the resources to regulate and monitor such sites properly. I would appreciate clarification on that. Although the debate has been short, a number of interesting speeches have been made, which all dealt with the theme of recycling. Richard Lochhead stressed that 90 per cent of waste goes to landfill. We have not made a difference on recycling, as Nora Radcliffe and Maureen Macmillan pointed out. There must be sufficient resources to deliver on the targets that everyone agrees should be met. Alex Johnstone and Margaret Ewing spoke about the big issue of transporting waste and John Swinburne mentioned the Cathkin landfill site. What has been said about the flies is true and I am amazed that Alex Johnstone is such an expert on them. I was going to ask what happens when it is decided that the problem comes from a landfill site, but Alex Johnstone kindly answered that question. It is not only the people in Stewartfield who experience such difficulties; other people who live beside the Cathkin landfill site have a terrible time. As well as suffering from the planning blight that comes with having a landfill site on the doorstep, they have been plagued with flies, too. I hope that the joint initiative involving Glasgow City Council and South Lanarkshire Council identifies the source of the problem and fixes it. Transportation is a significant issue, as three Glasgow City Council waste lorries have already been overturned on the way to the Cathkin landfill site. That brings me on to the ships that transport toxic waste. It is all very well to say that such waste has to be dealt with somewhere, as Alex Johnstone said, but our Government and, to an extent, our Parliament is charged with protecting our environment. It is worrying that we first learned about the ships bringing toxic waste through the Pentland firth from reading about them in a newspaper. I am sure that the minister will be as concerned as I am about that. I ask him to give us some feedback on how we can monitor such matters. The ships in question come from America. It is not as though they come from somewhere that cannot deal with toxic waste. Why are those ships bringing waste all the way across from America to be dealt with in this country?

That is all very well, but the fact that those ships come across into Scottish waters raises the possibility of an environmental disaster. It seems ludicrous that a convoy of waste ships should be sent all that way across the ocean. Surely there are experts on the other side of the world that can deal with the waste. We agree that we must come into line with Europe, but I would like us to go a bit further. Why cannot we be more ambitious? Instead of just coming up with the solutions for our country, as we have done many times, why do we not finance and resource those solutions? That would enable us to make a difference and to tap into the environmental justice that practically all members say we should be tapping into.

Beat that, Richard.

My point relates to an earlier comment by Margaret Mitchell, but I think that it fits in well at this point, given that she has mentioned wrangling between the Scottish Executive and local authorities. I am sorry that I was not in the chamber when Margaret Mitchell commented on South Lanarkshire Council's new consultation period in relation to East Kilbride and Hamilton. I would like to make clear that the new consultation period that she mentioned relates to which schools should be closed, rather than the basis for closing schools.

The debate covers a wide range of subjects. I will focus on a couple that are local to me. The motion mentions education taking "place in the most modern facilities". Nobody in the Parliament would argue that children should be expected to go to school in old-fashioned and outdated accommodation. The problems arise when we consider how the facilities are provided. The financial effects of PFI/PPP are well known and I am sure that that debate will continue in the chamber over the next four years. I will consider some problems that are being  caused by the wholesale disposal of public assets for private profit. In East Kilbride and Hamilton, which are both in Lanarkshire—where I live and which I represent—a school closure programme has been instituted. It is underpinned by the need to sell off development land to finance the PPP. Half of all secondary schools in East Kilbride will close, as will Earnock High School in Hamilton; the issue of Craighead School in Hamilton is a special case and requires a whole debate to itself. The upshot is that school pupils will face longer journeys to school, which increases the risks to their safety, and school rolls will rise to among the highest in Scotland—so much for reducing class sizes and investing in Scotland's youth. The Executive's motion mentions "extending access to high quality sport and leisure facilities". My colleague, Sandra White, raised this issue. School closures to facilitate profiteering remove sport and leisure facilities from communities. Schools that are run under PFI/PPP restrict access to their facilities. We have heard the good and cuddly public intentions of the Executive, but the policies cut away at the very fabric of the infrastructure that the Executive says it wants to support. As the SNP amendment stresses, we are facing problems of population demographics. Scotland needs to attract immigrants, and the SNP considers there to be a need now for a positive inmigration policy for Scotland. As one of the wealthiest countries in the world, Scotland should also be looking to play a full part in alleviating suffering here and elsewhere. I would like Scotland to play a full and active role in welcoming asylum seekers, first because it is right and secondly because their presence would add great value to our country. That is why I despair at the way that asylum seekers are treated here—not by their neighbours, because Scots generally welcome anyone who comes here. Sadly, it is the UK Home Office's draconian policies and intentions that are very much at odds with the sentiment in Scotland, in this chamber and elsewhere. Ministers here, including the First Minister, have made very sensible statements about immigration and asylum issues and I urge them to keep putting their views forward in the strongest terms to their Westminster counterparts. I live near Dungavel, which is now an asylum seeker detention and removal centre. The conditions inside the centre are as good as the staff can make them, but here we are having a debate about our young people while we are locking up other folk's young people in a prison environment. We are not even allowing those youngsters outside that prison environment for  education purposes. There has been much argument about whether the coalition in Scotland will or will not lock up the parents of antisocial young people, but in this country we are locking up both young people and parents, where no crime has been committed. There can be no moral basis for that from a country that signs up to many—but unfortunately not all—of the United Nations conventions on children and young people. I, for one, am deeply ashamed to live in a country that houses an institution such as Dungavel. Although I can agree with the sentiment of the Executive motion, I believe that that sentiment can be improved upon by agreeing the amendment lodged by Fiona Hyslop and by following that with reasoned action. I urge members to support the SNP amendment.

Will the member give way?

I welcome the fact that the issue has been put back into the social justice portfolio. We were concerned when it was shifted into the justice portfolio and disappeared without our hearing much about it. However, the minister's statement was very much along the same lines as the speech that was given by the Deputy Minister for Justice just before the end of the previous session. Legislation has not yet been programmed, despite the fact that, in 1999, the Lib-Lab coalition promised to review charity law and that, in 2002, it promised to introduce legislation. All that we are being offered now is a non-statutory Government agency—a regulator—as a holding measure that can be set up quickly. If the regulator can be set up so quickly, why was that not done in the previous session, rather than as an interim fix now that public interest has been raised because of the Breast Cancer Research case? The consultation has been well carried out and the  sector is calling for legislation. What is the Executive's timetable? When will it commit to legislation on charity law in the Parliament?

All I can say is that I hope that I am not retiring—I hope that I will still have my job after 1 May. I thought earlier that I should say something about colleagues across the parties who are retiring; they will all be sadly missed, but they will just have to take my word for it. I hope that my actions have showed how dearly I hold them all, because I feel that if I start to say anything I will just get upset and make a complete and utter fool of myself, so I will not do it. One thing that Colin Campbell said really struck home; I will paraphrase him. He talked about age being a state of mind, which is absolutely true because, until today, I had not thought of those colleagues as people who were older—I exclude from that Duncan Hamilton. Members have stood up and said that they are retiring, but they are colleagues I have thought of merely as my contemporaries—age has not come into it at any time until today, when they all stood up and stated how ancient they were, and that they were all going off into the sunset. It struck me that I am getting on a bit as well. Much to my shock, I saw that there was an Executive document called "Are you over 50?", which is a guide to services for older people. I was thinking, "I'm nearly there myself", then Sarah Boyack talked about an institution for women who are over 45.

I thought that Sarah Boyack would appreciate that opportunity, but I still have a wee bit of difficulty with being elderly because I am over 45. I do not know whether it is the same for other members, but I recently started getting Saga Magazine sent to me every month here in Parliament. Only when I heard Helen Eadie clarifying what Saga is did I think that I should perhaps have thrown the magazine in the bin. However, I thank Colin Campbell for kindly gifting me his Saga pen to remember him by. To return to the reality of the debate—older people's place in Scotland—the minister rightly cited the developments that Parliament has implemented on behalf of older people. The minister also said that nobody should have to live on less than the state pension and the minimum income guarantee. However, Sandra White rightly  said that the existence of the minimum income guarantee is proof that the pension is not enough to live on. Furthermore, there is a big problem with people not applying for the minimum income guarantee and not taking up their full benefits. Another member—I cannot remember whom—referred to the fact that there are local initiatives that involve giving people welfare benefits advice. For example, I think that the Eaga Partnership does that when its staff visit people for the central heating programme. We should consider giving such advice nationally. We should be able to tie all the different initiatives into the fundamental question of whether people have enough money to live on; it should not be difficult to include that in every initiative for older people. The minister made it sound as if the land of milk and honey had arrived during the past four years, but I am sure that she would be the first to admit—Bill Butler referred to this—that we still have a long way to go. I agree that changes have been made, but it is a sad indictment of our society that we still have a long way to go. Free personal care was referred to. I am extremely proud of the fact that it was the Parliament rather than the Executive that forced the issue on free personal care. Everyone in the Parliament has something to be proud of in that respect. However, there are problems with free personal care, which Mary Scanlon highlighted. She was right that we have all had constituency problems involving free personal care not working in the way that everyone thought that it would and, indeed, in the way that Parliament intended it to work. Transport and travel were also referred to. Kenny Gibson and I were curious about why Lewis Macdonald rather than Des McNulty will close the debate for the minister, but we were not long into the debate when we realised why. Members started to let slip the fact there was to be a big announcement on national concessionary travel—I think that Dr Sylvia Jackson eventually blew the gaff and stole Lewis Macdonald's thunder. Again, I think that the provision of national concessionary travel is a triumph for a viable Opposition and the Parliament because the Executive has been forced to admit that the localised concessionary travel policy has not worked and that concessionary travel must be rolled out nationally. I look forward to hearing the proposal's being formally announced. Keith Harding said something important when he said that what elderly people require is to be treated with dignity rather than to be patronised. I tried to imagine anyone trying to patronise my colleagues Kay Ullrich and Winnie Ewing; if someone did try that, I think that they would be quickly told something. Keith Harding also showed  a bit of a nerve in saying much of what he said about what the Tories did in their years in Government, but there was also much truth in what he said; for example, about stealth taxes on pensioners and the raid on pension schemes. Those were valid points on matters that are storing up big problems for the future. Mr Harding also went on about the how the right to buy was the most wonderful thing that had ever happened to alleviate poverty, but he will not be surprised to hear that I do not agree. On the minister's intervention on the right to buy, I do not like the suggestion that someone who happened to buy their council house was too stupid to realise that doing so would have implications.

I thank the member—I get the point. That problem also exists in the private sector. If we consider all tenements, it is not only ex-council houses that have problems with repairs and maintenance. When I was a housing professional, I often came across a problem for elderly people in relation to the right to buy, which was that the families of elderly people would buy their parents' council house on their behalf, but the family situation would change. I have had in my office many times elderly people who were homeless because their families had disenfranchised them. The right to buy did not really protect the elderly. I am running out of time, but I cannot leave the debate without saying firmly that the only thing that can really make a difference for the elderly of our country is to give us the powers that would truly make a difference. A viable independent sovereign state could make its own decisions about how we treat the elderly. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development estimates that the 21 most developed countries give 7.4 per cent of their GDP to their state pensions—this country gives only 4.3 per cent, so we have nothing to be proud of. Roll on independence and the opportunity to change that and many other things.

I also  commend Kenny Gibson for securing the debate and congratulate him on all the work that he has carried out on this subject, before and since his election to the Parliament. He secured a member's business debate on the subject at the start of the Parliament and has doggedly kept at it. I welcome the idea of an emergency suicide hotline. At the time, I welcomed the Executive's national strategy and action plan on suicide. I still do, and I hope that the minister will consider expanding it to incorporate some of these proposals and accept the national hotline as an idea that should be developed. The two-day debate on the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) Bill, which was very welcome, highlighted the lack of psychiatric services. I think that the story that Irene Oldfather has just told is probably all too common. This morning, I phoned a partner nurse to ask about her experiences in this respect. I was horrified to learn that there is a real problem with 15-year-olds. Some hospitals will consider providing child psychiatric services to children who are 14 and under, but will provide adult psychiatric services only to those who are 16 or over. As a result, there is a lost year in which someone who might be crying out for help cannot access it. The nurse also told me about the case of a teenager who, when she tried to access urgent psychiatric services, was asked, "Is it really urgent or can it wait a couple of weeks?" If someone is suicidal, the matter is urgent; it cannot wait. We obviously have a statutory obligation to help people in such a situation. As Donald Gorrie pointed out, however, we must also recognise the contribution of the voluntary sector in that respect. Some marvellous things are happening in that sector to help people with their problems. For example, Kenny Gibson mentioned Stresswatch Scotland in Kilmarnock. I am a patron of that organisation and have been impressed by how their networks go out into local communities. Its support work is very much carried out at ground level by volunteers. Another approach that I want to mention is a bit more innovative. Theatre NEMO—which was set up by Isabel McCue, and developed by her, her son Hugh and Tricia Mullen of the National Schizophrenia Fellowship Scotland—is a theatre group that is dedicated to helping people who have been affected by mental health problems. It is all about participation in the arts as a means of stimulation, self-help and building self-esteem. About 40 people and, importantly, their carers attend meetings of the organisation, and the amazing thing is that the shyest of people—those who really do not want to participate in life—participate fully in drama and the arts and become very descriptive when they are on stage. It is a  wonderful way of building people's esteem. South Lanarkshire Health Board has recognised the value of such an approach and has asked Theatre NEMO to put on two short plays at a forthcoming health board seminar. Perhaps when we come back to the next Parliament, we should think about how the performing arts can directly benefit communities. Certainly we should encourage such an approach. I should add that the company has recently received an equipment grant from the communities fund, which is good news. Another important point that Isabel McCue made is that, because Theatre NEMO is not seen as a mental health project, it does not have the kind of stigma that would stop many people attending. Kenny Gibson's motion is worthy of support. Indeed, I ask the minister to support it. We took a big step forward today with the passing of the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) Bill. We would, however, like the Executive's action plan to be expanded to include the suicide hotline proposal and to enable us to consider other innovative ways in which we can help people who really feel that their lives are not worth living.

Will the member give way?

That is the kind of attitude that I have problems with—the attitude that, as the debate is about the voluntary sector and charity law, it is not about politics. The debate is serious and it is a political matter. We should respect people by recognising that.

Like my colleague Tricia Marwick, I did not sign up to Jackie Baillie's motion. That was not because I did  not want it to be discussed—I want it to be discussed—and it was not because I have any problems with the commitment of Jackie Baillie and loads of other members to reforming charity law. However, I wonder a wee bit about the Executive's commitment—after all, four years down the line and four social justice ministers later, we do not yet have a bill on charity law reform to look at. Way back in 1999, the then Minister for Communities, Wendy Alexander, pledged to reform charity law in Scotland. However, after the McFadden report, it was an inordinately long time before the Executive responded properly. Charity law reform is a social justice issue—it is interesting that social justice ministers have spoken about it and that the Social Justice Committee has been pushing it. Hugh Henry should not take this point personally, but I am concerned that the issue is now under the justice remit—last week in the chamber, Jim Wallace answered questions about charity law reform. That worries me, because the ethos of each portfolio and department is different. The social justice ethos is, "We can do this and we want to do it, so how are we going do it?" I often feel that the justice ethos is, "Why can't we achieve this?" I worry that that has held things up. Another issue that could have held up reform is the on-going problem that we have with the authorities that deal with the voluntary sector. The amount of knowledge and expertise within the voluntary sector and the fact that people in the voluntary sector can run the agenda themselves are sometimes not recognised. That is down not so much to members of the Parliament or ministers—I do not doubt for a minute that our social justice ministers have all recognised the value of the voluntary sector—as to officials, who sometimes have a problem with recognising those facts. I talk from experience, having worked for a voluntary organisation. I know that there is a perception that people who work for voluntary organisations or charities are not right up there in knowing how to move forward—they are perceived as a bit wishy-washy. I would like ministers to take that problem on board. There is an on-going example of that problem. I notice in the Executive's response to the McFadden report that the Inland Revenue charities register will be overhauled and reviewed, so that charities that no longer exist are removed from it. The Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations has taken such an approach for 10 years, with its charities register in Scotland database, which is constantly updated and as a result is the most modern and up-to-date register of where charities are at in Scotland today. Why cannot we use that? Why cannot the Executive say, "The information is there; we don't need to  waste time or money on doing another survey of the Inland Revenue register"? I ask the minister how much that will cost, how long it will take and whether the process will delay reform yet again. I have two quick points to finish. Can we get the ethos of social justice back into charity law reform? Can we all make the commitment that, no matter who is in the Executive after 1 May, charity law reform will be a high priority on everybody's agenda?

Is the minister aware that, since the advent of the FSA, it is more difficult to set up a credit union? Will he also explain how, when—as shown in a parliamentary answer—the Executive does not hold information centrally, it can promote new credit unions?

Two members have mentioned the Co-op. I point out that the Co-op has made a commitment that any cocoa that it uses in its products will be Fairtrade. That is to be commended.

I must first declare an interest as a former member of the steering group for Strathaven Fairtrade town initiative and now as patron of the Strathaven Fairtrade group. This is Fairtrade fortnight and I am absolutely delighted to secure this debate congratulating Strathaven and Aberfeldy on being declared Scotland's first Fairtrade towns, particularly as I live in Strathaven and represent the town in Parliament. As a result, members will understand if I speak particularly of Strathaven. My colleague Mr John Swinney will talk more about Aberfeldy. Quite simply, fair trade is trade that gives a better deal to those who produce the goods. It is a way of trying, despite heavily stacked odds, to make globalisation work for the poor and to reduce poverty. More than 500,000 workers in developing countries already get a better deal from fair trade through the Fairtrade Foundation. The use of the Fairtrade mark shows consumers that they are buying goods that in some measure challenge the conventional model of trade and offer a sustainable future for the producers. Four and a half million growers and their families in 36 countries participate in fair trade and their goods are sold in 17 countries across Europe, north America and Japan. At this point, I had hoped to introduce Comfort Kwaasibea and Rijayatu Razak from a cocoa-producing farm in Ghana. However, I see that they have not managed to make it to the debate. I hope that members will be able to meet them, because they are touring the country during Fairtrade fortnight and visiting venues where Divine chocolate is sold. Of course, Divine chocolate is only one of more than 100 food products with the Fairtrade mark that we can enjoy. People can find the label on  coffee, tea, cocoa, chocolate, sugar, honey, biscuits, cakes, fresh fruit and juices. The Fairtrade Foundation continues to work hard to expand the product range for coming years. Sales of food with the Fairtrade mark are rising dramatically. Some £46 million was spent in the United Kingdom on Fairtrade foods in 2001-02—that is an incredible £1.50 spent per second. Since 1999, understanding of the meaning of the Fairtrade mark has doubled from 12 per cent to 24 per cent. The UK performs very well with regard to fair trade; it is now the second largest fair trade market in the world. I am pleased that Strathaven and Aberfeldy are now playing an active part in that. I first had the idea of Strathaven's potential as a Fairtrade town when I heard that Garstang had been declared England's first Fairtrade town. I want to put on record my thanks to Bruce Crowther of the Garstang group, who was very helpful. It was not long before the initial informal steering group organised a public meeting to test support for the initiative in Strathaven. I thank Oxfam for helping us to organise that. We got that support from the community and the movement has grown at a tremendous rate. Many groups and individuals must be thanked for their support. The local churches, which had already been holding an annual Traidcraft fair, have been highly supportive of our initiative. I particularly thank the office bearers of the group. Paolo Quadros, the chairman, is a Brazilian chap whose enthusiasm knows no bounds. Without that driving force, we would have been hard pushed to reach our target of being Scotland's first Fairtrade town along with Aberfeldy. I thank Sandy Grant, who has retired from teaching at Strathaven Academy and is Oxfam's local representative in the town. Again, he has been instrumental in driving the project, along with lots of local primary and secondary school children. I also thank Margaret Morton, a local businesswoman, who is our secretary. She works extremely hard to get the word over and to raise support. I mentioned the rising support and I was particularly pleased that the seven primary schools in Strathaven took part in our schools project for Fairtrade. On Saturday we held an exhibition and a poster competition, to which we had 180 entries. The level of understanding of fair trade among those primary 6 and 7 pupils was outstanding. Some of the pupils at Strathaven Academy are also working on Fairtrade projects. None of that would have been possible without South Lanarkshire Council, which has backed the Fairtrade initiative right from the start. I particularly want to thank Councillor Jim Malloy, who gave us much support from the outset, as did Councillor Chris Thompson and Councillor Eddie McAvoy,  the leader of South Lanarkshire Council. Strathaven town has seven entrances, all of which say "Welcome to Strathaven, Scotland's first Fairtrade Town with Aberfeldy". We want to sustain Strathaven's Fairtrade status and to make sure that there are on-going events in Strathaven to promote that. Of course we will always have our major exhibitions and initiatives during Fairtrade fortnight. The issue is not just about worldwide fair trade. There is also a local element. We are trying hard to make the link with Strathaven's farming traditions and use of local produce. As far as I know, we are the first Fairtrade group in Britain to include in its constitution support for local farming. The principle of fair pay for work applies as much to producers in Scotland as it does to producers anywhere else. There are many different ways in which to change the world and to challenge the ways of the world. I feel that a commitment to fair trade throughout our country is one way of doing so. I hope that others will follow our initiative. While the developed world is talking about war, there are organisations and people all over the country whose principles and ethics have the potential to change the human condition across the world. I believe that those who are contented with their lives, have enough work and are fairly paid for that work have no real interest in going to war and killing other people. I will finish with a quote that sums up everything that I want to say. At a time when we are sending £35 billion in aid to poor countries that lose £500 billion in unfair trade practices, I will quote the words of Isaías Martinez from Mexico, who says: "We do not need charity, we are not beggars. If we are paid a reasonable price for our coffee, then we can do without charity."

The voluntary sector is fearful that the spirit of the McFadden recommendations is being eroded by the delay since the first of four social justice ministers in this Executive announced the review of charity law, and since the second of the four announced that legislation would be introduced. Does the minister accept those concerns? Will he explain why the fundamental recommendation that there should be a charities act is being ignored, and why the pledge of a previous minister is being reversed?

I thank the minister for that.  Amendment 4 agreed to.

My colleague Lyndsay McIntosh is absolutely right. I said earlier that I did not intend to move amendment 17 and I did not intend to move it. I am terribly sorry for the confusion.  Amendment 17, by agreement, withdrawn.

When this matter was dealt with at stage 2, I felt that our outlawing of the use of bed-and-breakfast accommodation for homeless families represented a major step forward in relation to homelessness and I cannot see why the position should change now. Will the minister make a commitment that the regulations that are likely to be passed today will amount to the outlawing of the use of bed-and-breakfast accommodation for homeless families and that the regulations will come into play within weeks and will not be delayed? Given that the Minister for Social Justice came to the committee and admitted that the number of families in bed-and-breakfast accommodation has not been falling and that it was a lack of resources that prevented the ending of a situation in which families had to live in such inappropriate circumstances, I cannot see why we cannot pass legislation today that states that no more families will be made to live in bed-and-breakfast accommodation except in dire and unavoidable emergencies. The situation is simple and we must commit the necessary resources. I urge members to vote against the changes to what was agreed at stage 2 and force the Executive to commit the resources to end this abomination.

My colleague Kenny Gibson and I were pleased to support Robert Brown's amendment 32 at stage 2. I am a bit concerned about amendment 1, which removes the reference to employment, as we have a big enough unemployment problem without militating against people's ability to find work easily by moving. On amendment 2, all of us must face up to responsibilities in helping people from other areas of the world who flee to our country or are sent to our country from down south. I am glad that the Executive is taking the issue on board and that, at stage 2, it said that it would consider the matter and suggest an appropriate form of words—the Executive is to commended for and congratulated on that. I hope that the work that people in Scotland are trying to do on asylum and  immigration issues will spread and be listened to by the minister's colleagues at the Home Office.

Amendment 15 would ensure that there is a clear right of appeal against a decision made in a homelessness assessment. The current legal argument is that it is possible to ask for a review of the duty owed, but that that is not enshrined in legislation. The question has to be asked: how many people who present as homeless will be au fait with the finer points of the legal argument? If the right to an appeal were enshrined in law, there would be no legal argument to prevent the appeal from proceeding and sufficient advice would be available to applicants from sources such as citizens advice bureaux. Amendment 17 would allow the right to take the appeal to the sheriff court. That is in line with the European convention on human rights principle that there must be the right to a fair and independent hearing. The case in England of Adan v Newham London Borough Council resulted in a ruling that not to have recourse to a court was a breach of article 6 of the ECHR. We must be sure that we do all within our power to protect and enhance human rights in Scotland of Scots and people who live here. The amendment would help to do that. I move amendment 15.

I thank the minister for his reassurances in relation to amendment 15, which I accept—I intend to withdraw the amendment. On amendment 17, the case that the minister mentioned—whatever its name was—obviously came after the one that I mentioned. In the light of the minister's comments, which were extremely interesting, and his assurances about judicial review, I will not move amendment 17.  Amendment 15, by agreement, withdrawn.

Like everyone else in the chamber, I wish that all housing providers and all public service providers were wonderful, but we live in the real world, and they are not, have not been and are unlikely to become perfect. However, that is not always because of circumstances that are within the providers' control; it can be caused by events outwith their control. During the stage 1 debate and again today, Tom McCabe talked about the need to balance the need for and supply of housing. A lack of that balance could force a local authority into recalcitrance. The Executive should push to ensure that all local authorities become progressive on such matters, because it should be the Government's instinct to drive the agenda forward. Amendment 8 would help to achieve that. The homelessness task force suggested that the mechanism for managing the expansion of priority need at a pace that matches improvements in the supply and quality of housing should be made more explicit. That would help with achievement of the objective. I press amendment 8.

The purpose of amendment 7 is to broaden the definition of a young person and to replace the upper age limit of 20 with 24. Almost 40 per cent of homelessness applications come from people aged between 16 and 24, despite that age group making up less than 15 per cent of the adult population of Scotland. Those people are much more likely to become homeless than people in other age groups are. Under-25s are already treated differently by the law, as demonstrated by the single-room rent, which limits the amount of housing benefit that is payable. Mainstream benefits such as income support also discriminate against under-25s. That group is therefore more vulnerable to financial hardship. Many young people aged between 21 and 24 continue to be very vulnerable, and amendment 7 proposes that care leavers or those who are vulnerable for the reasons covered by the bill should be regarded as being in priority need. That should not be restricted to young people aged between 18 and 20. I move amendment 7.

I remind members that the Scottish Council for Single Homeless estimates that 42 per cent of rough sleepers initiative clients are under 25. Young people are much less likely to be in paid work and their wages are lower, so they are very much disadvantaged within a housing system that is dominated by home  ownership. Within the under-25 age group, problems can potentially arise when there is disruption to education, training and employment. There is also the potential for damage to health due to varying social factors. Such problems can create serious long-term exclusion with a lifetime of costs for both the individual and society. I am not convinced that a code of guidance would take care of the matter. We should show a real commitment to our young people by ensuring that those who are in what is obviously a vulnerable age group receive the protection of the law. That protection should be enshrined in the legislation. I press amendment 7.

Amendment 8 seeks to ensure that progress in abolishing the priority need test does not move at the speed of the slowest local authority or is held up entirely by the most recalcitrant local authority. I am worried that the date for the abolition of the priority need test might end up depending on the local authority that is making the least progress towards that goal. Although I understand that it would be unfair to place a legal obligation on a local authority that it cannot fulfil, it would be equally unreasonable for one local authority to stand in the way of the abolition of the priority need test. The minister must be in control of the process, as amendment 8 would allow. The amendment would also allow protection to be extended to those who are in need as quickly as possible, where possible.  I will not speak to amendment 9 because I suspect that my colleague, Kenny Gibson, is well able to do that for himself. I move amendment 8.

I thank Helen Eadie—it was a pleasure to hear a member willingly standing up in the Parliament and saying something nice about the Holyrood project without being forced to do so. I am most proud of the accessibility of the building—I know that Jamie Stone, John Farquhar Munro and others are proud of it, too. The building has been judged to be the best public building in Europe, which is a major achievement. The other day, I was in another new building at the bottom of Holyrood road. I had to get through a heavy door, and I could not see the buttons to press when I got into the lift. I thought that that was appalling. As far as I could see, the building had taken no account of accessibility issues. It is day 57 of the European year of the disabled and it is right that we should debate the subject. The minister started by giving some facts and a vision of what we should be trying to achieve this year and afterwards. That leads me to the Madrid declaration, which members such as Helen Eadie, Michael Matheson and Trish Godman have mentioned. Between them, Trish Godman and Michael Matheson said everything that I wanted to say—they covered the issue exceptionally well.  I have enough time to deal with only some of the Madrid declaration's vision, which is huge. I urge everybody to go to the appropriate website and register their names to sign up to the declaration. The vision is about moving "Away from disabled people as objects of charity ... and Towards disabled people as rights holders" and "Away from people with disabilities as patients ... and Towards people with disabilities as independent citizens and consumers." Irene Oldfather mentioned that the matter is about moving "Away from professionals taking decisions on behalf of disabled people ... and Towards independent decision making and taking responsibilities by disabled people and their organisations on issues which concern them." Benefits have been mentioned. Benefits should be looked at and we should push people to consider further use of the disability living allowance, for example, to help towards that vision. Another important part of the vision is moving "Away from a focus on merely individual impairments ... and Towards removing barriers, revising social norms, policies, cultures and promoting a supportive and accessible environment." That proposal, particularly the need for "revising social norms" has twice struck home to me recently. The first time was during a television programme called "Operatunity". The name and occupation of each contestant was flashed up on the screen and read out as people came on to sing. For one particular contestant, the line stated "Mother of three—registered blind." I thought that that was an appalling thing to do on national television—to state that that woman, who was taking part along with everybody else, was no more than a mother of three and registered blind. The other thing that made me think of that proposal was a comment on a BBC messageboard on the web, called "ouch!". As part of his answer to the question of whether he minded being called disabled, a chap called Bob Williams-Findlay explained: "I believe society disables me, not my impairment." That ties in very much with what members have said today. The underpinning principle for all of us must be that people with an impairment should not be regarded as objects of charity or as patients—they should be independent citizens who are fully integrated into society. That is what the Disability Rights Commission is forcing into the public arena and trying to get us all to take mind of. It is, as many members have said, a human rights issue We must start to see equality as more than warm words. Michael Matheson expressed the worry that we are very good at having the year for this and the day for that, but it goes no further. We must take action to ensure that there is equality of opportunity. I am thankful that the opinion that people with disabilities can neither speak nor act for themselves is diminishing. However, to a large extent the attitude of charity remains. We must get over that. I could talk for ever about the matter, but the Presiding Officer will be glad to know that I will not. I will now address the SNP's amendment. It is lodged as a marker, forcing us all to consider what must be done. The Disability Discrimination Act 1995 is coming into force. We must push to ensure that we comply with it and must put measures in place to ensure that we comply. I asked some parliamentary questions a while ago about what the Executive was doing to raise awareness of the matter. I ask the minister in his summing up to confirm for us what has been done today and what will be done throughout the rest of the year.

I am tempted simply to say that I agree with the minister and then sit down. I am amazed by the level of harmony that we have reached; we never quite reached such a level when Hugh Henry was the Deputy Minister for Social Justice. The fact that the bill will have been passed quickly does not take away from its importance—it is extremely important and long overdue. That speed is a mark of how well the parliamentary system has worked. I pay tribute to the Transport and the Environment Committee for its deliberations at stage 2. I was particularly pleased that the committee accepted Fiona McLeod's amendments on suitability for access for those with disabilities, which is an important step forward. I am a wee bit disappointed that, in the one vote that we have had today on the bill, the Executive did not accept Kenny MacAskill's amendment on broadband. That amendment was eminently sensible and progressive—just like Kenny—and I would have liked an unequivocal commitment on the issue. The only thing that remains for me to do is to say that we support the bill and are delighted with it. I am also pleased that the Queen agrees with the minister.

I shall be brief. I want to stress the necessity of John Scott's amendment, and ask that it be accepted. The issue was raised back in May 2000 when it was the subject of oral questions to one of the minister's predecessors, Iain Gray. Mr Gray admitted that although byelaws existed, they were not being enforced. Here we are, almost three years down the line, and we have seen no change. Please, minister, accept the amendment.

The issue of continuing requirements is absolutely crucial. I echo John Scott's concerns about the burdens on local authorities and I ask for clarification on that.

I understand that I have two interests to declare: my membership of the Chartered Institute of Housing in Scotland and the fact that I am a private landlord, as I let a property. I hope that my tenants consider me to be a fairly good landlord. I agree with everything that Johann Lamont said. The story that she told is familiar to many people. When I worked in housing and our tenants suffered because of their neighbours, frustration arose when those neighbours were owner-occupiers or had private landlords, because it was difficult to find out who could take responsibility. Anti-social behaviour orders have the potential to be more worthwhile. We must research why they are not being used to the extent that they could be used. There are many good private landlords, as Johann Lamont said, and a decent private rented sector makes a great contribution to housing in this country. The condition of houses is also important, because tenants' rights in private housing are important. I will relate one of my worries about that to the situation in the 1970s and 1980s, when councils and housing associations worked together closely in housing action areas to rid our cities of slum landlords and to provide decent housing conditions, mainly to people who lived in tenements. I am worried that, in isolated places, we could create a new private rented sector from ex-right-to-buy properties. East Kilbride—the constituency in which I live—has a growing problem of ex-right-to-buy houses being sold to people who want to let  them as private landlords. In one area, houses have lost much of their value because of asbestos problems, which are the subject of a continuing argument between residents and the local council. A couple of private landlords are trying hard to buy those properties. Johann Lamont talked about housing benefit. Such properties are often let at the maximum housing benefit level that landlords know the council will pay. Landlords pocket the money and feel that they have no obligation to such properties' tenants or to people who live round about in the wider community. We need regulation, and we can discuss the best method of doing that. I look forward to the housing improvement task force's report on the matter. Some people live in tied accommodation, the condition of which is ridiculous. I have seen that all over the country, but mainly in rural areas, where tied accommodation that is let in a particularly bad state can be found on large estates. I hope that the housing improvement task force considers the landlords of tied accommodation when it reports.

There has been much comment this morning on whether the Parliament should be discussing war against Iraq. My colleagues and I certainly wish that we did not have to do so. We wish that there was no threat of war on the horizon, but that threat exists. We must therefore discuss the issue because we owe it to everyone in this country who is seriously concerned about the situation. People see our nation being swept into a war without the backing of international agreement or of firm evidence that war is the required last resort. George Reid highlighted the effect that war against Iraq would have on the Iraqi people and on the infrastructure of that country. It is worth noting and reminding ourselves of the current state of that country and the effect of the sanctions that were first imposed back in 1990. Sanctions have been in place for more than 12 years, but it is apparent that they have failed to achieve what they set out to do, which was to secure peace in the region. The sanctions have had an effect; for example, they have ensured that Iraq's health care system has broken down. They have ensured that Iraq has had no chlorine for its water supplies for many years. They have ensured that Iraq now has one of the highest infant mortality rates on the planet—the rate has doubled over the past 10 years—and that one quarter of all Iraqi children are underweight while one fifth are malnourished. That is the state of the country with which we might end up at war. It is a country in which, UNICEF estimates, 250 people die every day. In 1996, it was reported that 4,500 children under the age of five die each month from hunger and disease in Iraq. The people also have to face the effect of depleted uranium. That is the state of the country that we are in danger of combating with neither published and compelling clear evidence, nor a specific UN mandate. Some people in Iraq would say that we are already at war. Those who live within the no-fly zones have seen their friends and families killed by western bombs. The USA and the UK say that UN resolution 688 allows them to enforce the no-fly zones, but it does not, which was confirmed in 1992 by the then UN Secretary-General. Similarly, the resolution that is currently on the table—resolution 1441—provides no automatic right to take military action. Reuters news agency reports that seven bombing raids have been carried out against Iraq already this month. Although we are told that no final decision has been taken about the war, American and British bombing of Iraq has increased by some 300 per cent, according to commentators. The Washington Post reports that, back in August, Secretary Rumsfeld ordered that  the target list be widened. According to answers to parliamentary questions at Westminster, the Royal Air Force dropped more than 124 tonnes of bombs between March and November. What do we call that type of operation? It seems pretty warlike to me. I agree with my party's motion that there is a "deep and serious concern" that we are "currently pursuing an inevitable path to war." We must try to block that inevitable path. Any decision further to escalate action must be taken properly through the United Nations Security Council in the form laid down in the SNP motion.

On one hand, I am pleased to speak in the debate, because it was following a meeting with the FBU in Hamilton that Alex Neil and I jointly agreed the motion. On the other hand, I am sad to be speaking, because that meeting seems so long ago and we seem to be no further forward. The Government does not even seem to have recognised that the professionalism of the firefighters should be matched with a professional wage. I will talk about pension provision for firefighters—an issue that the SNP raised way back in February. Firefighters do not carry a pension fund. Serving firefighters pay 11 per cent of their salary back into brigades' general funds, and pensions for retired firefighters are paid from those funds. In years past, the pension contributions were more than enough to cover pension costs and funds were diverted to prop up front-line services. This year, that scam hit the buffers. Too many retired firefighters had to be paid from too little money. Brigades face the prospect of closing front-line services. My colleague Fiona Hyslop has pushed that issue for some time and lately succeeded in obtaining some answers in the chamber from the Deputy Minister for Justice. We should not have to push for answers to those  questions, as that suggests a lack of respect for public service workers. The same disrespect and disregard of the potential consequences of their actions allow ministers to suggest that we can cut night-shift cover in the fire service and cut the number of firefighters. We can relate that to the pensions shortfall this year. If the Government plan of retiring 20 per cent of firefighters were applied, we would return to the choice between closing front-line services and refusing to pay retired firefighters' pensions.

No, thank you. In the meantime, serving firefighters seek a professional wage for a job that, since the 1970s deal, has become a profession. Why is the Government so determined to refuse even to discuss paying the salary for which firefighters ask? I have spoken to workers in the Scottish Ambulance Service who express similar concerns to those of fire brigade workers. Those staff see their jobs changing without proper consultation and without any consideration of the consequences. The UK Government is failing public service workers. I would like Scotland's Government to accept the responsibility for fighting that failure on behalf of those whom it is elected to serve. Public services should be operated on the basis of putting people before profit. I would like the Government in Scotland to spearhead that approach in the UK.

I understand from one of your very worthy clerks, Presiding Officer, that I should declare my interest as a member of the Chartered Institute of Housing in Scotland. I am sorry not to have done so before. The Minister for Social Justice opened with a defensive stance on the fact that the number of households in temporary accommodation has risen. It struck me as ironic that the minister—backed up by Cathie Craigie and others—said that that was because, through the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001, we are encouraging the hidden homeless to come forward for temporary accommodation, when all the evidence that we took from the Executive on the Homelessness etc (Scotland) Bill indicated that it does not expect any hidden homeless to come forward. I understand the need to spin about a bit, but I do not know how the Executive can square that circle. It seems Orwellian: if homelessness goes down, that is treated as a victory; if it goes up, that is treated as a victory as well. Lots of members, Brian Adam in particular, mentioned worries about housing supply. Tom McCabe and Bill Aitken spoke of worries about not having enough houses to deal with hidden homelessness. I think that the bill will be excellent legislation. I have no problems with it and its intentions are wonderful. We support it. However, I am convinced that an awful lot of hidden homeless people will come forward in the knowledge that they now have rights. It is incredibly naive to pretend that that will not happen.  I hate to agree with Bill Aitken, but I have to on this point: the proposals have not been properly costed. The minister mentioned the £127 million that has been set aside to deal with homelessness, but when the Social Justice Committee asked what additional money would be made available over the next few years, it learned that only an extra £14 million had been allocated, rather than the £100-odd million that has been mentioned today. I am worried about other aspects of the way in which the bill has been portrayed today. My comments are not meant as a personal criticism, but we must be careful about the language that we use when we talk about homelessness and I was worried by a comment that the minister made about intentionality. She said that people needed to be given a second chance to prove themselves. As Karen Whitefield has often said in the Social Justice Committee, not everyone who is homeless is helpless. Not everyone who is homeless needs to prove anything. Someone may have hit a hard time once in their life; they may need a wee step up, rather than on-going support of the type to which the bill refers. The issue of anti-social behaviour has been raised. I am bothered by the language that people use when talking about that. Every time that anti-social behaviour was raised, members spoke about anti-social tenants. There are anti-social owner-occupiers and anti-social people throughout society, but we always refer to anti-social tenants. Today no one used the word anti-social without mentioning tenants.

Apart from Tricia Marwick, of course.

Yes—I was about to come on to that. I was bothered by the comments that the minister made about the new community warden scheme, which we are supposed to laud and applaud. When the scheme was first announced, I lodged a parliamentary question in which I asked what powers community wardens would have. I received the answer that they would have no powers. Last night it was reported that when Scottish Television sent people out to get a handle on the new community warden scheme, they had to change location because youngsters started to stone their cars and cameras. There were no community wardens to be found.  Any form of anti-social behaviour is criminal behaviour. It would be best for us to deploy more police in areas where anti-social behaviour is happening, instead of funding community wardens and placing further responsibilities on housing staff, which is happening insidiously. Housing staff are expected to assume an increasingly significant role in dealing with anti-social behaviour, some of which is of a very difficult and criminal nature. We must be careful that we do not make people responsible for dealing with issues that the police and courts should deal with. We have talked about anti-social behaviour orders, but the main problem with going to court is that the process takes too long. I was glad to hear the minister say that the Homelessness etc (Scotland) Bill alone cannot deal with all the issues that relate to homelessness. We need to tackle how long it takes cases—particularly housing cases—to come before the courts. I could rant on for ever, but I do not have much time.

Tom McCabe, Donald Gorrie and many other members mentioned priority need, support services and joined-up approaches. All relevant agencies must come together to deal with the issues. We should place on the face of the bill a description of how joined-up approaches will work. I am glad that the Executive is considering lodging amendments to do that at stage 2. On behalf of the committee, Johann Lamont raised concerns—which Cathie Craigie confirmed—about waiting list and transfer list applicants. That takes us back to housing supply. Tom McCabe mentioned the aspirations of people on waiting lists and transfer lists, which we must consider, too. It would be terrible if we did not have the housing supply to allow people's aspirations to be met. I will finish now. I wanted to ask John Young about his busking. I know why Robin Harper would be busking, because he is a bit eccentric anyway, but I am intrigued to know why John Young was busking on the streets of Glasgow many years ago. We welcome the general principles of the bill and we look forward to stage 2.

That is the point.

I would.

Will Margaret Curran take an intervention?

The last sentence of the SNP motion notes that too many of our children continue to live in poverty. The most recent SNP debate in which I spoke focused directly on that fact. Therefore, I will not repeat all the stark statistics about poverty in this country; I will merely restate the findings of the Joseph Rowntree Foundation report that was published this month, which concluded that there is an overall sense that there has, over seven years, been little change. That is set to continue under the devolved settlement, in spite of the Executive's decision to change the measurement of poverty from a relative to an absolute measure.

No, it is too soon.  I want to make a plea for the children who live in Scotland who are the poorest by any measurement—the children of asylum seekers. Those children are very much a minority. We all know that the Scottish Parliament is denied control over asylum, immigration and nationality and the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, which will soon be operative, will discriminate against the children of people who seek asylum in our country.

I agree that it is sad that that terminology is used in a legal context. Some of the statements that have been made by members of the Government—who should know better—by the media and by the press simply exacerbate the problem. The new act will set up accommodation centres for refugees and asylum seekers. Sections of the act will remove refugee children in accommodation centres from the application of key sections of the Scottish education service. We are talking about segregated education—possibly for a period of months. Surely that is both regressive and discriminatory; it could contravene not only the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, but also the Race Relations (Amendment) Act 2000. I will quote from section 36(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, which states: "a resident of an accommodation centre shall not be treated as part of the population of a local education authority's area." It is sad that children in Scotland are already being educated outwith the mainstream education system in Dungavel detention centre in the East Kilbride constituency. In that regard, I have concerns about Scottish legislation. The Children (Scotland) Act 1995 lays out local authority duties towards children. A parliamentary answer about those duties, which I received in May 2002, states: "The Home Office has taken responsibility for ensuring that the needs of the children are met and may work with local authorities to do so."— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 13 May 2002; p 652.]  Surely it is not good enough that the Home Office "may work" with local authorities. We should insist that it is for Scotland to look after any children in this country. The fact that we have legislation that safeguards the rights of children and the responsibilities of our elected local authorities  means that those rights and responsibilities should be respected and honoured. We should not just lie down and accept what the Home Secretary is doing. He is prepared not only to discriminate against people who must already be at their lowest ebb, as they have had to flee their homelands, but to deny asylum seekers' children rights to the same basic services that our children can expect. As the minister said, second best is not good enough for anyone's child. I do not think that the Scottish Executive's ministers who have responsibility in this area think like their London colleagues and I have faith that a good number of coalition members do not think like their London colleagues, either. I ask the ministers to give a commitment that they will fight to prevent asylum seeker children in Scotland from being treated in that way. The Home Secretary is required to consult Scottish ministers before establishing accommodation centres in Scotland. I ask ministers please to use that consultation to insist on rights for refugee children. I guarantee that the SNP will join ministers in any campaign to stop or reverse the relentless rightward drift of policy on asylum seekers and refugees. As a Parliament, we should make it clear to anyone who will listen that Scotland is a nation that can and will play its part in helping to alleviate the problems that are faced by immigrants, refugees and asylum seekers, but that we can do so only if we are allowed to.

Does the minister have a view on how the guidance will set out how local authorities deal with relaxations of buildings standards when they relate to access for disabled people?

You caught me on the hop, Presiding Officer. The minister's speech was incredibly short; she did not even speak quickly. The SNP welcomes the bill's general policy objectives, many of which are long overdue, such as the objectives of providing greater reassurance for people who use tradespeople and of providing more information to house buyers. The consensus is that local authority powers to identify dangerous buildings should be strengthened, that designers thrive on flexibility and innovation and that the system should be more responsive to the needs of the public and industry. The SNP is always up for providing excellence in public services, encouraging sustainable development and being constructive in helping the Executive to meet its obligations under European directives. The main purpose of the bill is to modernise Scotland's building control system. That modernisation must have a robust base, with credible enforcement powers to reflect a basic need for accountability and competence. I am concerned that the policy objectives to which I referred, as outlined in the policy memorandum, have not been reflected in the bill's long title, which is "to make further provision with respect to buildings, building standards, work in relation to buildings and related matters; and for connected purposes." Many others share those concerns and I ask the minister to consider them further as the bill progresses, so that it can be strengthened to ensure that it is objective driven rather than process driven. I do not have time to dissect every element of the bill, but I will raise some particular points. As I said, the provisions on dangerous buildings are welcome, but we should note the evidence of the Fire Protection Association, whose representative said that the bill would not give fire authorities a statutory right to be consulted. Their expertise would be brought into play only if there were variations from technical standards. That is a potential amendment for the Executive to consider. I am reminded of the licensing scheme for  houses in multiple occupation, on which the Social Justice Committee has taken much evidence. I suspect that that scheme was introduced under the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982 almost as a panic measure after the tragic death of young men in a fire in accommodation in Glasgow that had bars on the window. However, the scheme does not give local authorities further powers to prevent such an incident from happening again. That situation needs to be addressed. I ask the minister to consider lodging an appropriate amendment at stage 2. One of my colleagues will concentrate on the functional standards versus technical standards aspect of the bill. I want to register my concern that, if technical standards are no longer to be mandatory, we could be in danger of reducing our standards to a lower common denominator. In light of the European directive, the Executive might feel that it has devised the best way to proceed, but how will the Parliament scrutinise and influence if the enabling legislation allows ministers a free hand with guidance and regulation? The accountability to ministers of the new, or reformed, central building standards body is noted in the policy memorandum but, again, that issue is not addressed in the bill. A number of the provisions might have significant cost implications; evidence was taken about the potential costs to local authorities. The City of Edinburgh Council highlighted the potential for an "enormous burden" and the Scottish Association of Chief Building Control Officers warned that the aims could not be achieved without "adequate funding". Paragraph 148 of the financial memorandum would seem to suggest that fee income and savings gained will result in cost neutrality. I am not convinced, and I ask the Deputy Minister for Social Justice to expand on that when he sums up the debate. A particularly contentious issue is that of independent verifiers. It is understandable that strong views were expressed for and against by the private and public sectors. I was a bit puzzled by the evidence that was given by the former Deputy Minister for Social Justice, Hugh Henry. He contended that the Executive had no plans to extend the verification role to the private sector but that the possibility of doing so should not be excluded. I thank the minister for expanding on that point today, but did the former Deputy Minister for Social Justice's evidence indicate that the Executive does not yet know what the additional costs to local authorities are likely to be and that, rather than fund local authorities to do the work, the work will be privatised? I was particularly impressed by the Disability Rights Commission's evidence on behalf of the country's 800,000 disabled people. The  commission also raised the question of replacing mandatory standards with guidance as a cause for concern. Requests for relaxations have long been contentious for disabled people. The duties in part III of the Disability Discrimination Act 1995 come into force in October 2004. Bearing that in mind, no building currently in use by the public should be granted relaxations for any aspect of any regulation that would have a direct or indirect negative impact the accessibility or usability of the building by disabled people. I say to the minister that I assume that no relaxations whatever will be allowed in the case of new buildings. The explicit inclusion of access and usability in the functional standards would ensure clarity in determinations after a breach is reported. It is also vital that accredited verifiers include professionals who are competent and qualified to certify that a design is accessible and usable by disabled people. The Disability Rights Commission asked that the definition on convenience be expanded to include explicit reference to accessibility and usability for the disabled, rather than the implicit references in the policy memorandum and the explanatory notes. The word convenience does not adequately cover, or might not be understood to cover, the requirements of disabled people. A building that is not accessible or usable is considerably more than an inconvenience; it is discriminatory, exclusive and may hinder someone from accessing services and facilities. I am sure that a solution to that issue is not beyond the scope of the many resources that the Executive has to hand. I ask the minister to consider the matter further. I also ask for an assurance that the bill is only one part of the continuing modernisation of building construction and repair. Are issues such as tenement law and rethinking construction practices to incorporate the Eagan principles still on the agenda? Who is driving the agenda? I could say much more. Fine intentions have been laid before the chamber today and stage 2 will be interesting. I reiterate that the Scottish National Party supports the general principles of the bill.

Is the minister confident that all local authorities in Scotland share her ethos about combating the issue? I have found that local authority councillors across the country can hold  very different views.

There were two things that threw me today. The first was finding out that Des McNulty is going to be my opposition number from now on: I welcome the dynamic duo. The other thing that threw me was that Roseanna Cunningham led the debate today rather than Kenny Gibson, and it is a different experience to sit through a debate with Roseanna.

Do you think so? Roseanna Cunningham stated at the outset the SNP's support for the motion, as did Lyndsay McIntosh for her party. I do not believe that anyone in the chamber would argue that we should not do all that we can to combat domestic  abuse or any form of violence in our society. All that I would say to the Liberal Democrats is that I am surprised at the strength of their argument, considering that they have not lodged an amendment against the motion.

So Mr Rumbles's position is the Lib Dem position. Johann Lamont's point of order is answered. We may disagree about the methods of trying to eradicate domestic abuse from our society, but it is great that we are debating it at all. Dorothy-Grace Elder referred to that, and we have debated the subject a few times. I would like to take this opportunity to mention that in 1976, Deputy Presiding Officer George Reid tabled a domestic violence bill for Scotland at Westminster. Sadly, it died due to a lack of time and was not passed. Having said that, I invite the minister to seriously consider accepting the SNP amendment. There is surely nothing in it that she would disagree with. It is about the equalisation of funding across the country to ensure that no one is left without protection, and I make a plea for groups who deal with domestic violence but are not affiliated to Scottish Women's Aid. We should make sure that they come into the equation as well, so will the minister comment on that? We must recognise and meet the needs of children affected by domestic violence. Irene McGugan mentioned that, as the minister will remember, and it is such an important issue because SWA reminds us that one third of all protection cases have domestic abuse as a factor. I ask the minister also to give us an assurance that the announced increase in funding for child protection will go towards addressing the lack of support workers, rather than merely propping up the current statutory provision. The national strategy clearly states that it is the Executive's responsibility to ensure adequate resourcing for the prevention strategy. It worries me that the Executive expects local authorities to pick up half of that tab. While targeting capital works expenditure on modernising refuges is right, I worry that that will take money away from revenue funding. Irene McGugan also mentioned the resource implications of the recruitment crisis in social work services, and I want to hear the minister say what the Executive intends to do about that. Roseanna Cunningham also proposed reform of the justice system, which is very much a part of the SNP amendment. Indeed, domestic violence requires urgent reform, and Robert Brown reminded us of the wider issues that are related to domestic violence. I contend that the development of family courts would have a number of beneficial  effects, chief of which would be the introduction of real powers to deal effectively with domestic abuse. Gil Paterson mentioned that we should take on board innovative thinking from other countries. At that point, Roseanna Cunningham reminded me that a police authority in England is now taking video cameras along when investigating reports of domestic violence or abuse. That video footage is admissible evidence. I would like to hear the minister's view on whether that might be one way forward. We should not pretend that this is a simple matter. All MSPs have to work together to ensure that we come up with the possible solutions, because we have to wipe the scourge of domestic abuse from Scotland's face and establish that our nation is truly socially just. I have faith that Margaret Curran believes in what the SNP is saying in its amendment. As a result, I urge her to accept it and tell the Deputy Minister for Justice to get on with it.

Are the members pals again?

For many years, Scottish culture and the creative arts were neglected by those in power. Despite that, there were many examples of people coming together against all the odds to create cultural advancement and entertainment. Small travelling theatre companies, such as Borderline Theatre Company, 7:84 Theatre Company and Wildcat Theatre Company, combined top-quality writing and acting with social comment. Traditional musicians and artists created folk events and festivals all over the country, in Aberfeldy, Dingwall, Bute, Edinburgh and Girvan, to name but a few. There were also great multicultural events, such as the mela. Local authorities were also active: witness the success of Celtic connections, which Glasgow City Council initially helped to fund. Surely now that we have a devolved Parliament, those beginnings should be built upon and strengthened. Sadly, that has not been the case. The Executive has not taken advantage of the opportunity that devolution could have provided to counteract the years of neglect. Core funding for the arts has not risen significantly and is proportionately lower than in the rest of the UK. Grass-roots companies are struggling—sadly, some have already gone under—and our national institutions are woefully underfunded. When the cultural strategy was first unveiled way back in November 2000, I spoke in the debate. When I look back at the Official Report of the speech that I made that day, I find it sad that I could read the same speech over again today, because nothing much has changed. At that time, I told the chamber how the then Deputy Minister for Culture and Sport, Rhona Brankin, had said: "The development of the Cultural Strategy has been a stimulating and invigorating experience".  She had also said that "excellence in the traditional arts" was being promoted. I will repeat what I said then: "We already have excellence in our traditional arts; it is the promotion and funding that is the problem ... Adequate core funding is what is required. Let the practitioners of the traditional arts spend their time doing what they do best, which is not administration and filling in lottery applications, but performing, teaching and passing on their art."— [ Official Report , 2 November 2000; Vol 8, c 1367.]  I was interested in the minister's comment about the promotion of Scotland abroad. The thrust of the review is all about events abroad, such as the Scotland in Sweden event. That is marvellous and should not be knocked, but we are forgetting about the promotion of our culture here in our own country to our own people through schools and colleges and through entertainment and the arts.

The minister can have all the little pilots she likes, but she must give core funding directly to the people on the ground who are capable of delivering excellence in traditional arts, instead of funding them to fill in applications for match funding from councils and for lottery funding. The people who can best provide that excellence are those who have been doing it for years despite the lack of a strategy. The strategy document was welcomed by the SNP, as it reflected culture as part of the education portfolio. Sadly, however, the Executive does not seem to have moved on to do more than reflect on that. The minister can talk all she likes about what the Executive is doing through the Arts Council and so on, but the fact is that local authority provision has dropped. Interviews with key players in local authorities have revealed that cultural services are held to be less important than other services. There is a general lack of finance to deliver the expectations. The increased use of ring fencing and match funds to direct local authority expenditure has had a detrimental effect on the arts. The Executive's response is simply to issue another consultation; this time it is on guidelines to local authorities on the implementation of the national cultural strategy.  Two years ago, the cultural strategy said that the Executive would "Work with education authorities to maximise opportunities for instrumental tuition in schools, free to those unable to pay". No mention is now made of free tuition, which is another target that has disappeared. Instead, we have more and more consultations. It should be quite easy: just give free musical tuition to children in schools. We have had enough of pilots. The minister can have as many pilots and task forces as she likes—I understand that we are to have another audit about musical tuition in schools—but we need to be more realistic, so that we can get things really working. The way to start on that is to support the SNP amendment to the motion.

The minister will recall the debate on credit unions that was held in March last year. During that debate, the then Minister for Social Justice outlined to us the differences that exist between regulation by the Financial Services Authority and regulation by the Registry of Friendly Societies. That is a reserved matter, but concern has been expressed that new credit unions are finding it difficult to become established under the Financial Services Authority. Have attempts been made to alleviate the problems that new credit unions are experiencing?

I will try hard to stick to the truth and not to myth, which we have heard so much of in the debate. Kenneth Gibson began his speech by giving some facts about poverty, which are worth repeating. Around a quarter of individuals in Scotland live in low-income households, which is higher than the average for Great Britain. In November 2001, the  total number of people in Scotland on income support was 668,000 which, as a percentage, is above the Great British average. The proportion of the Scottish population aged 16 or over claiming income support is above the Great British average. Around a third of Scottish households claim income-related benefits, in contrast to just over a quarter of Great British households. In 1999-2000, Scottish lone-parent households had the lowest income, at £204 a week, which is again below the Great British average. The Labour party tells us that being part of the union is best for Scotland. I want to know how it works that out, because I cannot do so. The minister talked about the myth of independence, but it ain't no myth. Belgium, Norway, Holland, Denmark, Sweden and Finland are not myths and they have less child poverty than Scotland has. The minister did not answer Lloyd Quinan's question on that issue. Lloyd was right to say that those independent countries—which are not myths or dream fantasies—have less child poverty than Scotland has. The real myth is that the unionist Labour party is committed to poverty eradication. The Labour party came to power in the UK in 1997. It is claimed that Labour was committed to poverty eradication, but how did sticking to Tory spending plans and cutting single-parent and disability benefit amount to poverty eradication? The Liberal Democrats at UK level now say that there is a move to reduce the lone-parent working tax credit by 19 per cent. If that is true, how will that contribute to eradicating poverty levels? Robert Brown outlined various initiatives that the Parliament has agreed to. Some of them have been good and have received cross-party support although, as Sandra White said, some Labour members had to be dragged kicking and screaming to support those initiatives. However, those measures will not make substantial inroads into the eradication of poverty because they are no more than tinkering around the edges; they treat the symptoms, not the disease. The only way in which we can treat the disease of poverty is by taking responsibility for it. It is sad that some Conservative members think so little of the people of this country that they believe that, without England to shore us up, we would be a nation of social workers and their clients, which was Bill Aitken's comment. It is disgraceful that Bill Aitken has that view of the Scottish people whom he was elected to support. Different kinds of poverty have been mentioned. The Executive used to measure poverty in relative terms, but it suddenly decided to change to an absolute measure. Wendy Alexander described absolute poverty as not having the ability to get "the basic necessities of life."  It is pathetic that in the third millennium we measure poverty against the ability to get the absolute necessities of life. I want more than that for the people in this country, as do the other SNP members. We want honesty in the measurements. We should not change from a relative to an absolute mark of poverty. If the absolute mark remains the same, inflation alone will mean that the Executive is beating poverty. The concept of absolute poverty is a ridiculous concept—to use it is cheating and it is not on. We then got havering Hugh Henry, who is terrified of the people of Scotland taking matters into their own hands and going for independence. One thing, however, that fascinates me about Hugh Henry—indeed, it fascinates me about the rest of the Labour members—is their assumption that, when this country gets independence, which it will, it is the SNP that will be in power. It never crosses the minds of the Labour members that Labour would be in power in an independent Scotland. All that we get is a repeat of the question, "What would you do when Scotland is independent?" It seems that the Labour members have accepted that there will be no place for them in an independent Scotland. I will tell the chamber what the SNP will do when Scotland becomes independent. We will take on board that the people of Scotland are capable and willing to take their own decisions. The Scottish National Party is the only party in Scotland that has faith in people taking their own decisions. It is the SNP that will be in power, working towards a fairer solution for Scotland. I have noticed that the coalition partners have been using a bit of a slogan today—"Much done, much more to do," which seems to be an admission of failure. I ask myself whether that is to be their slogan for the next election. I say to the coalition parties that if that is their slogan, I much prefer ours. Let us release our potential.

Will the First Minister be honest Jack today and acknowledge that child poverty has not been reduced since the coalition came to power? Will he further acknowledge that it is only by joining the consensus in Scotland for the Parliament to have economic powers that we will ever make a difference?

Having compiled a member's bill on forestry, I was particularly interested in the forestry devolution review. I would go so far as to say that I was quite excited by its final recommendations, because they were somewhat similar to my own thinking. That excitement was dulled by the watered-down stance that the Scottish ministers have taken. I went a bit further than the review group's recommendations, in that, like Rhoda Grant, I wanted local communities to have a real say in what happens with the forests in their neighbourhood. However, our policies were similar. The policy of ensuring that decisions are taken at a level as close to the people as possible is known as subsidiarity. I remember that Jack McConnell looked quite surprised when Kenny MacAskill told him that as First Minister he owned Inverness airport. The Scottish ministers also own Scotland's forests. The ownership of the forests was transferred under the Transfer of Property etc (Scottish Ministers) Order 1999 (SI 1999/1104). Article 4 of the order transferred "all rights and interests belonging to a Minister of the Crown in any land in Scotland" acquired under sections 39 and 40 of the Forestry Act 1967 and any property used for the functions of the Forestry Commission in Scotland, with the exception of the Forestry Commission headquarters in Corstorphine Road and the research offices. Given that the Scottish ministers own the forests in Scotland, I found it surprising, to say the least, that they do not want to take real control over what are some of Scotland's most precious national assets. It is surprising that the Scottish ministers do not want to bring the management of Scotland's forests more transparently within the control of Scotland's people. I cannot see how the minister can justify leaving such a valuable Scottish asset in limbo. The position can easily be altered. Westminster legislation is not required. We already own Scotland's forests, so let us bring their operation back home. I ask members to support the SNP position and set up a forestry management structure in Scotland for Scotland. For the sake of the Scottish timber industry, let us be brave. As I said, the ministers own the forests, but they hold them in trust for everyone who lives in  Scotland. They should work towards making them forests for us all. I want a restoration of the public aspects of Scotland's forests. That is starting to happen in some ways with the central Scotland forest in my area and the Millennium Forest for Scotland Trust, for example. I have read the booklet that the minister recommended—"Scotland's Trees, Woods and Forests"—and its foreword. The document represents a way forward and it is good that we are putting out that kind of publication. There must be a proactive reconnection of the people in the country with the assets of the country, such as forestry. We must be aware of how forestry issues and policy affect us all. For example, is the presence of vast conifer monocultures really the way forward for Scottish forestry? Should we not have more regard to the need for biodiversity? Should we think of our forests only as a cash crop? Why can we not turn the forests for which we have paid so handsomely through our taxes into a vast national resource for education, leisure, employment and other social and economic ends? I say that we can.

The minister is wrong. The proposal that he mentioned was one of the options that was outlined in my consultation, but the general thrust of the bill was to bring forests under some form of local control. Education about our forests is important. I commend an initiative that has been started in Dalkeith, in Rhona Brankin's constituency—the world of trees initiative. I declare an interest, as I am a trustee of the charity that is promoting it. The initiative aims to make the forest an educational resource for young people, so that they can see the benefits that forestry brings to us all. A generation of children is growing up who cannot tell one tree from another. Adults are generally the same—I am certainly no expert. The wildlife in the forests represents another huge learning resource, but it, too, is in danger. The minister mentioned capercaillie. There is a problem with declining stocks of capercaillie in the wild. We must look again at how we are managing that decline. For the future of Scotland, for her people and for her environment, we must promote a new linkage between the people and the land. I hope that we can seize the opportunity now and move that  forward.

I, too, welcome the policy statement, which is a tribute to the task force and all who helped its work. I have two quick points. The first is to pick up on what the minister said about people's responsibility to maintain and improve their houses. Many people in Scotland are in private rented stock that is below tolerable standards. It is landlords' responsibility to ensure that they take rent for a decent house. Has consideration been given to expanding the decency standard to include houses in the private rented sector? That would tie in with the issue of tenement law. When is legislation likely to be introduced? On prudential borrowing, obviously only some local authorities will be able to take advantage of the loosening of the rules. Other authorities will not be able do so and stock transfer would seem to be the only option for them. If a council dug in its heels and said that it did not want to proceed with stock transfer, what could we do to ensure that its tenants are not stuck in the middle and do not fail to get the benefits of what the minister has announced?

It is nice to be back on familiar territory, and there is no more familiar territory than the failings of the coalition Government. I want to place the cards on the table right away. We all know that the power to change benefit rates is held prisoner in London. Moreover, the fact that the main levers of economic competence are withheld from us makes it difficult for us to improve employment prospects. We do not even have the chance to play a full role in supranational organisations such as the European Union, because that is a reserved matter. Again, we are deprived of the opportunity to glean the full  benefits of membership. Paraphrasing Wendy Alexander, I should say, "It's the constitution, stupid." If we really want to make a difference in Scotland, are really sincere about improving life chances and want to do more than simply administer our pocket money, we have to agree with Wendy that independence in Europe is the one big idea in Scottish politics.

It is basic mathematics: A leads to B, straight down the line. We need independence to improve life chances. In Scotland, we have the choice between the big vision of independence—in other words, the desire to improve the country—and the narrow and blinkered vision that decrees that we are somehow not good enough to run our own affairs and that we must take our lead from London. That is the opportunity gap. We are tinkering around the edges when we could be talking independence to release the country's full potential.

No, thanks. While we await the Executive's Damascene conversion, we will just have to trawl through the latest self-promoting publication and find out what it contains or—more likely—misses. Page 19 of the document is a nice place to start. It says that social justice "encapsulates the Executive's core beliefs that child poverty is unacceptable and must be eradicated". I am glad to hear it, because child poverty has continued to rise in Scotland under new Labour and, in fact, is at a higher level now than it was under Thatcher. For example, 30 per cent of Scottish children still live in poverty after five years of new Labour's continuation of Tory rule. Of course, that figure is reached using the international definition of poverty as 60 per cent of the median income after housing costs. Although we have already heard that absolute poverty is falling in Scotland, we should consider what that term means in the new Labour-Liberal Democrat lexicon. The definition of absolute poverty used in "Social Justice ... a Scotland where everyone matters: Annual Report 2001" is living at a level below 60 per cent of the median income of 1996. It is hardly surprising that the level is falling. If we changed the baseline year to 1832, we could wipe out poverty in a flash.  I am glad to hear that the Executive will examine methodology, but it should have done so a long time ago, because it has neither conducted any research into nor accepted any academic findings on the minimum levels of income that are necessary to avoid poverty. As a result, the opportunity gap has widened. It is time that Government ministers started getting honest with the electorate, told the truth and owned up to what they can and cannot do. I know that it is difficult for new Labour to throw away the crutch of spin and step away from the smoke and mirrors, but I assure it that it would gain far more respect by being open and telling the truth. Indeed, I welcome the minister's honest acknowledgement that poverty exists.

If Robert Brown wants to remit the Government now, we can show him what decisions we would make. If he would rather wait, he will find out after next year's election. Poverty in Scotland is a national disgrace and there can be no solution to it until the problem is fully admitted. After all, the first action in any therapy has to be an admission that there is a problem in the first place. Yes, funding for child care is a good idea, so of course the SNP welcomes the £20 million investment in child care for deprived areas, but it is not enough simply to provide child care. That cannot help parents into work where there are no jobs. Without the ability to create the economic conditions that will grow the potential for employment, we cannot provide the jobs. The sad part is that the Executive does not have the powers that it needs to alter substantially the employment market in Scotland. Worse, it does not even want to acquire those powers. It is interesting that page 21 of "Closing the Opportunity Gap", which details the social justice objectives, gives no targets for increasing employment in Scotland. There is an unemployment target in the chapter on enterprise and lifelong learning, but it is merely to narrow the division between the worst 10 per cent of areas and the Scottish average. There is no target to increase the number of people in employment. Under milestone 13 of the social justice annual report, the Executive admits that it is not even possible to provide sub-Scottish figures for unemployment. Therefore, we will never know whether the Executive has managed to  close the gap, because the figures to measure progress are simply not available. Never mind that, the target on page 30 of the document is one of the least ambitious time scales ever for creating employment. There is a concentration on project grants rather than on economic growth. Economic growth is the key to raising employment and to raising the standards of everyone in the country. Instead of being able to tackle Scotland's problems and create a vision to be realised, all the Executive can do is trim the fringes. That is like painting a house while it is falling down. I have no doubt that the Government would like today's debate to be merely a congratulatory pat on the back for having worked out how to spend Gordon Brown's extra pennies, but life is a bit tougher than that. No one in the chamber would argue that extra money should not come to Scotland, but surely we should have the courage to raise and spend our own money rather than rely on someone else. That would mean real responsibility. We would need to take care of ourselves. We would need to raise and spend our own money responsibly and wisely. There is no gain for Scotland in merely throwing money into a pot and hoping that the right result will come out. We need to be sure that the money is spent for the benefit of those whose home is in Scotland. Sadly, the Executive is not living up to that duty. Child poverty in Scotland is still at 30 per cent, while homelessness is on the increase. Perhaps that is why the income of the poorest 20 per cent of the population rose by only 1.4 per cent during the first three years of Labour Government while the richest 20 per cent saw their income rise by double that rate. The gap between the rich and the poor and between the haves and the have-nots is growing. The situation is growing worse for those in Scotland who live in poverty. I offer the Executive the opportunity to come clean. The opportunity gap exists and Scotland's opportunities are falling down that gap. When that happens, people in Scotland suffer. I move amendment S1M-3477.2, to leave out from "welcomes" to end and insert: "notes the failure of the Scottish Executive to make any improvement in the field of social justice; further notes its inability to close the opportunity gap; agrees that the lack of adequate powers of the Executive and the Parliament perpetuates inequalities, and calls for the return of full parliamentary powers to Scotland."

I was going to be terribly nice, but I might change my mind. It has been a long time since we debated the national cultural strategy in the chamber, and I took part in that debate. Although I expressed disappointment—along with many others—at the lack of substance in that strategy, I welcomed the strategy document's reflection of culture as part of the education portfolio. Strategic objective 3, which Mike Russell talked about, obviously promoted culture as part of education. Section 5 acknowledged that education and culture are inextricably linked and expressed a wish to extend young people's opportunities to learn musical instruments within and outwith the school setting. I am not convinced that we have moved much further forward than merely wishing on the issue of instrument tuition. The Executive has now pledged to work with education authorities to maximise opportunities for instrument tuition in schools and make it free for those who are unable to pay. The minister has spoken about the guidance leaflet and about the pilot projects that will include music, I assume.

Not yet, thank you. However, it is still the case that half of our local authorities charge for instrument tuition. The charges vary widely, from £50 a year to £249 a year. The spending proposals included a new commitment to support music tuition for children, to widen access and to improve their quality of life. Today the minister has spoken about a review and a group that has been set up. Will one of the ministers expand later on whether they are considering funding for free music tuition throughout the schools in our country to complement the work of the cultural co-ordinators? Will the minister also confirm that Scottish traditional music, including voice, dance and storytelling, is being seen as part of the strategy in schools? That cannot be confirmed often enough in my opinion. When reading today's motion, I was struck by the lack of substance, as I was when I read the national cultural strategy. That is reflected by the fact that the motion was so easily accepted by my knowledgeable and learned colleague on my left, Mike Russell. I was also struck by the realisation that we have an Executive that seems to have a terrible need for self-validation; we have a Government that needs constant reassurance about its worth.  We have a motion with which it is hard to disagree, but it evokes a sense of disappointment and frustration all the same. No real debate has been invited. Let us take a look at the motion. Education is good. Yes, we all agree with that. Participation in cultural activities is good. We all agree on that. We agree that cultural activities make a valuable contribution to educational attainment. Scotland has a rich and vibrant culture; we all know that. There is lots of agreement, but we need evidence of the Executive's commitment to increasing the opportunities for all young people to take action to engage with Scotland's rich and vibrant culture.

I thank Cathie Craigie, because she has moved me on nicely to the next part of my speech. Evidence exists that participation is wanted. It exists outwith the Government and outwith the Parliament. It is in the area of North Lanarkshire Council, which is doing an excellent job, and it is in South Lanarkshire. It is in the schools and community projects that are already providing cultural education, but with limited resources. It is in the amount of cultural events that take place in our communities. It is in the increasing number of authors who are writing poetry and prose in their traditional languages. Young writers such as Matthew Fitt and Scott Borthwick are joining the ranks of well-established writers who use Scots—for example, Janet Paisley, who has been plugging away for years. Last night, at a Napier University reception, there was a lively conversation about writers' and artists' increased use of their traditional culture. We have to maximise that and promote it. Although we support Brian Monteith's amendment, I cannot let pass his statement that we should take cultural funding away from local authorities. Cathie Craigie mentioned the good work that some local authorities are doing. I am sure that, given the appropriate funding, local authorities will be glad to employ sufficient people to take the message forward.

In his speech, John McAllion stated that the finest moment of the Scottish Parliament so far was the vote to abolish poindings and warrant sales. I agree totally; that vote was the most important event in the Parliament to date and I often say so when asked. The vote led to the setting up of the working group on a replacement for poinding and warrant sales. The result of its work is the  introduction today of the Debt Arrangement and Attachment (Scotland) Bill. As a member of the Social Justice Committee, I have to say that I had unavoidably to miss some of the meetings at which the bill was debated and evidence taken. However, I have studied carefully the evidence, the committee's report and the Official Report . The issue is one about which I care deeply; over the years I have witnessed the actuality and the effects of debt, including the effect of poindings and warrant sales. Most of the contributors to the debate noted that the bill has two main parts. Although members said that the debt arrangement scheme is worthy and long overdue, many expressed concerns. Those are summarised best by Citizens Advice Scotland, which highlighted the sort of scenarios that citizens advice bureaux workers and volunteers encounter regularly. The scenarios include debtors who can repay but whose repayments are less than the interest accruing, debtors who can pay but whose repayments are only marginally more than the interest accruing, debtors whose creditors will not agree to composition of debts and—far too common—debtors in high levels of multiple debt. Citizens Advice Scotland also highlighted the horrendous situation of debtors in multiple debt whose debt repayment would take longer than the lifespan of the debt arrangement scheme. My colleague Kenneth Gibson alluded to that. I am very pleased that the Social Justice Committee took on board and reported much of the advice that it was given by those at the coalface. The committee has considered how to make the debt arrangement scheme a better scheme. I am heartened by the minister's commitment to taking a broad-based approach to that subject and by her recognition that further consultation is required. I foresee copious amendments at stage 2 to allow the part of the bill that deals with the debt arrangement scheme to serve better the needs of those at whom it is aimed. One contentious aspect of the debt arrangement scheme is the need for money and debt advice to be independent. That was outlined eloquently by Robert Brown, who declared his interest in the Rutherglen and Cambuslang citizens advice bureau. We are talking about an area in which perception can be as important as reality. Earlier this week, I spoke to representatives of the East Kilbride citizens advice bureau, who told me that their clients tell them repeatedly that the CAB's independent stance is crucial to those who seek advice. It is not surprising that the contentious part of the bill has been the main issue of debate today. I listened carefully to the debate. What I heard reinforces what was at first a gut feeling that the  bill does not replace warrant sales—poindings, yes but not warrant sales. However, the will of the Parliament was to abolish both poindings and warrant sales and I am greatly concerned that the will of the Parliament is not being followed.

I am not the best person to answer that question; neither Kenny Gibson nor I had the social justice portfolio at the time. The matter has dragged on for a long time. I suggest that Helen Eadie ask Christine Grahame that question.

I did not realise that I was so popular.

I did not think that I was going to be a referee when I stood up. [ Interruption. ]

I have no doubt whatever in my mind—

I might do so soon. I have absolutely no doubt that the Minister for Social Justice, Margaret Curran, my coalition colleagues in the Social Justice Committee and most MSPs wish to do the right thing. However, I also have absolutely no doubt that they are misguided if they believe that they are abolishing warrant sales. Christine Grahame's absolute logic proves that point. I suggest to Richard Simpson that, before he tries to take on Christine Grahame again, he read the bill and make sure of his facts.

No, thanks.  We have heard much about the need to differentiate between those who cannot pay and those who will not pay. However, under the bill, those who cannot pay might still suffer warrant sales—that archaic form of debt collection. We have heard many fine words about the need for a last resort. In theory, a last resort is an absolutely wonderful idea, but eviction from one's home is seen as a last resort for those who owe rent and it is a fact that some landlords use the threat of eviction to control rent arrears. Although warrant sales are supposed to be a last resort, some councils use the summary warrant procedure as a tactic to scare and harass people in order to collect council tax arrears. It is nonsense to say that there are no alternatives to warrant sales. Many members have suggested such alternatives today, and many others have discounted them.

As I have said, the issue is not poindings and warrant sales; we have done away with poindings, but we still have warrant sales, as Christine Grahame clearly pointed out. The paragraph of the report to which Johann Lamont refers mentions "poindings and warrant sales".

Johann Lamont said that she, as the convener of the Social Justice Committee, would not get all wound up, but that is clearly what has happened. Although I was unable to do so, my colleagues sat and listened to the evidence that was given. I have read that evidence. We are not replacing poindings and warrant sales; although we are doing away with poindings, warrant sales still exist. After reading the evidence over and over again and listening to many people, I feel strongly that warrant sales will still be used.  Although we welcome the debt arrangement scheme, we do not welcome the introduction of exceptional attachment orders. The minister mentioned that, in relation to the proposals, a witness had used the phrase "a rose by any other name".—[ Official Report , Social Justice Committee , 12 June 2002; c 3014.] I suggest that warrant sales by any other name would smell as vile. I should also add that I am very saddened by this morning's ruling that no deletions—only amendments—to the bill will be allowed at stage 2. The SNP will attempt radically to amend the bill's exceptional attachment provisions, because if we do not, we will be unable to reflect the Parliament's will in a way that protects as much as possible the poorest and most vulnerable people in our society.

I was glad to hear the minister mention at last the sexual health strategy. When will it be published and when will it be implemented?

I speak as a regional MSP who also covers Karen Whitefield's area. I have not yet visited the scheme that was mentioned, but I am going to—and I am not going to tell her when, because I do not have to. The SNP believes that no one in Scotland should suffer from fuel poverty. Everyone would agree with that. However, as we have heard from Lloyd Quinan, Tricia Marwick and Alex Neil, we generate so much fuel energy that warm housing should not be dependent on wealth. It should be a basic human right in our energy-rich nation. Low incomes and low benefits are given as the first major factor in causing fuel poverty. The Executive has acknowledged that in its statement. However, the Scottish Parliament does not have the power to alter benefit rates, nor do we have sufficient power over the economy to create the conditions for improving income rates. Fuel costs are given as the second major factor but, as Lloyd said, we do not have the power to regulate fuel prices.

No. I am not Fiona, so I certainly will not. Phil is always on the ball—up to date with everything. In the absence of the ability to use the fundamental levers to effect radical change, we have to do what we can. The SNP supports the coalition Government in its intent to eradicate fuel poverty. The SNP broadly welcomes the central heating programme and the warm deal. However, as we have heard today—from Sarah Boyack and Karen Whitefield in particular—those things in isolation are not enough to effect change. They can help only if they are part of a bigger picture. Helen Eadie will be pleased to know that building regulations now insist that socket points should be at decent heights. I am sure that that will be a huge relief to her. Energy efficiency in housing is crucial. The improvement in building regulations is a start; it is a statement of intent. I hope that we can achieve building standards and thermal efficiency in housing of a level as high as that in Scandinavia, where people do not suffer from fuel poverty and where the weather, in parts, is even colder than  ours. However, we have had that debate before. As Shelter, the Chartered Institute of Housing and the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations never tire of reminding us, without decent housing the expenditure on services for that housing—services such as central heating—will simply fly straight out of the single-glazed steel-framed window, or straight through the roof that has not been properly thermally insulated. Expenditure and innovation are required, and there are many good examples. Fyne Homes Ltd in Lochgilphead has a scheme that uses a communal heating system for a housing estate. It is fired by woodchips. That is innovation and an example of the way forward. Phil Gallie mentioned the problem of heating in rural areas where we cannot have natural gas. In Cairndow, people managed at the time—though I still do not know quite how—to get funding from Scottish Homes not only to put in wood-burning fires with back boilers, but to put in storage tanks and gas central heating as well. That gave people options in how to spend their money and heat their homes. It can be done. The cheapest housing solution is not always the best. We have to acknowledge that we have great expertise among our social housing providers and their agents—the architects. Those people are capable of providing innovative solutions to help with fuel poverty. We have to fund people to make those real improvements. We have to judge applications for social rented housing not entirely on the cost per unit. We should judge housing developments on their long-term sustainability. Let us set milestones for a decent home standard. That has been done in England. I know that there have been problems, but the intention is to have decent homes by a specific time. With such a standard, we could tie in the central heating programme, the warm deal and all the rest. We could start by improving the minimum tolerable standard, which has been in place for more than 30 years, which is ludicrous. We should be considering raising that standard. The SNP wants this statement to work. I worry that it will not, because of some of the evidence that I heard at the Social Justice Committee about the lack of skills available to carry on the central heating programme. We must constantly monitor the programme's effect, carrying out investigations as to who it is reaching and pick up all those who are being missed. We heard evidence at the Social Justice Committee that we should be frontloading the investment. It is only by frontloading the investment that we will ensure that we are not leaving to the end those who are most in need. That is important for people who do not come  forward because they do not know that they are entitled, and because we could end up with a backlog of poor housing.

It worries me that there is potential for that. I hope that that will not be the case. When new initiatives are set out it is often those in the know who come forward first—those in areas where people are going out and actively encouraging them to participate. There are still houses in this country that have stone walls, where insulation is not possible. The Deputy Presiding Officer is indicating that I should wind up, so I will, although I could talk about the subject forever. I would like some clarification about one of the process milestones, in relation to private rented sector houses, for 2006. Will that also cover obsolete heating systems and partial central heating systems in places such as East Kilbride, which was used for dummy runs in the 1960s and 1970s for all sorts of nonsense heating systems that are now obsolete? It is not even worth considering supporting the Tory amendment. I often feel that the Conservative party has a set amendment which rubbishes everyone else and says that the Tories are great, into which they slot the appropriate debate. They do not bother to prepare for the debate—they just come in and spout the usual old rubbish. However, the SNP amendment is marvellous and I urge members to support it.

Does Mr Brown agree that the shortage of skilled fitters, which affects many trades in Scotland, is more of a legacy of the Tory years than anything that Bill Aitken mentioned earlier?

I apologise to Karen Gillon for not signing her motion. That is not because I do not fully agree with the motion; it is because I pressed the wrong button on my computer. It is probably just as well that I do not work in the emergency services. I am sorry that Paul Martin has left. I did not want to intervene during his speech, but I cannot let some of his remarks pass. Criminal behaviour is criminal behaviour and it is up to the police to deal with it. It is not up to housing officers or voluntary members of management committees to deal with such behaviour and we should never change that. In general, I agree with what members have said, but I add that we cannot over-emphasise the importance of our emergency services. Margo MacDonald is absolutely right. The issue concerns attitude change. There should be respect towards those who work in our emergency services and attitude change should be promoted through every layer of society. Respect must start from the top. It must start from the Government and those who are in power in countries that employ emergency services. The worth of workers in emergency services must be reflected in working conditions. Such conditions include pay—Margo MacDonald and Angus MacKay have spoken about that—but they also include the health and safety of workers and the conditions under which they work. We should ensure that they have up-to-date equipment with which to work. Some firefighters have said that the uniforms and equipment that they use are not as state of the art and up to date as they should be. We should consider resources. I want to discuss the ambulance service in the area that Karen Gillon and I represent. Through parliamentary questions that have been lodged,  she will know about the state of the ambulance service in Lanarkshire. In East Kilbride, almost half of the shifts are not covered and single crews go out to emergency calls. What kind of working conditions are those, given that there are attacks on emergency staff? Single ambulance men are sent out to deal with emergency calls. We must deal with that issue. For the Executive to say that that is the Scottish Ambulance Service's problem is not good enough. We must respect our fire, ambulance and police emergency services. Society must be shown that they are respected through Governments' taking some responsibility. I hope that the minister will deal with that in winding-up.

On Tuesday night, I rushed home from a social occasion because I was so looking forward to reading "Better Communities in Scotland: closing the gap".

I was sadly disappointed. I cannot improve on Kenny Gibson's critique of the document, although I disagree on one point. I found one phrase that had an absolute ring of truth. On page 8, paragraph 15 says: "We must also be smarter". That is straight from the horse's mouth.

Never mind. I know that it takes Labour members a long while to get such things. The minister churned out the statistics on poverty and we heard Helen Eadie rehearse some local ones. We know the statistics—we hear them over and over again in the chamber. However, some people are living those statistics every day of their lives and nothing has changed for them since 1999 or 1997. The statistics remain the same. Indeed, child poverty is up 1 per cent from last year. However, the minister is still talking about the development of a strategic approach. As Lyndsay McIntosh said, there are no aims, targets or time scales in the document. SIPs were introduced in 1999. In her speech, the minister assured us that SIPs would not be the only model to be used under the new strategy. That is just as well, as only five out of 50 SIPs—or 10 per cent—did not underspend over the past two years. All over the country, there are examples of SIPs that underspent their budgets. Dundee Xplore underspent by 46 per cent, Glasgow Smaller Area SIP underspent by 99 per cent, Moray Youthstart underspent by 77 per cent and West Lothian SIP underspent by 66.9 per cent.

I did not ask for a speech; I allowed the minister an invention. It is clear from the fact that SIPs have underspent so badly that the minister does not understand how communities work. The minister is changing the parameters and the monitoring of partnerships. She is doing so because she now realises that she did not set up the system properly in the first place. Andrew Welsh raised the issue of poor housing. Shelter sent us a briefing, setting out its view of the Executive's glossy document. Shelter rightly says: "There is insufficient focus on housing in this statement." It went on to ask how "regeneration can occur without a focus on the provision of decent, good quality housing". On Tuesday night when I was at home, I also read an article in Inside Housing magazine, which explained the enigma of why housing is not a central part of the regeneration strategy and why the housing improvement task force is still to produce its second report. The report is due fairly soon but, as the magazine reported, Ms Curran cites the work of the task force, which she chairs, as "the big issue" between now and the election. The article notes: "Ms Curran is enthusiastic about its work and says that the recommendations it is due to make next spring will form part of Labour's manifesto commitments at the next election."

We are talking about a Scottish Executive task force, not a Labour party focus group. We are talking about politicisation of the worst kind. I do not know the politics of the members of the housing improvement task force, but can the minister tell me whether John Spencely, Robert Rennie, Martyn Evans, Allan Ferguson—

Those people think that they are part of a Scottish Executive task force, but would they be happy to be on a Labour party manifesto think-tank?

The recommendations—

I close by repeating the quotation: "Ms Curran is enthusiastic ... the recommendations it is due to make next spring will form part of Labour's manifesto commitments at the next election."

Does Murdo Fraser believe that we cannot have diversity in a state-funded school system?

I was hiding behind the lectern. During Brian Monteith's speech I was struck by the way in which the Tories always do down our education system and what happens in Scotland. Brian spoke about the OECD report on educational performance, to which the minister also referred. Recently I attended a meeting in Falkirk, to which educational specialists from one of the German Länder had come because they were so impressed by what they had read about the Scottish education system, backed up by the OECD report. It is not helpful for us to be negative all the time about what we are achieving and will continue to achieve in this country. The Tory motion avers "that schools should be given the flexibility to organise learning in the ways that best meet the needs of their pupils". That is a fine sentiment, with which no member would publicly disagree. As Colin Campbell said, such flexibility is nothing new—it has always existed. The breadth of learning that pupils achieve through both the school and the university degree system has always been a huge strength of our education system. Although flexibility in the organisation of learning may be an admirable aim, it may not always be achievable; in some cases, it may be impossible. Schools are still struggling to surface from the sea of bureaucracy that the Tories created during their  years in Government. I worry about the fact that schools now have to wade their way through league tables and the targets that the Executive is setting. Such burdens may stymie the innovation that has always been a strength of our education system. Today we have heard a great deal about class sizes being cut. However, I am not convinced that cutting class sizes by creating composite classes is the answer to our problems. I have heard practitioners argue both for and against composite classes, but most of them take the view that composite classes are not ideal.

What a choice. I am afraid that Alex Johnstone beat Cathy Peattie to it.

Alex Johnstone should have delayed his intervention, because I was about to say that there are settings—small schools—in which composite classes have worked very well over the years. Alasdair Morgan made that point in his speech. My concern is very different and relates to schools in large conurbations, where composite classes have been introduced purely to achieve a cut in classroom sizes. I am not aware that any research has been carried out into composite classes. I hope that the minister can tell me that research has been commissioned. Currently, we have only views from across the board. We must know more about composite classes if that is the way our education system is going. Teachers in South Lanarkshire are extremely worried about the situation. I am sure that that is reflected in all members' constituencies. The state of school buildings is a long-standing problem that we all know about. I am not convinced that the Labour solution of PFI/PPP—originally a Tory solution—is the right one. It means selling out the future of our public services. When today's schoolchildren are adults, they will still be paying the mortgage on the schools in which they are educated now. That is not an ideal situation. I am pleased that some councils are considering the SNP's public service trust model, an idea that was introduced a few years ago. When I asked the Minister for Finance and Public Services if the Scottish Executive had ever considered the public service trust model, he said, "No". Local Labour- run councils appear to be more innovative than our Labour Scottish Executive. Colin Campbell said that education should be regarded as a right. The SNP believes that absolutely. I worry that for too long education in Scotland has been considered an expense rather than an investment in the future of our country. We hear pearls of wisdom about how Scotland must be at the cutting edge of the information economy. I wonder if there is anybody in power with the guts to make the investment to make that happen. I want to see it happen and I hope that things will look and sound different in the future. I ask members to throw out the Tory motion because it is pretty awful.

The Tory motion will be thrown out by acceptance of the SNP amendment, which makes it clear that the future of our education system lies in the public service trust finance model and not in private finance.

Like all the previous speakers, I have been lobbied hard by local groups, such as the Newhouse Residents Association and the East Kilbride crime prevention panel—which was quite vociferous on the issue—on the sale of fireworks. Sale of fireworks is a big issue for individuals and groups. It is not just about high spirits, misguided youngsters and incidents that take place around bonfire night. Shona Robison alluded to the fact that fireworks can also be used in a deliberate and sustained campaign of intimidation and for other extremely offensive purposes. As Paul Martin said, if fireworks are used properly in appropriate displays, most people can enjoy them. I received a letter from Councillor Diane Williamson of Falkirk Council, who put it better than I could: "No one wants to be a killjoy or put obstacles in the way  of local firework displays that are organised and supervised. What we need to target is fireworks getting into the hands of irresponsible individuals who glory in creating mayhem and misery for others, usually those who are unable to fight back." That is the particularly sad aspect of the problem—those who are targeted are generally "unable to fight back." We must consider what we in Scotland can do to help to solve the problem. We cannot ban the public sale of fireworks, because that is a reserved matter, although there is a view that we should lobby Westminster for such powers. We cannot wait for Westminster to act. Two private member's bills are going through Westminster but, because of timing, they are unlikely to come to fruition. However, we can take the action that is suggested in Shona Robison's motion; we can review the powers that are available to local authorities in respect of vendor licensing. I do not accept the Scottish Retail Consortium's view that the current powers of enforcement are sufficient and merely require better policing. It is absolutely ridiculous that a premises licence costs only £12 per annum. It is also ridiculous that councils cannot refuse to issue a certificate and, as Shona Robison said, are generally powerless to act in cases of overstocking. Overstocking can create a huge problem, although this country has not experienced anything as serious as what has been experienced in other countries. In Peru for example, which I visited last year, special shops are set up for people who make and sell fireworks that are used in a big celebration in Peru. Just after I came back, one of those shops blew up. Hundreds of people in down-town central Lima were killed or injured simply because fireworks are totally unregulated. That is an example of what can happen when things go badly wrong. In conclusion, fireworks are a public safety issue, which the Parliament can address in some measure. I ask the minister to consider seriously the terms of Shona Robison's motion.

I am glad that I came back into the chamber and discovered your error.

So is Mary Scanlon. Everything that has been said has been consensual. All members present welcome the acknowledgement that we must have a strategy for cancer treatment and that that strategy must be implemented and monitored. However, I ask the minister to reconsider the SNP amendment. Although we all agree broadly with the Executive motion and we know what must be done, a bit of vision is lacking. I believe that Nicola Sturgeon's amendment provides something towards a vision for the Scottish cancer strategy. The results of the CSBS's investigations highlight very clearly the lack of staff and the worries about getting specialist staff to work in our cancer services. They mention the few specialist nurses and the varying levels of access to specialist nurses depending on geography and circumstance. The CSBS has great concern about the staffing of cancer services throughout Scotland. Although it is admirable that we are all pulling together on the matter and that we want to make a big difference through the cancer strategy, we must be realistic. We must consider what resources we have and what we must do to encourage people to enter the service so that it can be fully staffed. I urge members to consider the tone of the SNP amendment and to accept it in the constructive manner in which it is intended. A couple of members have mentioned Margaret Ewing today. Fergus Ewing said to me that cancer services are obviously now close to his and his family's heart. He asked me to say that his family's experience—and that of anyone to whom he has spoken—is that, when someone ends up being treated for cancer, they are full of praise for the service that they are given and the great treatment that they are given by all who are involved in hospitals. That applies not only to the doctors and nurses, but also the ancillary staff, who look after them very well. We should aim for that experience for every cancer patient in Scotland. Bringing waiting times down also means that we require more staff in such specialist services. I ask members to think seriously about  supporting the SNP amendment.

Will the minister explain how she can hope to deliver social inclusion when the budgets for social inclusion partnerships have been underspent by a total of £9.6 million over the past two years, including over £1 million in the minister's constituency? Will the minister guarantee that that underspend will, in addition to this year's budget, be used for deprived communities and not recycled for ministerial announcements elsewhere?

Is the First Minister aware that even a quick glance at social inclusion partnership expenditure for youth projects shows an underspend of more than £0.5 million over the first two years of their operation? In Moray alone, SIPs have underspent by 77 per cent of the budget. Will the First Minister guarantee—unlike the Minister for Social Justice, who merely fudged about flexibility—that the £9.6 million underspend on SIPs will be spent on deprived areas, rather than being shifted into other budgets for new announcements?

Will the minister give way?

What the minister says is fine and logical in relation to a major contractor that is dealing with a client for a major project or a one-to-one contractor that is dealing with one client. However, when big contractors use lots of sub-contractors, they can—as Brian Fitzpatrick said—use the retentions system as an ingenious way of avoiding paying for many years. The arbitration system can be spun out, which permits that to happen. We must find a way of protecting the small trader against the big boy in the trade.

I thank Marilyn Livingstone for securing a members' business debate on the construction industry. Her final statement was right—a root-and-branch review of the construction industry in Scotland is needed. In July 1998, before the establishment of the Parliament, the Egan report was published. That  report, which was commissioned by the Department of the Environment, Transport and the Regions, was entitled "Rethinking Construction". It contained many good ideas and recommended some positive ways forward for the industry. It also considered radical ways of thinking, some of which merited further discussion. The Egan report identified five key drivers of change to set the agenda for the construction industry at large: committed leadership; a focus on the customer; integrated processes and teams; a quality-driven agenda; and a commitment to people. Those drivers reflect everything that Marilyn Livingstone noted in her motion and spoke about. In the report's summary, its authors emphasised: "we are not inviting UK construction to look at what it does already and do it better: we are asking the industry and Government to join with major clients to do it entirely differently." They proposed "a radical change in the way we build" in this country and they wanted progress to be made on their aims within five years. It is almost five years since the report was published and there does not appear to have been any change at all. A further consultation paper has been produced by a committee that is chaired by Sir John Egan—the strategic forum for construction. That paper builds on "Rethinking Construction" and looks at how change can be accelerated. I was pleased to see that the consultation paper noted another report—the Laing report—which I am sure is close to Robin Harper's heart, as it deals with sustainable construction. The Laing report emphasises "the importance of whole life performance in securing enduring value through productivity in use." The consultation, which is due to be completed by 31 May, has taken that on board. I have a general interest in construction, and in November last year I asked the Scottish Parliament information centre to find out how the Scottish Executive was developing its thinking in relation to the recommendations that the Egan report made. I was happy to learn that the Executive was considering the Egan report and the promotion of the Egan agenda within Scotland. The Executive approved funding to cover the salary and secondment costs for a co-ordinator for the pulling together in Scotland campaign. The Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors in Scotland was pleased to publish details of the campaign as a way forward for construction in Scotland. Marilyn Livingstone mentioned the rethinking  construction centres that have been opened in Northern Ireland and Wales. I did a massive search for similar initiatives in Scotland. I even asked SPICe to find out what was happening in that regard. We could not find anything. Has the co-ordinator been appointed? What is happening about the pulling together in Scotland campaign? What is happening in relation to "Rethinking Construction"? Even a website would enable ideas to be pooled and the issue to be progressed. I ask the minister to let us know whether the Executive intends to embrace any of the Egan principles and to tell us what is happening about the project into which the Executive put money six months ago. We have heard nothing further about it.

I was going to congratulate Margaret Curran on her ministerial elevation, but she is not here. I congratulate Hugh Henry and welcome him to the social justice portfolio. I do not know whether he has been elevated or if the move is a side step. This is the fourth social justice team, so I wish him the best of luck. As a member of the Social Justice Committee, I am pleased to have contributed to the report on the voluntary sector. Today, however, I am speaking on behalf of the SNP. I want to pick up on something that Johann Lamont said, which is crucial to an understanding of the voluntary sector. She spoke about the diversity of the voluntary sector. There are too many perceptions about what the voluntary sector is. People can volunteer for an hour or two every week and do a variety of tasks, but there are also businesses that are run by voluntary committee members, which are also part of the voluntary sector. Being voluntary does not mean being amateur—it means being professional and  providing a good service. Last night, I visited an after-school care project in Blacklaw. For 10 years, the project has been run entirely voluntarily by local people who act as employers and employ staff. The project has been totally self-funded. It should always be borne in mind that the voluntary sector is a professional part of our social economy. Like colleagues, I received the Scottish Executive's response to the committee's report quite late last night. As the First Minister said, personalities go, but the work carries on. It is unfortunate if the unexpected departure of a minister prevented the earlier distribution of the response, which is important. I note that it took a full two months for the Executive, with all its resources, to respond to the committee's report. Ministers should reflect on the fact that voluntary organisations that have more limited resources must respond to many Executive consultations in two months or less. Johann Lamont said that some of the respondents to the inquiry spoke about consultation fatigue and I think that that question has to be considered. The Scottish National Party is supportive of the report, the findings of which are broadly in line with what our members have been hearing from volunteers and voluntary organisations for some years. As someone who has spent most of her working life employed in the voluntary sector and working with volunteers, I can see from the report that many of the issues have not changed in the past five, 10 or even 15 years. I do not have time to cover the full range of issues highlighted in the report but, of course, there are key issues of concern to which I would like to draw attention. The first is the biggy: funding. The distribution of Scottish Executive funds is a major issue for the voluntary sector. Particular concern was expressed about the lack of core funding and continuing funding for successful projects and also about the fact that there is little recognition of the difficulties that are faced by small organisations when the expected funding does not appear. Despite the supportive words in the Executive's response, all the evidence suggests that the situation will continue to be business as usual. Voluntary organisations have experienced yet another delay in their funding this year. I ask the minister to explain why the decisions on section 9 and section 10 grants did not go out until after the beginning of this financial year and urge him to try to understand the effect that uncertainty of funding has on voluntary organisations. It results in worry for and pressure on the volunteers and the service users.

I accept the point that Robert Brown is making and I will deal with that element later. However, I point out that good examples and best practice have to come from the top. Uncertainty in funding can lead to demoralised, overworked and frustrated employees. It is horrifying that many of those who work in the voluntary sector receive redundancy notices as a matter of routine. We heard about that in evidence that was given to the committee. Given that the Executive has an annual underspend of more than double the total funding that it gives to the voluntary sector, surely we can rectify the situation. The evidence of the voluntary sector is that, even when the Executive wants to give away money, it cannot always do so. Would the minister please do what is now commonly known as a McConnell and pledge that this will never happen again? Voluntary groups should be told before the beginning of the year how much money they will receive and should be able to rely on that money arriving on time. I found the Executive's response on the mainstreaming of voluntary issues a bit disappointing. I note that the Executive is "committed to promoting and mainstreaming voluntary sector issues" but what has been achieved? The response talks about working groups, review groups, an issues unit and a management board—and let us not forget that there is a leaflet that is updated annually. It seems that voluntary issues are no more mainstream now than they were in the Scottish Office. That has to be considered carefully. If the minister wants evidence that nothing has changed, he need look only at the Executive's response to recommendation 6. The committee said that voluntary groups should not have to reinvent themselves to secure funding, as the convener of the committee and Keith Raffan said earlier this morning. The Executive responds to that point by immediately reinforcing the issue of innovation. It is that concentration on innovation in Scottish Executive funding that forces groups to reinvent themselves. We have to stop talking about innovation and start talking about best practice. Voluntary groups do some things better than the state does. They should be encouraged with consistent funding and a well-developed national and local infrastructure. The evidence is that voluntary organisations innovate because they are responsive to local and individual problems rather than because the public purse  dangles a carrot in front of them. Local authorities now have three-year rolling budgets, so there should be no difficulty in providing a similar arrangement for the funding that local authorities provide to voluntary organisations. I am glad to see that the Executive says in its response that it has accepted that, and I am sure that we can look forward to local authorities providing that peace of mind. As Robert Brown pointed out, voluntary organisations are funded by other sources, such as health boards, too. Recently, with regard to money from the Community Fund, many voluntary organisations have told me about the difficulties that exist in relation to the innovation that is required to secure those funds, too. I have also heard about the difficulty of getting information when grant applications are turned down. The Community Fund appears to say simply that a project has run its course, is no longer innovative and will receive no more funding. In East Kilbride, a wonderful project for adults with severe learning difficulties had to close its doors because it could get no more funding from the Community Fund. The galling part of that is that the Community Fund has not told the group why that happened. The letter that was sent to the group said something like, "There is no point in your contacting us because we do not have to tell you why we are turning down your further application." I ask the minister to examine some of those problems.

Mr Raffan is right. We need to find ways to cut the bureaucracy. We also need to cut out a lot of the buzz phrases. We can talk about community planning and partnership working, but we need to focus our efforts on the people who are getting the service and providing the service and take it from there. How can the needs of those groups best be serviced? Before leaving the issue of local infrastructure, I want to comment on social inclusion partnerships. Increasingly, those bodies should be a source of joined-up delivery of support to the voluntary sector at a local level. It is important, therefore, that their decision making is transparent and can stand scrutiny. I have asked a series of questions recently on SIPs and it appears that there is still much to do in relation to establishing those bodies. For example, there was no requirement for a register of interest for members of SIP boards  before April this year. Having the register is a step forward, but there are still no sanctions for use against anyone who conceals an interest. The burden for keeping the registers has fallen on local authorities, who are obliged to ensure that all members declare any relevant interest. It is disappointing that the Executive's response to recommendation 8 fails to address the issue of regulation. To be effective, regulation must be transparent, consistent and backed up by sanctions. SIPs are perceived in different ways by different people and we have all heard anecdotal evidence about them. However, a perception that patronage exists or that there is a lack of accountability is almost as important as the problems themselves, whether they exist or not, because it puts people off and stops people benefiting from the project. The Social Justice Committee is considering examining SIPs more closely. I would welcome that and I would also welcome the Executive more closely examining the issue of the regulation of SIPs so that everyone can be confident that they are providing what they should be. Johann Lamont mentioned the final issue that I want to touch on, which is the importance to the voluntary sector of the review of charity law. In 1999, when this Parliament was in its infancy, Wendy Alexander, who was Minister for Communities at the time, promised a reform of charity law in Scotland, which was welcomed across the chamber. She set up the McFadden commission, which reported a year ago. We now know that the commission rushed out its report unnecessarily and that nothing will happen, it would seem, until after the next election. Jean McFadden was clearly disappointed at the lack of action and was reported in Third Force News as saying: "If we had known that nothing was going to happen the commission could have had an extra few months putting more details on to some of the recommendations." She went on to say: "I spoke to ... Jim Wallace and told him of my concerns ... He said there were certain aspects of the recommendations which were 'controversial' and needed more discussion." If the McFadden commission had not been forced to rush out its report, perhaps that controversy would not exist. I am reliably informed that work on the promised review of the social economy has not moved forward since Jackie Baillie's time in the social justice ejector seat, which seems a long time ago. It is a bit worrying that the minister who now has responsibility for the Executive's economic strategy showed so little interest in economic development in his previous role.  Members have been waiting for me to use the I-word: independence. My party and I believe that it will take independence for Scotland to have real control over its economy, social or otherwise. The key instruments for economic development in Scotland rest in London. However, it is clear that the voluntary sector has a key role to play in local economic development. I ask the minister to give us a commitment to put the review of the social economy back on track—or is the review another of Wendy Alexander's ideas that seems to have fallen by the wayside? In conclusion—I am really coming to a conclusion this time—while we debate reports and responses, we must remember the importance of the voluntary sector to all Scotland's communities, both urban and rural. Each has particular problems, as Mike Rumbles pointed out, such as isolation. It is all very well to talk about population numbers and the level of poverty in one place in comparison with another, but for the individual who lives in poverty, it does not matter how many more people live in poverty around them. We must carefully consider how we deal with the voluntary sector in rural areas, which have their own problems with infrastructure. For example, transport is a basic need, with which the geographic SIPs can help. Overall, the voluntary sector provides services that are locally controlled and that focus more clearly on the needs of individual service users and volunteers. The sector is more responsive than remote, bureaucratic organisations and is an important source of community leadership. I thank all the volunteers and workers from the voluntary sector who took time to correspond with and meet the Social Justice Committee. They contributed greatly to the development of the committee's thinking. I ask the new ministerial team to consider more fully how to respond to the Social Justice Committee's report and to commit the Executive to taking action more rapidly than it has done to date. The SNP supports the committee's motion, which says that we should note the report, but I ask the minister to take notice of the report.

We talk a lot about sustainability. We talk about sustainable economies and sustainable communities. Jamie McGrigor talked about sustainable Gaelic and someone earlier mentioned sustainable Scotland. This is the third Executive debate on sustainable development in which I have spoken. It is ironic that every time there is a Cabinet reshuffle, we have a debate on sustainability. Let us consider what sustainability means. The accepted phrase comes from the Brundtland report's definition:  "development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs." It is up to us to ensure that future generations of Scots—whether they are lucky enough to be born here or sensible enough to move here—remain fit and healthy. To do that, we must first ensure that Scotland's houses are fit for Scotland's people to live in. That means that there must be dry, warm houses; therefore, we have to end fuel poverty. After three years of government in a devolved Parliament and the passage of the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001, in which many of us tried to push for a definition of fuel poverty, the Scottish fuel poverty statement is still out to consultation. Despite promises two years ago from the then Minister for Transport and the Environment—promises which I believe were absolutely sincere—we are still consulting on the building regulations that relate to conservation of fuel and power. Furthermore, despite much lobbying from those in the know, the Executive has unfortunately shown no real willingness to make progress on the energy auditing of properties. At this point, I would have expected Margaret Curran—or perhaps Hugh Henry in his new role—to jump up and down and shout about the central heating programme, but neither of them is in the chamber. However, it will take three years to get round to fitting radiators in properties where the elderly reside. We await with interest the further roll-out of the scheme to other sections of society and properties that have partial, obsolete or inefficient systems. We also need to recognise that central heating alone does not solve fuel poverty. To achieve the sustainability that we all talk about, we need innovative approaches and close working between the housing improvement task force and the fuel poverty action group. Moreover, we must recognise that, if we are to achieve the 15-year target, the interim targets will have to be front-loaded. Energy efficiency targets should also be introduced not only to measure progress on the main responsibility of fuel poverty but to deliver on wider issues that are relevant to the Kyoto protocol and the energy review. In order to achieve such targets, we must identify continuing resources for improvements in energy efficiency. We must have joined-up policies across portfolios and incorporate fuel poverty into the wider poverty agenda and into all relevant areas such as health, building regulations, the environment and education. Given that no target has been set for the home life indicator in "Meeting the Needs", an obvious first step would be to include fuel poverty in the social justice indicators.  We must be in the driving seat in delivering the promises which the Parliament's very existence makes to the people whom we were elected to serve. We should realise the vision of a socially just, forward-looking and economically advancing Scotland.

I am sorry. I am in my last minute. Insulating Scotland's houses, installing efficient heating systems and lifting Scots out of poverty are not an expense, but an investment. We can have a better Scotland under devolution, but the best Scotland can be achieved only by breaking the chains that bind us to the past. We cannot have true sustainable development without the powers to control the economy and the welfare system. The Gaia principle on which the Rio declaration was based demands that we take responsibility for our actions. It is about time that Scotland did just that. By supporting Bruce Crawford's amendment, we are at least one step along that route.

I will be brief. I thank Cathy Peattie for securing this debate. The issue of international workers memorial day that she has raised is certainly worthy of discussion. When Cathy mentioned that more than a million workers throughout the world die every year, I began to wonder whether there are any physical memorials for those who die at work in the same way as there are war memorials for those who die in battle. We must also consider the struggle that workers face in some parts of the world. Most of my own work on that subject has centred on south and central American countries, where people on the fruit plantations work in horrendous conditions. In Guatemala and Puerto Rico, even as we speak, workers are being persecuted for seeking better working conditions or for trying to prevent the use of certain insecticides that cause birth deformities and lower life expectancy. Trade unions exist in those countries and they are trying very hard to improve the rights of workers. MSPs have met a few of the folk involved in that work. I particularly remember Gilberth Bermudez, who has visited the country a few times to talk to parliamentarians and trade unions. At the moment, Gilberth is in hiding in Latin America. His life is in danger because he is trying to organise workers and to secure a better deal for them.  Moreover, about a year and a half ago, another trade union activist called Doris Calvo spoke to the SNP conference. Doris was attacked on her way to the airport to catch her flight to the United Kingdom. Her passport was stolen, obviously with the intention that she would be prevented from leaving the country. The awful thing is that the multinational corporations—the everyday names that the whole world has heard of—allow these acts to be perpetrated. I am talking about companies such as Del Monte and Dole. We see Del Monte's produce on the shelves everywhere we go and those terribly jolly adverts in which the man from Del Monte says yes. In actual fact, the man from Del Monte says no. He says no to trade union and workers' rights and safety legislation in the fruit plantations that the company deals with. I pay tribute to the volunteers and workers of the World Development Movement, which constantly tries to raise such issues on behalf of international workers. I also pay tribute to our own trade unions, which lobby very hard on the behalf of those workers and form strong partnerships with other trade unions across the world, particularly those in Latin America. I again thank Cathy Peattie and apologise for having to leave as soon as I finish. I have another engagement that I must attend. Before I finish, I want to say that this day should not pass without paying tribute to those throughout the world who work in extremely adverse conditions. We must all do our best to raise awareness of their situation and to change the way of the world.

Given that the minister will not agree with Phil Gallie, will she agree that, during the passage of the Housing (Scotland) Bill, if the Executive had accepted the SNP amendments on the minimum tolerable standard, on improvement grants and on the powers of local authorities, the local authorities would now be in a far better position to improve the condition of private sector dwellings in Scotland?

I, too, would like to congratulate Ellen Leaver and Fiona McLeod, but I do not have time. I want to speak about the part of the motion that states: "the Scottish Executive should regularly monitor and report". I believe that Her Majesty's Government has commitments to children that the Scottish Executive should monitor and on which it should report the results to the Parliament. Those commitments were made when the UK Government ratified the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child in December 1991, which means that the Government should obey the law as written in that convention. Article 1 of the convention says that everyone under 18 years has the rights under the convention. Sadly, I think that the UK Government falls down on article 4, which says that Governments should make the rights available to children. The UK Government also falls down on its refusal to ratify article 22, which states that children who come into a country as refugees  should have the same rights as children who are born in that country. We can see in Scotland why the UK Government refused to ratify article 22. I refer to the fact that in a Home Office immigration removal centre in the area that I represent, which was recently reclassified without our knowledge, children are held under lock and key and behind barbed wire. That is a direct result of UK Government policy. When some of my colleagues visited that centre—Dungavel—last week, 16 children were living in the family unit. They do not go to school and are educated in-house. They must pass through locked doors to get outside to play. The Executive allows that to happen and—as far as I know—puts no pressure on its UK partners to stop the practice. We should insist to the Executive that the so-called risk of absconding does not outweigh the damage to children who are denied their freedom, and that in Scotland we should explore community reporting procedures as an alternative to locking up children. We should ensure that the Home Office does not force Scottish local authorities into a breach of their duties under the Children (Scotland) Act 1995. I am sure that Scottish local authorities and sheriffs would be most concerned about cases of children being wakened early in the morning, being removed from their place of residence and losing their access to school education and to friends that they have made. There is nothing in the Immigration Act 1971, as amended, to overrule the provisions of the Children (Scotland) Act 1995. Before the minister says that the matter is reserved, I will say that that is not good enough. Westminster MPs have tried to cloud the issue by accusing members of the cross-party parliamentary group on refugees and asylum seekers of criticising the workers at the Dungavel centre. That is not the case. The group criticised the Government's policy of locking up people who have not committed a crime and who have children. One Westminster MP, Mr Harris, said on "Newsnight" that the cross-party group on refugees and asylum seekers is no different from Westminster's all-party group on "Coronation Street". I do not believe that members of the all-party group on "Coronation Street" have ever visited children behind barbed wire. I ask that members, while feeling good about the motion—which is very worthy—remember that there are children in Scotland whom the Parliament is letting down very badly.

I must make a declaration because I own a flat in Rothesay, which is tenanted. I say to Bill Aitken that I am not an irresponsible landlord and I inform Karen Whitefield that I do not make a profit from letting my flat. It is in an area in which it is difficult to sell. I welcome the report and the SNP welcomes the report. I did not welcome the fact that Lyndsay McIntosh closed for the Conservative party. She  always throws me because she apologises for her colleagues, which takes my anger away and means that I cannot rant on about how awful I think they are.

Bill Aitken and Keith Harding were wasting the Parliament's time. It is clear that neither of them had read the report, or if they had read it, they must have done so a long time ago. Perhaps they have a short attention span and have forgotten what it said. They did not even seem to know the report's title. Bill Aitken used the opportunity to rant on about his personal prejudices and gave no thought to the content of the report. I started off with a certain sympathy for what he said about the report not containing anything that we did not already know. He is right that most of us knew what the story is but, as Frank McAveety said, the problems need to be quantified before they can be addressed. I am pleased that the problems have at last been quantified. Over the piece, successive UK Governments of both hues have simply ignored the problems in the private sector, especially the problems in the private rented sector. Far be it from me to praise my colleagues, but I am glad that we at last have a quantified report of the problems that need to be addressed. We should all work together to address those problems for the benefit of everyone. I agreed with one thing that Bill Aitken said, which was that the opening up of improvement grants in the early 1980s—and the 1970s—made a huge difference to the private sector in many cities and towns. I have a problem with the Tories' motivation in doing that but, nevertheless, the result was that many houses were improved. We should look again at the methods that were used to bring that about. The designation of housing action areas allowed a lot of grant funding to be provided for improvements to houses in such areas and wonderful improvements were made. Kenny Gibson mentioned the need for more grants. Even at my tender age, I can remember a regime under which 90 per cent grants were available for houses that were below tolerable standard in housing action areas. If we are serious about doing up our houses and making all the houses in our country fit to live in, we should look at that kind of thing again. Many of the problems apply mainly to tenemental properties. As the minister said, we have a problem because people do not understand, or will not comply with, the shared obligations that arise in relation to properties where there are, so to speak, multiple properties under the one roof. Therefore, it is a great shame  that tenement law reform has been bumped down the agenda since the Parliament came into being. On many occasions, I have asked when the Parliament will consider the issue, which was, after all, a manifesto commitment back in 1999. The answer that I have received is that we need to wait until the title conditions bill has been dealt with. We should push on with tenement law reform because it is absolutely crucial. I reiterate that the problem concerns not only tenements and cities; rural housing is also full of problems. Many of our rural properties are in an absolutely horrendous condition. Not that long ago, I worked in housing and we were still dealing with properties that had outside toilets. In this century and millennium, that is an absolute piece of nonsense. I imagine that there are still properties in rural areas which are in that condition. Although I said that we now have a quantified report, I have a problem with one thing that it contains, which is the statement that there is not necessarily a link between low incomes and poor housing conditions. Many of us know that there is in fact a link and many studies have shown that the link exists. I would like that aspect of the report to be revisited. Whenever housing associations, which have experience over the piece, have looked at which properties they should do up, the poorest-quality properties have always been inhabited by people on low incomes. Nora Radcliffe mentioned housing logbooks, which are another innovative idea that we should consider along with sellers surveys. In fact, under construction regulations that have been introduced within the past decade, developers who rehabilitate properties are already required to keep a formal logbook. Perhaps we could build on that and consider introducing the measure for people who buy properties further down the line. I want to cut to the chase now, because I feel that nobody has done so thus far. We can talk all we like about the report and say all these things and know what way we need to go but, unless we are willing to make the resources available, we will not improve the private housing stock in this country. I think it was the Chartered Institute of Housing that said in its briefing—and I agree—that while it welcomed the £10 million for new policy initiatives, the money would not eradicate the severe problems of disrepair. Housing is much more than just a matter of bricks and mortar; it affects many things in our society. We know that we could save money in the health service if everybody was in decent housing. That point was confirmed again by Professor Arbuthnott on news programmes this morning. I do not want to be too pessimistic about this  issue, because I hope very much that one of Kenny Gibson's dreams will come true in the budget today—I hope that we will leave here to find that Gordon Brown has made the sensible move of saying that housing improvement, repair and rehabilitation will not be subject to VAT. That would free up a wonderful amount of resources—so, fingers crossed. In England and Wales, there is a target to eradicate poor housing by a certain date—I cannot remember the year. We have such a target for fuel poverty, but I think that we should be imaginative and set a target for housing. We must put our money where our mouth is. Before somebody asks me, I will talk about how to pay. I was quite disappointed in what the Minister for Social Justice said this morning about the fact that, if large-scale stock transfers take place, we will have more money in the Scottish block grant because the Treasury will write off residual housing debt. Why can we not ensure that any money that is freed up in our grant is put directly into housing? The minister said that it would not be and that it would be for the Cabinet to decide how the money is spent. I ask the minister to try to convince his colleagues to consider spending on housing any money that is freed up by stock transfers. It does not seem right that we are selling council house stock and then using the money to prop up budgets elsewhere. We wanted all these issues to be discussed as part of a comprehensive housing bill. That did not happen, but we cannot lose the momentum now. I urge members to support the SNP amendment S1M-2982.1, which sets a timetable for the start of action by this Parliament, to ensure that the problems are addressed.

I will not take four minutes, Presiding Officer. Some time ago, we had a debate on the radical rising of 1820. I said at that time that I thought that it was sad that many people in our country did not know the history of the 1820 martyrs and that our history was not properly taught in schools. The same is true of our debate today. Hamish Henderson left behind a wonderful legacy, but comparatively few people in our country know about it. That is a mark of the fact that our history and culture have been largely submerged for a long time. Everyone in the Scottish Parliament should be making an effort to try to change that to some extent.  Cathy Peattie and I were on the Equal Opportunities Committee when it conducted its inquiry into Gypsy Travellers. As Cathy Peattie said, Hamish Henderson collected a lot of that culture and tradition and put it on record for us all. In a meeting of that committee, Cathy Peattie made the point strongly that it was sad that the vast majority of people in Scotland did not know about Gypsy Traveller culture and that it would be a loss to us all if no one did. "The Freedom Come All Ye" is my favourite song that has come out of our country, particularly the lines: "Broken faimlies in lands we've herriet, Will curse Scotland the Brave nae mair, nae mair". Those lines are a mark of the man's internationalism, but they are also a mark of his nationalism. I look forward to our country being independent and being a country that can match that sentiment, and becoming the kind of country that other places all over the world will look up to because of our statement of peace and freedom. I thank Hamish Henderson for encapsulating that for me in so few words.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. In the light of previous rulings, will the Presiding Officer comment on the fact that this Executive has once again handed an Executive study—"Social Focus on Women and Men 2002"—over to the press without bringing it before the Parliament. Furthermore, the Executive has embargoed the study until one minute into tomorrow morning, so that it can be published in the press tomorrow without the Opposition parties being able to comment on the Executive's continuing inability to address inequality issues.

Can the member guarantee that time scale?

I am not a member of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee or the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, both of which dealt with this bill, but I was pleasantly surprised when I read the bill, because it was good to see that ministers will now take some responsibility for the SQA. That should be welcomed by everyone. I feel strongly that one of the major factors in the problems that arose previously was the lack of willingness on the part of ministers to shoulder responsibility when the extent of the corporate denial, to which Ian Jenkins referred, eventually came to light. I hope that the sudden realisation of the duties of Government will be infectious, and that we will see a bit more of it from time to time in the chamber. Who knows, perhaps we may even hear an admission from the Government that independence is the best way for Scotland to go. I welcome the bill. I hope that in changing the structure of the SQA we can also change the culture of that organisation, to ensure that its focus is entirely on the students who are waiting for their  results. I wish to mention a group of people who were not mentioned much at the time of the trouble in the SQA. It was not just higher and standard grade students who had problems; in my constituency, many youngsters at further education colleges, who were waiting for the validation of their higher national certificates and higher national diplomas, were also traumatised by the trouble that the SQA was going through. We should remember that the SQA deals with more than just schools. I cannot remember who it was, but a member spoke about the expansion of expertise if we start on the right basis. The Education, Culture and Sport Committee will scrutinise the bill carefully at stage 2 and I am confident that various concerns that have been raised will be examined. The SQA has a long way to go to restore public confidence and credibility. Much of that work will have to be done by the SQA, but politicians from all parties will play their part in setting up the important regeneration framework. The SNP is broadly in favour of the bill—that is not in doubt—and we will support it today. Our members on the Education, Culture and Sport Committee—Irene McGugan and Mike Russell—will ensure, along with other members, that the bill is scrutinised properly and that the Executive's plans are examined. One or two issues need to be examined, and I ask the Education, Culture and Sport Committee to examine them in detail. One of those issues, which was mentioned by Alex Neil, concerns the advisory council. It looks like the advisory council will be governed largely by secondary legislation, and that concerns me. I tend to go on about secondary legislation all the time, because we end up dealing with a lot of secondary legislation from the legislation that is passed by this Parliament. I have heard it said by ministers and their advisers that that is normal. Well, what is normal? We have been here for three years, and we should determine what is normal. Let us consider having more primary legislation, because if we leave too much power in the hands of ministers with regard to secondary legislation, we must be aware that there is no guarantee that the ministers who are here today will be the ones who introduce the secondary legislation. Whom does the minister have in mind to be members of the advisory council? That is important. I assume that we are talking about people such as university and teaching profession representatives. There may be an argument for enshrining one or two such appointments in the bill. We should know the ministerial intent. I have other concerns, but my time is running out. I am sure that those matters will be addressed at stage 2. I reiterate that the SNP is broadly in favour of the bill. I look forward to its progression through the Parliament.

First, I thank everyone, headed up by Dorothy-Grace Elder, who has taken part in the debate on this issue in the three years since the Parliament was set up. I apologise to everyone as I will have to leave early, just after my speech. I am not an expert in the field, but I have listened to Dorothy-Grace Elder as she has persevered over the past couple of years, as Mary Scanlon said. I have learned with horror about the prevalence of chronic pain and about its many causes. From speaking to other people, I have learned that the cost of chronic pain to the national health service cannot be measured only in hard cash terms, because physical and sometimes emotional and mental illnesses can result from suffering chronic pain. The social cost was mentioned by Elaine Smith and many others. I wonder whether we should take a much wider view of chronic pain, its causes—of course—and its effects. We should consider other ways of dealing with and managing it. For example, the Chartered Society of Physiotherapy is keen for workplace physiotherapy to be put in place. That could help people to manage their pain and remain in the employment market, which is what they want to do. It must be awful to have the will to carry on with life normally, as everyone else does, but to suffer chronic pain and be unable to do that. I am keen that we take a step back and take a holistic approach. We should think about a bit of innovation. We should look at alternative therapy, complementary medicine and preventive strategies. Throughout the health service, we do not take enough account of the prevention of illness and place too much emphasis on curing illness. Pain management programmes and a national framework and guidelines for the management of pain, whether in specialist pain clinics or existing resources, have been discussed. As I said, I am not an expert, but I contend that bodies such as the Chartered Society of Physiotherapy and the Pain Association Scotland, which Dorothy-Grace Elder mentioned, are experts. They are strong on considering such measures, which could have added benefits for the NHS in general, because no  one talks about many conditions that cause chronic pain. Many people suffer chronic pain from various illnesses that are never talked about and on which records are not held centrally, for example. I have asked the Executive about a condition called scleroderma, which is sometimes called systemic sclerosis. The Executive told me that it did not hold figures centrally on various aspects of the illness and that the illness is very rare. Many such illnesses might be rare, but to the people who suffer the illness and its resultant pain, it does not matter that the illness is rare. What matters is that no resources exist to help them. I feel strongly that a national pain strategy and centres could help to unearth some of the hidden illnesses and suffering in our society. I pay tribute to the voluntary sector, which does a wonderful job all over our country in assisting the national health service and helping people to manage their day-to-day lives while they suffer chronic pain.

No.

No thank you. If someone were really undertaking legitimate pest control activity, they would have the option of shooting the wild mammal. If they were pursuing the sport of falconry, they would have the option of killing with a bird of prey. Both are allowed for in the bill. Section 1F is dangerous. If we are to have a competent bill, the section must be removed completely. I urge the Parliament to vote for amendment 64 and to vote against the other amendments in the group.

Section 1F is not capable of improvement. Again I urge members to vote for amendment 64 and to oppose the others in this group.

Section 1F, like section 1B, admits a loophole that would allow coursing, killing and baiting with a dog. I am clear that when the Parliament voted, by 84 to 34, for the general principles of the bill, its primary intention was to outlaw fox baiting, hare coursing and mounted hunts. We wanted to ban those activities because it is wrong to cause suffering to a wild mammal for entertainment. We were also clear that we wanted legitimate pest control to continue. Section 1F allows so much to be done to a pest species that fox baiting and hare coursing are allowed back into the bill. If someone's only humane action in relation to an animal is to set a dog on it, I contend that they must be in a pretty unusual situation. For example, a man going fox baiting with a terrier and a spade can either batter the fox to death with his spade or bait it with his terrier. If he chose baiting, he would be exempted by section 1F because the alternative was less humane. Section 1F allows baiting in such circumstances. I believe that comparable situations would exist with hare and fox coursing.

I support the Executive's amendment 48. Section 1A(2) defines when it is acceptable to use dogs underground and in "an enclosed space within rocks or other secure cover above ground". That is one of the aspects of pest control with which many people have problems. The National Working Terrier Federation has accepted that the practice has suffered from many problems, hence its code of conduct. Its representative, Thomas Parker, told the Rural Development Committee: "We have been trying to clean up what some people perceive as the not very nice end of the fox control business."—[ Official Report, Rural Development Committee , 6 November 2001; c 2331.] I understand that the Rural Development Committee did not feel able to support a code of conduct under the bill. However, I applaud the committee's efforts to define the boundary between legitimate terrier work, as conducted by the National Working Terrier Federation and gamekeepers, and illegitimate terrier work, as conducted by fox baiters. The National Working Terrier Federation's code of conduct says: "The prime objectives of properly conducted terrier work is to provide a pest control service." Section 1A should make that clear. I stress that amendment 48 would not prevent the work of legitimate pest control. The tests of need in section 1A(1) are extremely broad. It will still be possible to send terriers down a hole or into a rock cairn to flush a fox from cover for pest control purposes. No one should send a dog underground, where it might fight a fox, unless they have a reason to do so. Amendment 48 would protect gamekeepers and hill packs that have valid reasons for their activities and it would ensure that others could not abuse  the provision as a loophole for entertainment purposes. I hope that members will support the amendment.

When I was listening to Donald Gorrie, I was struck by a question that I would like to ask the minister. There are around 670 or 680 instrument instructors in schools, some of whom have teaching contracts, and I would like to know whether removing the link applies across the board or only to instructors without teaching contracts. I fully support Mr Gorrie's motion. When I first considered the issue, what came to mind was the Executive's national cultural strategy document, "Creating our future ... minding our past", which was one of the Executive's flagship documents some time ago. It puts great emphasis on participation in Scotland's culture and seeks to increase such participation among children. In fact, the document specifically states that, as well as instrumental tuition within the class, many children "can choose to receive additional specialist tuition". Furthermore, "Pupils who choose to study music at S3 and beyond" can "receive specialist tuition in one or more instruments". The strategy document makes a commitment to "Produce guidance on best practice for local authorities on the provision of instrumental tuition services". Has that been done? The strategy document also refers to the "disparity in the provision of instrumental tuition across ... local authorities" and the variation in tuition rates. Indeed, the document appears to recognise that there is a problem in that respect and states that the Executive will "work with education authorities to maximise opportunities for instrumental tuition in schools, free to those unable to pay". What steps have been taken towards such fine  objectives? I was worried at first about the introduction of tuition fees in some schools; now we have this latest move to break the statutory link with teachers' pay. I feel very much that if that goes ahead, it will reduce the status of the instructor and the musician within the profession. We have to consider whether those people will want to continue working with such a reduced status. The situation seems to be completely at odds with the national cultural strategy's emphasis on the importance of tuition. Steps are now being taken to undermine the position of these folk who are doing such a good job. Like other members, I draw attention to the position of education advisers. More than a decade ago, music had its own specialist advisers in each education authority, providing support for teachers and instructors alike. Music now forms part of a group of subjects that are covered by one adviser who is not necessarily a music specialist. Naturally, that must have a negative effect on the provision of in-service guidance for teachers and instructors. Instrumental instructors are not the only ones to face a reduction in status; the advisory service is much reduced, grossly overburdened and faces a similar demoralising situation, which is compounded by the fact that advisers do not come under the McCrone settlement either, and are waiting to see what will happen to their salaries. The encouraging aims of the national cultural strategy, which was broadly welcomed when it was introduced a long time ago, cannot be achieved without enthusiastic support from the profession. The actions that are now being contemplated do not encourage that.

When the minister next meets his colleagues in the Home Office, will he tell them that it is unacceptable for ladies and gentlemen from churches in my constituency region of Central Scotland to be fingerprinted and photographed  routinely when they choose to visit Dungavel detention centre residents?

I am interested to know why it is the responsibility of the SNP to fix every major disaster that is caused by the Executive. We debated the roads issue just over a year ago, on Burns day, when the then Minister for Transport told us that Labour had decided to go along Labour's new way by privatising roads maintenance. Although I was appalled at the attitude that was shown by the ministers that day, I was heartened by some of the constructive criticism that was offered by Labour back benchers, but that changed pretty rapidly. I was worried about whether the level of service given to our roads would be the same once Labour had sacked the public service workers. I had to ask repeatedly—eventually I had to resort to asking parliamentary questions—to see the performance assessment criteria before bits of the contract were placed in the Scottish Parliament information centre. Margaret Ewing asked for that information too. It is ridiculous that the elected representatives of Scotland could not see the criteria for safety provisions on our roads. That is an absolute disgrace. I was not the only member who expressed concern in that debate. A Labour member who was not a minister at the time said: "Allowing the management and maintenance contracts to go ahead as planned would be one of the worst decisions that we could possibly make. A flawed process has led to a flawed result". He went on to say that the process "does not, in any way, offer value for money and it does not provide best value. The process is a shambles."— [ Official Report , 25 January 2001; Vol 10, c 579-80.]  Andy Kerr cannot come on down, as he is not in the chamber today. However, those were the words of the member who is now Minister for Finance and Public Services. He condemned his  party's Executive and became a local hero—at least in his own lunch time—in the constituency of East Kilbride, where I live. In the East Kilbride News , Mr Kerr said: "We are on the edge of making one of the Parliament's worst decisions ... It is a personal and political embarrassment." There are questions to be answered. Is Mr Kerr now bringing his fellow Cabinet member round to that sensible point of view? If not, is Wendy Alexander now the very lonely minister with no support from anyone in the chamber, as Sarah Boyack was quoted as saying? I am sorry, but I see that it is poor Lewis Macdonald now—what a shame. What is Andy Kerr doing to ensure that roads in his constituency are being serviced to the same level as before the maintenance contracts were privatised? Not a lot is being done. The trunk roads that run through East Kilbride constituency are a disgrace. Residents of East Kilbride have been agitating for the service to return to the level that they used to know. In particular—I think that the minister will back me up on this—local people have long highlighted their safety concerns about damaged roundabouts. As members will know, we have many roundabouts in East Kilbride. Damaged roundabouts have been left for months with temporary barriers and rusting ironwork.

I have in my hand many newspaper cuttings and photographs, which go back over the years. I take that back, as I meant to say months rather than years. When Mr McCabe was in charge of South Lanarkshire Council, we had a wonderful service on roads and roundabouts in East Kilbride. Now we have a terrible service. I am aware that I am running out of time, so I will move on. Lewis Macdonald was quick to have a go at the SNP's motion. Let us look at the Executive's amendment, which is specious. We are asked to note "the actions taken by the Scottish Executive to ensure that the ... contracts deliver the prescribed level of service." It seems to me that every Executive action is reactive. If the Executive had carried out the process properly in the first place and had properly assessed what was going on, we would not be in this position. The amendment wants Parliament to call "upon the Executive to continue monitoring the performance of the operating companies."  If Parliament did not call on the Executive to do that, would the Executive not bother its shirt? Would it just let the situation go on? That part of the amendment means nothing. The Executive amendment also calls on Parliament to invite "the Executive to enter into dialogue with local authorities". Does that mean that the Executive has not been doing that? Can the outcome of that dialogue—the proper monitoring and results—be placed in SPICe? That would allow us to see those results. I ask members to support the SNP motion.

Does the minister have details on the number of posts in the new office compared with the number of posts in the existing services? I am not asking about people who move to the new office and take voluntary redundancy, for example, and whose post disappears. My question is about posts rather than people.

I was caught short by Murdo Fraser's brevity. On this occasion, I have a certain sympathy with the decision to debate the matter for only so long because there is a broad general agreement about it. I am tempted to say that I more or less agree with everything that everyone has said and sit down. However, I want some points to be clarified. We have all said how wonderful it is that the ombudsman service will be a one-stop shop. However, there are certain exceptions. Tricia Marwick mentioned the water boards, Mary Scanlon mentioned social work complaints and, in committee, Iain Smith talked about prison complaints. The ombudsman service will not be a one-stop shop for everybody. Before anyone jumps up to intervene, I am saying not that the Executive has got it wrong, but that we must be careful. When we publicise the ombudsman—as is necessary—we must not raise false expectations. If we are not careful, people might believe that, no matter what their complaint about any element of the public service, it will be solved by going to the one-stop shop. We need to exercise caution about how we frame the advertising and the publicity. I am pleased by the independence of the office, as that is crucial. I know that the ombudsman is to be appointed by the Parliament, but I would like the minister to state how he envisages that appointment taking place. Will there be a vote in the chamber? Will the parties co-operate through a body such as the Parliamentary Bureau? There should be no perception that there has been any political interference in the appointment of the ombudsman. The definition of maladministration was mentioned. I know that the bill will not contain such a definition. The matter relates to discretion and informal resolution, which has been mentioned by many people. The only experience that I have of dealing with an ombudsman—I hasten to add that  I was not being investigated at the time—was when I dealt with the housing association ombudsman. One of the great strengths of that office was the informal resolution mechanism. It would be a great loss if the new ombudsman did not have a similar element of discretion. If a member of the public thinks that as soon as they pick up a phone to make a complaint a formal investigation will start up, they might be deterred by that formality. Sometimes, informal resolution can work much better. I noticed that the minister said that, following the recommendation of the Local Government Committee, he would consider that matter again. I urge him to do so carefully. Keith Harding talked about there being no specialised deputies. That point has worried me since it was raised at a Local Government Committee meeting that I attended. I have since read about it in the Local Government Committee report and I am still open-minded about the matter. I sympathise with Janis Hughes and I understand Trish Godman's point about the possibility of ending up with a situation similar to that which exists at the moment—a fractured service in an umbrella organisation. I ask the Local Government Committee to consider the issue again during stage 2. Consistency of powers is important. It is confusing that one element of the ombudsman service should have greater powers than other elements in relation to maladministration. I do not accept that that greater power should be taken away from housing associations because it has been used only once. As Iain Smith said, that is not a valid reason. Johann Lamont touched on an important point when she said that the least advantaged people in society are the least likely to get satisfaction from a public agency. Before the Local Government Committee's report was published, I put a query to the Scottish Parliament information centre about that. I was pleased by the clarification in the bill that a third party can be authorised to complain on behalf of someone. That is crucial. My query was about whether voluntary organisations could complain to the new ombudsman. The bill shows that voluntary organisations will be able to complain on their own behalf and on behalf of an individual. Voluntary organisations will be able to use that role well, because they tend to have good relationships with people in their communities. Donald Gorrie talked about communities. Voluntary organisations are well placed and people have confidence in them to take up complaints. Their being able to do that on behalf of individuals is an important step forward. I reaffirm the SNP's support for the bill. I apologise for my colleague Tricia Marwick's not being present—she is unwell. I look forward with  great confidence to the Local Government Committee's detailed investigation of the bill at stage 2. I thank the minister for his willingness to consider amendments.

Is the minister aware of tests that have been carried out in the United States of America and Europe? DNA testing has identified the presence of bacteria in the cells of ME sufferers—those bacteria are difficult to find. That seems to detract from the idea that ME is psychological and psychosomatic. Is the minister willing to examine that research with a view to having similar research carried out in Scotland to try—once and for all—to negate the myth that ME is a psychologically caused disease and to find out whether there is a physical cause?

I am not a member of the Local Government Committee, so I have not had the benefit of listening to all the evidence that has been given to it, although I have, of course, read its report closely. I speak as someone who quickly signed up to Euan Robson's member's bill. I speak to him not in his role as a minister but as a member who feels strongly about the issue, as I do. Like Euan Robson, I have received lots of approaches from people in my constituency—probably as a result of having signed the bill—who are not religious, who choose to get married and who find it unfair that they are restricted as to where the ceremony can be carried out. That is a mark of how difficult it is for people who have no religion and who are not willing to pretend that they have a religious conviction to meet the standards of the society that we live in, which is firmly built on religious institutions such as marriage. Such institutions also include funerals. It was difficult for my family when my father died unexpectedly: his wishes were that he should have a funeral that was in no way religious. We were not prepared for the event, and it was very difficult to carry out his wishes. Furthermore, some of the things that were said to us as a family when we were trying to arrange the funeral were hurtful.  At some point, we must address the issue of people without religion. I was pleased when Euan Robson published his draft member's bill and was pleased by its intentions, but when the Executive published the bill after Euan Robson was promoted, I found it cumbersome and not nearly as simple as I thought it should be. It seemed to me that the draft bill gave religious celebrants the option of marrying people anywhere, but the bill as introduced will restrict marriage venues to places that a local authority deems acceptable. I agree with Michael McMahon's strongly expressed opinion that a local authority should not be left to work out whether a place is suitable as a marriage venue. I ask the minister to look again at that matter. After all, one person's meat is another person's poison. If ministers of religion are willing to marry people in such places as mountain-tops, they should be allowed to do so. I believe that this is an equality issue. Why should someone who wants a registrar to marry them not have the same option? Perhaps the person who carries out the ceremony should decide whether they are willing to do so in a particular venue or location. I was a bit concerned about the views of the Local Government Committee and some councils that it should be easy to amend the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982. One council—perhaps it was Dumfries and Galloway Council—said in evidence that that could be done by the insertion of only three words into the 1982 act. I urge caution on that matter, because in a job that I used to have I worked with the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982. It is a cumbersome piece of legislation that is not clear. I am pleased that the 1982 act is being reviewed by the Executive, because it should be. Such a review is long overdue. There was a recent amendment to the 1982 act in relation to houses in multiple occupation, which is an issue that we in the Social Justice Committee have been investigating. I will not pre-empt that committee's decision on the operation of that amendment, but my view is that it was wrong to make such an amendment, whose effects have been terribly cumbersome. It was a bad piece of legislating to amend the 1982 act to take on board something else, so I urge the Local Government Committee to be cautious about the view that it should be simple to amend the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982 to take the issue of marriage venues on board. I err on the side of caution by believing that primary legislation is required on the issue of marriage venues, but I also have great worries about the volume of secondary legislation that will be required. I concur with the Local Government Committee's view: if we are to have primary  legislation, let us have as much as possible in the bill to avoid discrepancies in the future and, indeed, vague legislation. Regulation is fine, but we must have something that can be enforced. I am sure that we can find a compromise between primary legislation and regulation that would allow decisions on the suitability of venues for marriage to be carried out equitably for everyone.

rose—

When Wendy Alexander launched the tracking mechanism for social justice, she spoke in the foreword to the pathfinder document—"Social Justice...a Scotland where everyone matters"—about, among many other things, progressive politicians and vision. She said: "Today, Scotland's Parliament and Executive should be no less ambitious in our time". I will pay one tribute to Jackie Baillie: she was never quite as windy as Wendy was. That was much welcomed. Donald Dewar said in the same document: "The purpose of this report is to commit Scotland to a set of targets that can only be achieved if we follow them up by action and change." Action and change are the point. What should have been a trailblazing document, a raft of policies to set Scotland on course to eradicate child poverty and a bonfire of inequalities has turned into a quagmire of inaction and a sad indication of the impotence of Labour's Scottish ministers. I do not believe that that comes from incompetence this time. It is because the power and influence that we need to make Scotland a socially just country have been retained by Westminster. Scotland's ambitions are being ignored by the Government in Edinburgh. Once again, the little green book provides some perspective in its statement that, when setting targets, we have "to measure what matters". However, although we have the power to measure, we do not have the power to effect change. The document says: "Delivering social justice will ... need a more effective rethink of how to allocate and use public budgets." The Executive can think all it likes, but the most important budgets are controlled in London. All we have in Scotland is a gaggle of Labour ministers who are powerless in the face of forces that they cannot control. The Executive might be quite happy to allow that to continue, but I am not. Like every member of the SNP, I came into politics to change the lives of  Scottish people for the better. We know what needs to be done and what needs to be changed to improve Scotland and we will work tirelessly to ensure that that happens. I will even tell the Executive what it will have to do to improve Scotland. If it is truly serious about changing the face of Scottish society and if it really wants to make a difference to the lives of Scots from children through to pensioners, it must have the power to make such a change. As that power currently resides in Westminster, it has to be brought back to Scotland. The Parliament and Government must have the power to change taxation, alter benefits and revise employment law—and those are just the powers that are needed for social justice. In short, Scotland needs to become a proper nation again. If we are to improve the lives of our people and lift children out of the poverty trap—and I do not mean by 1 per cent over four years, because goodness knows how long it will take us at that rate—and if we are to give our pensioners a decent standard of living and insist that families have enough to live on, we have to take back the power to legislate on those issues. I will make it even more simple. Scotland must become a normal, independent nation state where we are free to make our own choices, to choose how we spend our money, and to decide what laws we make—indeed, where we have the freedom to be normal. I know that the Executive does not have the vision to join us on that journey just now, but I also know that it will try to claim the credit for starting that journey once we arrive at our destination. The Executive has to get off its knees, dispose of the begging-bowl mentality and stop looking to London. It has to start standing up for itself and for Scotland. It was elected by the people of this nation to deliver for them, not to be the puppets of another Parliament. However, it has failed to deliver time after time and it will continue to fail as long as it cannot truly stand up for Scotland. The Executive should be grateful to the SNP. This afternoon, we are giving the Executive a chance to begin to learn how to stand up. If it takes that opportunity and votes for the SNP amendment, it will have started learning. I ask members to support our amendment.

This case has wide implications for the Scottish legal system. It clearly demonstrates the gulf between that legal system and Scotland's ethnic minority communities. It also shows that many people in our communities feel distanced by our legal system. On page 199 of the Jandoo report, Assistant Chief Constable Pearson of Strathclyde police makes a statement that sums that up. I will summarise it. He says that the perception is that there are "an absence of care ... no explanations of what is going to happen ... a lack of feedback and explanation". We often hear complaints about communities failing to come forward with evidence of crimes in their areas. We also often hear that the communities are fully aware of who has perpetrated the crimes, as are the police. Often, the communities and the community police work together closely. Such cases fall for reasons that are never relayed back to the victims, their families or those who have come forward with information. Even well before the Chhokar case, there have  been many instances of co-accused appearing separately and blaming each other, which leads to no conviction being secured. I am not a lawyer; perhaps one of the many lawyers in the Parliament can explain that seeming absurdity at some time.

I thank Winnie Ewing. In the Chhokar case, witnesses came forward and people were charged, but there was a systematic failure to detect and punish the guilty and to protect the innocent—whether victim, witness, or the people who loved and cared about the victim. Sadly, as Roseanna Cunningham and others said, that failure does not seem rare. The legal procedure is daunting—any legal system would be daunting—and many people feel intimidated, alienated or disadvantaged by it. Sometimes, the cases of such people are taken up by other caring individuals who articulate the case and proceed with tenacity against all the odds. They sometimes articulate the case because the people who are victims or are traumatised feel that it is too painful to do so themselves. Sometimes the establishment turns on such people and demonises them. I believe that that has happened in the Chhokar case, but I thank goodness for Aamer Anwar and his like in communities and constituencies all over Scotland. More power to their collective elbow. Individuals and communities are sometimes the victims of people on both sides of the fence in the legal system—prosecution and defence—who are too concerned with procedural gamesmanship. That procedural game is reported regularly in the press. Its functioning in the Chhokar case is detailed in the Campbell report. Our legal system, in the guise of judges, is extremely keen to command respect and to punish anyone who demonstrates contempt for the system. However, respect must be earned, not commanded. Lord Hardie, the former Lord Advocate who presided over the initial debacle in the Chhokar case is now a self-appointed judge. How does he command the respect of those who appear before him in court? Our legal system clearly needs root-and-branch investigation and reform. The Chhokar case clearly requires a public inquiry. I ask members to support the SNP's amendment.

We were asked about our immigration policy, but the Executive has admitted that it thought that it was extremely important that immigration policy be separated from asylum policy in discussion of the asylum issue. That is what I said.

Does the member accept that although that great work was done by all sorts of people long before the Parliament existed, such work must be backed up by resources? The Parliament and the Executive were a bit dilatory in working out what financial and other resources were required from the top down.

As the Minister for Social Justice has just said, we have a tradition of welcoming to our country and into our communities people from around the world—indeed, I myself am a product of that tradition, as are many others in the chamber. We  should not forget that, in the course of our country's history, although long ago, we have also suffered repression and forced emigration to other shores. We, from this country, were indeed asylum seekers. From time to time, it has been the unfortunate position that people who have come to live here have been fleeing repression or mistreatment in other nations. We have been a safe haven to which they have turned in their time of need. We in Scotland have been very lucky, in that many of those who have come to our shores have chosen to remain here and have enriched our society and culture. We still have space. Scotland is not full up. We know that our population is falling and that we are heading for a skills shortage, which can in some way be met through continuing our tradition of welcoming new Scots who have the skills that our society requires. A short time ago, an English Tory MP said that Britain was in danger of becoming a mongrel nation. There was uproar and calls for that MP's resignation; there was outrage that he should be saying such things. I also remember William McIlvanney telling a rally in Glasgow that Scotland was a mongrel nation. He was cheered for that, because the Scots in the audience were—and are—happy that we are indeed a mongrel nation, with the benefits to all of us that that brings. We should strive to accept our fellow human beings into our midst and to treat all as we would want to be treated. Similar sentiments were expressed in this chamber at the official opening of the Parliament in 1999: "That man to man, the world o'er Shall brithers be for a' that." That is a fine aspiration which we should be at the forefront of promoting. For that reason, I want today to praise the work that the Executive and this Parliament have done recently. It is true that ministers were initially reluctant to act against the dictates of Westminster, but once they were on their way they went willingly enough. The work that has been done recently in Glasgow is a testament to the Scots attitude that I mentioned a few moments ago. One indication of that attitude was the appointment of Jackie Baillie as minister with special responsibility for asylum seekers, which indicated that this country was prepared to do whatever it can to aid and assist those who are forced to flee their countries. I congratulate the minister on her appointment and the First Minister on having the courage to insist that this post was needed in Scotland. Because of Jackie Baillie's appointment, we have now begun to take steps to deliver at least a semblance of social justice to asylum seekers in  Scotland. I welcome the funding for a law centre to help asylum seekers in Glasgow, the funding for language skills and services, the extra money that has been made available to social inclusion partnerships and today's announcement of the Scottish refugee integration forum. We all know that much of the work should have been done before the asylum seekers arrived in Scotland, but it is being done now. My SNP colleagues and I welcome the work that is being done to integrate asylum seekers into the host communities. It is not yet enough, but it has begun and it is a step in the right direction. I urge the minister and the Executive to continue thinking along those lines and to continue seeking ways in which to help asylum seekers and the communities of Scotland. I know that the minister will do that, because I have faith in her belief in social justice. I ask her to carry it forward with renewed vigour. As we have heard today, too often this world slips into crisis. Too often we are faced with the sight of large numbers of people being repressed, tortured, bombed out of their workplaces and homes, or subjected to genocide. We must not fail to continue on the particularly Scottish path of social justice and egalitarianism. This country can and must play its part in ameliorating the suffering of asylum seekers and refugees. We can and must stand with the international community in seeking to find homes for asylum seekers. We can and must have an internationalist outlook, rather than the narrow, inward-looking politics of the fortress. That is why our amendment to the minister's motion regrets the moves made on Monday by her London colleagues. The statement that David Blunkett made on Monday at Westminster suggested a shift into the shadows of insularity and isolationism—a step into the narrows. He made it clear that he wanted to send a signal to people throughout the world "that the United Kingdom is not a soft touch."— [ Official Report , House of Commons , 29 October 2001; Vol 373, c 627.]  That was language straight from the mouth of Ann Widdecombe. Not only was it the language of the dark, but the new policy of the new Labour Government echoes some of the worst fears of those of us who believe in social justice and humanity. No longer are we to be allowed to welcome asylum seekers into our communities. Instead, they will be locked up in camps. I have heard people make the defence that that is being done for their own safety. What an indictment of the so-called democratic society that new Labour is fond of talking about and of claiming to promote.

I suggest that David Blunkett has spent too much time listening to Tory policies and to the worst of the tabloid press.

I welcome the Government's commitment to cease keeping asylum seekers in mainstream prisons. We should be ashamed that Greenock and Cornton Vale prisons have for years been used in that way. The commitment that has been made would be welcome if the Home Secretary were not setting up special prisons for asylum seekers. I know that he says that they are for reception and accommodation rather than detention, but if it looks like a prison, feels like a prison and acts like a prison, it is a prison, no matter what it is called and how much spin is put on it—a prison is a prison. Where the Scottish people accept asylum seekers into our communities and the Scottish Government works to ensure full integration, the Westminster Government wants to introduce isolation. Where the Scottish Parliament wants to deliver social justice to asylum seekers, the Home Secretary wants to introduce social exclusion. In the Home Secretary's statement, he did not introduce the stigmatisation of prison alone, as asylum seekers will also be required to carry identity cards, which no one else in Scotland will be expected to carry.

No, thank you. Mr Blunkett wants to call those identity cards smart cards, but they will carry a photograph and the fingerprints of the asylum seeker. These so-called smart cards are supposedly for monitoring purposes, but asylum seekers are being asked to wear a badge to show that they are not part of our country. ID cards are a potent symbol of difference. Asylum seekers' movements are to be monitored and those who carry the cards will have to live in camps. We are in great danger of levering our country away from libertarian social democracy and moving sharply towards the right.

I will not dignify that prepared speech with any kind of response. I do not carry an identity card. The Executive expects asylum seekers to carry identity cards and to declare their difference and their non-integration to the rest of the country. Where Scotland would extend the hand of friendship and our Minister for Social Justice has tried to ensure that some measure of human dignity remains with asylum seekers, London would have us treat them as potential or actual criminals for daring to flee persecution. If some poor unfortunate refuses to take their place in one of those camps, perhaps fearing a return to the circumstances from which they only recently escaped, Mr Blunkett knows exactly how to deal with them. He said: "Those refusing to take up such a place would disqualify themselves from support."—[ Official Report , House of Commons, 29 October 2001; Vol 373, c 628.] Where is the understanding of different circumstances? Where is the instinct to protect human dignity? Where is the determination to fulfil our international obligations on human rights? Even more than that, the Home Secretary wants to change the process through which asylum seekers can appeal. Grounds for appeal will be limited to a point of law—there will be no real right of appeal—and detention places will be doubled in the centres that have now been dubbed secure removal centres, but that are nothing more or less than deportation centres. I have been to Dungavel and I have seen the barbed wire. When I first heard the Westminster statement, I felt that a few small rays of hope remained. I was glad to hear that the processing system will be bolstered and speeded up, which should help lessen the stress felt by asylum seekers as they await a ruling. However, that hope was slightly soiled by the cutting back of the appeals process. Some lightening of the heart was also to be gained from the proposal to speed up the integration of refugees after the authorities have ruled in their favour. However, that was destroyed by the move to keep asylum seekers away from communities and by the intention to remove them with the same speed and with a reduced appeal process. At first, I also thought that the socially divisive and degrading voucher system was being abolished—a moment of true pleasure, but only a moment. David Blunkett, in his statement,  suggested—only suggested—that vouchers were going. The man did not state categorically, as demanded by so many of his back benchers, "Vouchers are going." If members take the time to read the explanatory notes to the statement, they will see that matters are even less clear.

This debate is not about immigration policy. The Executive set the agenda. Its motion is about the integration into Scotland of asylum seekers and refugees. Labour members want to change that agenda because they do not like what they are hearing, which goes against the grain of what the Scottish Executive is trying to do. The Executive is stymied once again by Westminster. The common public perception is that the smart card, which is just as socially divisive and degrading, will be a kind of bank card that can be used in a limited number of retail outlets—a kind of electronic voucher system. It is only in reading the explanatory notes that the reality hits home. Point 6 of the explanatory notes states: "Consideration is being given to the potential for automated credit transfer and other mechanisms". It is clear that the voucher system will be superseded by a more robust system, but surely we are entitled to know what is meant by a more robust system. What is proposed for asylum seekers who come to our country? I know that there are Labour and Liberal Democrat members—even some Conservative members—who believe in social justice and that some of them have fought for the rights of asylum seekers and refugees for years. I know that there are members of the Labour party who want Scotland to play its full part in helping asylum seekers and refugees from around the world. I say to them that they should stand up for their principles and stand up for what they believe in. Some things should be beyond the cut and thrust of party politics: human dignity and human rights are among them. Support the SNP amendment. Demand that the powers of the Parliament enable us to send a message to the world that Scotland intends to fulfil its moral obligations—the obligations that we would face as an independent country. I move amendment S1M-2377.2, to leave out from "and further welcomes" to end and insert: "; congratulates the host communities and Scotland's civic society on the steps taken so far to enable integration; welcomes the appointment of a Scottish Minister with responsibilities in this area; notes that the statement by the Home Secretary in the Westminster Parliament on 29  October 2001 indicates a move by Her Majesty's Government contrary to the current direction of the Scottish Executive, particularly in the establishment of "accommodation centres" as opposed to sensitive dispersal and the imposition of "Smart Cards" as a form of electronic voucher for asylum seekers, and calls for the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Executive to welcome asylum seekers and refugees into our communities and to have the power to provide appropriate services to promote true integration."

I am terribly relieved, as I thought that I would have to go at a rate of knots. I thank Mary Mulligan for securing the debate. What we have heard about Linlithgow Oxfam group and all the other Oxfam groups across the country shows that every piece of input from an Oxfam activist taps into the wider picture of Oxfam's marvellous work across the world. I pay particular tribute to Oxfam workers working elsewhere in the world—Iain Gray referred to some in Mozambique. Every day they work with people in the greatest need. I have met some wonderful Oxfam activists across the world. I remember when I was in East Timor a couple of years ago meeting some people who worked for Oxfam. They had worked in the region before, but all the NGOs were kicked out of East Timor when the troubles started a few years back, as the oppressors were trying to hide what was going on. It fascinated me that, because they felt so strongly about East Timor, those Oxfam workers had taken leave of absence from their jobs with Oxfam to go back to East Timor for the ballot—that is commitment. When I was in Peru last year, I met other wonderful Oxfam people who were working in a shanty town just outside Lima. They were working on a women's health project and had done some fantastic work. They were working with other NGOs—Mary Mulligan mentioned the importance of working together—to promote a better quality of life for people in that town. It especially interested me that they were not working from the top down—everything that they did had a teaching element. Oxfam teaches citizenship in our schools and works worldwide to ensure that people have the tools to make their lives better. I pay tribute to an initiative from Clare Short, who has done rather a good job in the Department for International Development, to take aid into  places such as Peru through NGOs such as Oxfam rather than through Governments. I am pleased that we are going down that road, because the NGOs are the people at the sharp end who know how to do that. Fiona Hyslop asked what the Parliament can do and pointed out that we face certain difficulties. Donald Gorrie mentioned the World Trade Organisation. We should consider the major campaign that Oxfam is running on the agreement on trade-related aspects of intellectual property—TRIPS—which affects us by imposing a 20-year patent protection on all products and manufacturing processes. The 20-year rule is delaying the supply of equivalent but cheaper generic medicines to countries that need them. We all remember the publicity about the South African Government's great coup in winning its case on cheaper generic medicines. Oxfam is currently running a big campaign on the issue and is asking people to sign up to its global petition. I am being hurried up by the Presiding Officer, so I will close by asking every member to lobby friends and colleagues and get as many people as possible to sign up to Oxfam's global petition.

I say to Annabel Goldie that I, too, was delighted to be asked to be a guide ambassador, having never been a girl guide. I then discovered that Jamie Stone was one, which tarnished the honour a wee bit.

I meant that Mr Stone was a girl guide ambassador, not a girl guide. Members have rightly paid tribute to many different volunteers from all over the country who carry out work here and abroad. I pay tribute to the volunteers who are working here on an international level, with refugees and asylum seekers who come here. I know that Jackie Baillie and Margaret Curran will meet many of those people in their new roles and that they will back me up on that. A lot of great work is going on in Sighthill and elsewhere in Scotland. The SNP is broadly in agreement with what the Scottish Executive is trying to achieve and what it is achieving in our third sector. Anything that I say is meant in a spirit of co-operation. It is the role of the Government to put things in motion and the role of the Opposition to try to point out the shortcomings. In the creation of a better country for us all, it is also our role to point out what is likely to be problematic and to work together to find a better solution. I make no apology to Robert Brown for quoting the SCVO—after all, the Executive looks on those people as experts in the field, which they are. That fact should be recognised. The SCVO has said that it is worried about the strategic overview of the voluntary sector. One part of the submission that it made to the Social Justice Committee  concerned new approaches that have been taken in participation, planning and service development, which have had the effect of making the relationship among the voluntary sector, statutory agencies and councils less clear cut. There is concern about the way in which the Scottish Executive, local authorities and the voluntary sector are interacting and working together. I have been told that many existing organisations in Lanarkshire feel that, although they have been assured by the Scottish Executive that the local authority has been given funding for specific projects in specific fields of voluntary work, the money is not getting through. There is a perception that, in wishing to be seen to fulfil their obligations in relation to consultation, the statutory agencies, health boards, health trusts and councils are starting to set up their own groups and are not acknowledging the views of the groups that have for many years been working at the front line. I use the word "perception" because I do not know the reality of the situation. I raised the matter at the Social Justice Committee and was told by Executive representatives that the Scottish Executive is not monitoring whether the money that is given to local authorities is spent on the purposes for which it is given, when that money is not ring-fenced. I ask the minister and the Scottish Executive to address that. Members mentioned voluntary organisations in relation to poverty in our country. We know about urban deprivation and rural deprivation, but I was stunned to hear George Lyon say that there is no citizens advice bureau in Argyll and Bute.

I am sure that George Lyon will thank the minister for that welcome information. Members have spoken about the SCVO. I hope that this information is wrong—I ask the minister to correct me if it is—but I was told recently that the services within the council for voluntary services network are being given a set amount of money. I am worried that no account is taken of the areas in which those services operate.

I would like to make a special  plea for South Lanarkshire Council, which faces both urban and rural problems. Kenny Gibson talked about the effects of legislative change on the voluntary sector. For example, he said that social security forms tell the applicant to go to a citizens advice bureau, which is difficult to do if there is none in the area. The Executive must think strategically about the voluntary sector at every point, because its decisions and actions impact on the voluntary sector and its services. For example, although the problems relating to the SCRO checks have been sorted, we could have avoided the lobbying that took place on that if the proposal, which was worth while, had been thought through when it was introduced. I read recently about hygiene regulations that will come into force and that will impact on the ability of soup kitchens to provide food for homeless people. I appreciate that hygiene regulations must be put in place, but the Executive must have regard for the impact that such regulations might have on the voluntary sector. I am worried that if an additional regulation is put in place without additional support, there will be less volunteering. While the SNP broadly accepts the terms of the motion, we have a problem with the line that mentions "the increased resourcing of the sector". The Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations believes that there is evidence to suggest that, proportionally, the overall pot of voluntary sector funding is stagnant and is probably shrinking. Given the increased expenses for water companies—the removal of water relief, for example—we must think about that. There is nothing in the SNP amendment that has not been mentioned by almost every speaker: transaction costs; consistency; sustainability; leadership; core and direct funding; and the adverse impact of the removal of water relief. I must therefore ask ministers to consider accepting the SNP amendment in the spirit of all that has been said today.

Does the member accept that if the coalition Executive is more than willing to consult and take the voluntary sector on to working groups and task forces and to increase participation, it is perfectly acceptable for the Opposition to consult the voluntary sector?

I welcome the debate and put on record the fact that the SNP very much welcomes the extra money that was announced yesterday. Many members have said that there are lessons to be learned and I hope that we will learn a lesson from Glasgow. When we have dispersal programmes to different local authorities across the country, I hope that we will take on board everything that has been said today and has been said many times over the piece. Preparation and knowledge of what is happening is the key. I also welcome the appointment of Jackie Baillie—and presumably of Margaret Curran as her deputy—to spearhead the approach to refugees and asylum seekers in Scotland. It is important that we have someone heading up that work. However, I sound a slight note of less than optimism. There is so much that can be done in Scotland and so much that can be done to help Sighthill. Much can be done to help people once they come here, but I feel that the systems that we have in the UK, over which Scotland has no control, are creating problems too. I hope that part of the ministers' remit will be to ensure that there is proper co-operation between the Scottish Executive and the UK Government on the strategic issues surrounding asylum seekers and refugees to make practices a bit better. Robert Brown mentioned problems with NASS. Many MSPs, as well as local volunteers who work directly with refugees and asylum seekers, have tried hard to get some sense out of the prevailing systems, but we have found it very difficult. Small things can cause problems. For example, a bus load of asylum seekers may arrive, but the welcoming people may have lists with different names on them. I heard of a couple in Sighthill who had to go to Liverpool for an interview, but were not sent their tickets and had to borrow the money to get there, in terror that they would miss the interview. They have still not had their money refunded; when people are living on vouchers, that is a ridiculous situation. I have also heard of people who go down to England for an interview and take their children with them, but who have no money to buy food. In some cases, they may not have eaten for 24 hours by the time they have got down there and back again. That is difficult for anyone to cope with, but when English is not their first language and they are jaunting about a country that is completely alien to them, it is even more difficult. I hope that Jackie Baillie and Margaret Curran will be able to take such examples on board. Even if they cannot insist that NASS opens an office up here so that people can go for local interviews, they should at  least try to do something to streamline the procedures. I have no doubt that they will try to do that. Dungavel detention centre is in the area where I live. I have visited the centre and I have no doubt that the people who work there, 95 per cent of whom are local, want to do the very best they can for the people who are detained there. However, there are restrictions. I have found that, even for a local MSP, it is very difficult to get information about what is happening there. I do not know whether detention will be part of the ministers' remit, but I hope that they will monitor detention closely. We should be monitoring detention in Scotland, asking for information in Scotland and insisting on getting that information in Scotland. It is only then that we can make bland statements such as "Scotland welcomes asylum seekers," or "Scotland's not racist and welcomes refugees." We have to grasp the opportunity to insist that we are a welcoming society. I ask the minister to acknowledge that in her winding-up speech.

Is the First Minister aware of parliamentary answer S1W-16469, which confirms that the Scottish Executive is currently considering secondary legislation to correct anomalies in the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001? Does he agree that a reliance on secondary legislation to rush through primary legislation creates bad practice and bad law?

Is the minister aware that SNH is already distributing leaflets on the basis of the access provisions in the stage 1 draft land reform bill, citing principles of the access concordat? Has the Scottish Executive approved that measure? If not, what action will the minister now take?

As well as being a member of the 1820 Society, I am a resident of Strathaven, where James "Perlie" Wilson was from. I am pleased to be able to speak as a member of the Scottish Parliament, as we have now achieved the restoration of an element of our sovereignty due to the efforts and sacrifice of many Scots over the years, of whom James "Perlie" Wilson was one. His compatriots who were killed along with him and those who were deported were others. As Gil Paterson said, James Wilson was not a young man. He was about 63 at the time of the rising. For many years he had been an unceasing and energetic worker for the radical cause. It is easier to be radical when young. For James Wilson, who had suffered many disappointments and who had reached that age, still to be fighting against adversity for the rights of his fellow Scots was wonderful. Following the infiltration of the organisation by Government forces, the radical rising of 1820 was fairly short-lived and the consequences for those who were involved were dire. Nevertheless, the success of the rising can  be judged by the fact that it continues to inspire succeeding generations and is remembered nearly two centuries later, despite the fact that its story has never been taught as part of the school history curriculum. It is arguable that the Scottish Parliament is a step forward, but it is only one step in the long process in which James "Perlie" Wilson and his compatriots played a part. We should honour men and women who have made such an important contribution to the life of Scotland. We must remain alive to the struggle that continues around us. That struggle might have changed its character over the years, but fundamentally it is the same as the cause for which Wilson, Hardie and Baird made the ultimate sacrifice. The rising encouraged Scots to pursue their liberty—as individuals and as a nation. Other members have spoken about education. Like Gil Paterson, I was taught about the Tolpuddle martyrs. I am a bit younger than Gil Paterson, so what we were taught did not change much. I was also taught about the French and Russian revolutions. Why was I never taught about a radical uprising in my own country?

Margaret Ewing is right—they did not know about it. We did not know about it and we should be ashamed. We must avoid complacency and self-satisfaction when we consider that times have changed. It is true that things are easier than they were in 1820, but the social conditions and the freedom that many of us enjoy were brought about by the struggle of those earlier generations. We must continue to safeguard our position by remembering that. The rising of 1820 should not be a far-off event of which our young people know nothing. We should make it more widely known and we should teach its significance for the cause of social progress and for the cause of Scottish self-determination. In the tradition of Hugh McDiarmid, debates such as this and the teaching of our history to future generations should not be based on tradition alone, but on a willingness to acknowledge and to learn from historical precedent. In James Wilson, we should recognise a commitment to social progress and to the restoration of Scotland's ability to make a unique contribution to international affairs. It is only through concrete achievements that we will honour most effectively the sacrifice made by James Wilson, John Baird and Andrew Hardie. As a parliamentarian in our new Parliament, I hope  that the Parliament will live up to the sacrifices made in its name over the years from 1820 to the present.

Debates such as this are always difficult because the great measure of consensus means that many of the things that I wanted to say have been said. Before members tell me to sit down again, let me say that it never prevented any of the guys in other parties from standing up and speaking for a wee  while. I will indulge myself. The first thing that bothers me a wee bit is that the minister's motion talks about how admirable it is that we have a commitment to "social inclusion, equality and diversity and to working in partnership". I agree that that is admirable, but I wonder why the term "social inclusion" has come back in instead of "social justice". My personal view is that "social justice", which is the term that we use in the Parliament, is a much more inclusive term than "social inclusion" because it display fairness, which is what we should all be striving to achieve. That said, I will examine some of the things that have been said and some other matters that I want to mention. I share the valid concerns of the SCVO about the lack of Scottish input to the disbursement of the new opportunities fund, although—like Mike Russell—I welcome the cash injections that have been given. However, there is a lack of Scottish control. Another concern of mine has already been mentioned by members—the use of lottery money to finance the core operations of Government when that money should be truly additional. It is wonderful that health spending has gone up by £32 million, that £10 million is being spent on drug rehabilitation and that £87 million is being spent on physical education and sport in schools—which I will come back to. However, it concerns me greatly that, if we keep going as we are, we are heading towards a situation in which public expenditure could, quite literally, become a lottery. I am also concerned about comments that were made earlier this week by the chairperson of the National Lottery Commission to the effect that there is likely to be a shortfall from what Camelot expected when it made its bid. I hope that that does not point to a future shortfall in funding. Will we see a lottery squeeze that is far worse than the Barnett squeeze? I mentioned social justice. I am concerned that, although we all welcome the wonderful social justice initiatives that come through lottery funding, Angus MacKay's budget speech this morning showed that the social justice budget for the Parliament over the next two years will lose £35 million. I wonder whether Allan Wilson will address that issue. I said that I would come back to sport. Like everybody else, I welcome the injection of money to improve sports in schools. I also agree with everything that Karen Gillon said about trying to create an attitude among young people so that they want to participate in sport. However—in acknowledging all that Cathy Jamieson said—it is problematic that the majority of lottery money  comes from those who can least afford it. I remember that there was a bit of a stushie last year when the private Mary Erskine School in Edinburgh was given a lot of lottery money for its sports facilities. I will be interested to know how much of the sports money that will be distributed this time will go to private schools.

Yes, it is appropriate. I am expressing my personal opinion that we should do more than use the Arbuthnott formula. We should target areas that have no facilities and we should encourage sport in those areas. The other thing that I want to say about sport is much more personal. Although I agree that we should promote sport in every way, I want to make a plea on behalf of kids at school who hate sports, because that was me. Let us not be prescriptive and force absolutely every child to enjoy sport. For me, it was absolutely awful—I hated every minute. There were no sports that I wanted to play apart from darts and snooker, and I do not suppose that those are the kinds of sport that will be promoted.

That is my plea for the kids who do not want to play sports—do not start making them do so. I welcome many things that have happened. In Central Scotland, which I represent, East Kilbride, Hamilton, Motherwell and Falkirk are all seeing the benefits of lottery funding. However, let us be cautious: we must not start to regard lottery funding as a replacement for core funding.

On 10 May, Rhona Brankin, the Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development, said that the new operating companies had had to tackle the backlog of litter left on motorways "during the final months of the old contracts".— [ Official Report , 10 May 2001; c 609.]  However, on 11 June, I received a written answer from Sarah Boyack, in which she stated that "no evidence" to support that position had been received. Will the minister apologise to the local authorities and their workers for that slur on their work and character?

I am devastated.

rose—

I speak on behalf of the progress group. Some people have suggested that that must be a difficult position for a member of the SNP, but it is not. SNP members have a free vote on the motion,  which is the responsible position to take. I have no difficulty in supporting the SNP amendment because it is absolutely right. It reflects what the corporate body, the progress group and the Scottish Executive—once it came into being—inherited: an ill-thought-out project that suffered from a lack of honesty. I am pleased to say that for the first time we have absolute honesty in the project. The corporate body and the progress group are to be commended for that. I do not mind patting myself on the back because it has taken a lot of hard work to get here. I also pat Andrew Welsh and the rest of my colleagues on the back. My colleagues had the strength and the public commitment to say, "We were handed this. It was done completely wrongly and we accept that, but now we are moving towards a Parliament for the people of Scotland. We must take part in that." We will work collectively to ensure that what we get at the end is a Parliament that is fit for the people of Scotland. I was not going to be political, but I will reply to Ken Macintosh, who accused the SNP of being irresponsible. What we have been doing has not been irresponsible. What was irresponsible was the mass agreement to the £195 million cap that was put in place last year, which came from a base of no knowledge of how the project was being run and how it would continue. The project that we inherited is now different. It is well managed and tightly run. Much has been thrown at us over the Alan Ezzi situation, but I tell members that Alan Ezzi came on board and made a valuable contribution. It was then realised on both sides that the project had moved on a stage, and that different skills were required. It is to the credit of the character of Alan Ezzi and to the tight management of the progress group and the SPCB that mutual agreement was reached on a parting of the ways. That is a mark of how the project is now being run—with control. In relation to the SNP amendment, it is clear that no public service money should be spent on the project. However, that is not within the remit of the project group, so I will hand that issue back. The SNP amendment also seeks to have a minister on board. For the record, I would be delighted to welcome Tom McCabe to the progress group, but I will lay down the ground rules now. If Tom McCabe comes on to the progress group, he will not be in charge and there is no way that he will fix me. [ Laughter. ] I urge every member to think for themselves and to vote the way that is right for Scotland, which is to support the SNP amendment and fully support the motion lodged by the SPCB.

I am extremely disappointed that amendment 190 cannot be debated. I move amendment 190.

I point out that the tolerable standard is often used to define the levels at which grants and development funding can be given,  particularly in housing action areas, so it is not merely about earmarking properties for demolition.

Along with the whole SNP group, I am pleased that a statement on fuel poverty has now been incorporated into the Housing (Scotland) Bill. There is no reason why the bill should not also include a statement on affordability of rents. Many studies have been carried out into this  question in the past, but they have never been properly formalised or endorsed. Over the years, there has been much debate on affordability of rents. It is ironic that we talk about affordable rents all the time without having a clear definition of the term. I feel strongly that it is time we clarified that once and for all. We all know the financial constraints under which landlords are operating and the obligations and responsibilities that they have relating to stock condition and services to tenants. We know that we are moving towards stock transfers away from councils to many new registered social landlords, some of which, under the bill, will be private housing companies. Those registered social landlords will be dependent on the private sector for development funding, the costs of which will have to be met from rents. Rents are therefore likely to rise. We would be foolish to suppose otherwise. Because of the capital funding system for housing that has been with us since 1989, there are already huge differences in rents across the country. The average weekly local authority rent in Midlothian is £25.50, whereas in the City of Edinburgh it is £45.35. The average weekly rent for a Govanhill Housing Association property is £29.07, whereas that of a Melville Housing Association property is £47.66. During the debate on the bill, we have talked a great deal about fuel poverty. There is also such a thing as rent poverty. In England and Wales, such a situation arose much earlier than it has in Scotland. Over the past couple of decades, social rents in both nations have risen alarmingly as public sector funding for housing has been reduced, with private sector funding supplying the bulk of resources for new housing development and rehabilitation of existing stock. Reliance on housing benefit has reached crisis proportions in some areas of Greater London. In Scotland, two thirds of housing subsidy is housing benefit, over which the Scottish Parliament has no control. That subsidy comes directly from Her Majesty's Treasury and it is clear from the Scotland Act 1998 that the Scottish block grant could be cut if the Treasury took the view that Scotland's councils were claiming too much subsidy. All those issues should be investigated. If the Parliament accepts my amendment, it will go some way towards ensuring that that happens. It will also send a clear message that we recognise the issue of affordability in relation to the costs of one of our society's basic commodities: housing and the roof over people's heads. I ask Parliament to support my amendment. I move amendment 174.

Amendment 174 asks the Executive to define affordable rents. The Executive has already defined fuel poverty and I do not think that defining affordable rents would be much more difficult. Rent is already subject to a regulatory framework, yet there is still a massive variation in rents between landlords. Rents reflect the cost of housing these days and, although we are relying increasingly on the private sector to fund that housing, the fact that rents will rise and rise affects housing benefit. Housing benefit is a reserved matter and it is right that the parties in government recognise that. However, they should understand it and be able to look ahead and see what kind of impact the increase in housing benefit to meet rising rent levels in Scotland could have on the future viability of the money that comes into Scotland through the Scottish block. I believe that we should all understand that and that we should investigate the matter. The amendment would give us a way to do that.

I suggest to you that your party makes up the Government of Scotland and you  are supposed to bring legislation forward.

You have the opportunity to do something sensible. If you wish the SNP to go away and create policy to give to you—which we have done before and I point out that you have been glad to accept some of our policies in this bill—we will do so, if you want to admit that we are the more capable party.

rose—

The effect of amendment 172 would be to make the target for the achievement of the Executive's proposals 10 years rather than 15 years, as published. I ask Labour members to think back to their manifesto for the Scottish Parliament elections in 1999, which said that they would eradicate fuel poverty within two terms of a Labour Administration at Holyrood. They are now giving themselves an extra seven years. I am being very generous in giving the Executive an extra two years. I know that Robin Harper will say that the eradication of fuel poverty should be carried out in eight years. I urge the Parliament to be ambitious.

I am in a state of shock. When the groupings were published, I thought, "Oh gosh, what's happening to the assistant registrar of friendly societies?" Then, after a wee bit of digging about, I found out that the poor soul is being abolished by Westminster and that his functions are being transferred to the Financial Services Authority. I would be interested to know why it has taken until stage 3 for all these amendments to be lodged. Is it because the minister's colleagues in Westminster forgot to tell her? [ Interruption. ]

I wish to refer to some of the contradictions of this debate, which is about the extension of the right to buy. The first contradiction is this: in a short while, we will hear about all the wonderful amelioration provisions that are being inserted about the existing right to buy, including pressured area status and fewer discounts. That is fine, and I can go along with that. The justifications that I am hearing from various people in the chamber who argue that right to buy is suddenly fine because of those provisions are amazing. Surely the bottom line is that if there was real concern about preserving rented housing, not only would we have the amelioration provisions, but we would not have the extension of the right to buy to housing associations. It makes perfect sense to me. The second contradiction is about balanced communities. They are mentioned in the bill and we have been hearing about them for two years. I ask the Executive to tell me what kind of balanced communities we will have in the west end of Glasgow, in the city centre of Edinburgh and in the rural areas that Maureen Macmillan mentioned. In 10, 15 or 20 years, we will back in the holiday homes scenario in rural areas and we will have no social rented housing in the west end of Glasgow or in the centre of Edinburgh.

Some balanced communities  those will be. Many members mentioned the opportunity that has been given to people to own their own home. That is fine. I do not have a problem with that.

No, I do not. However, if we want people to own their own homes, we should be imaginative and preserve the social rented stock that is in place. Why do not we consider giving subsidies to first-time buyers? We could let them leave the social rented sector to buy a home. Why do not we consider further low-cost home ownership and shared ownership? Yet again, the bill gives housing associations a kicking and the Executive is giving another kicking to the voluntary members who work their butts off and give up their time, week after week, because they care about their communities and about balanced communities. They do not want to become glorified estate agents, which is what the Executive will turn some housing associations in some areas of Scotland into. We owe the voluntary members, the tenants, those who are on the waiting lists and the homeless more than that.

Will the minister give way?

The minister commented on anti-social behaviour orders leading to the conversion of Scottish secure tenancies to short Scottish secure tenancies. At the beginning of May, I asked in a parliamentary question whether the Executive's legal advice was that that complied with the European convention on human rights. I have not yet had a reply to that question and I would be obliged if the minister could give me an answer now.

I want to speak in particular to Executive amendment 27. It would delete the successful stage 2 amendment 93 which, although lodged by the SNP, was supported by a further two of the main parties in the chamber.

Not yet. Amendment 93 did not give RSLs the right to refuse homelessness nominations: it said that a local authority should have regard to the allocation policies of an RSL—and, indeed, why not? Following that successful stage 2 amendment, a  lot of nonsense has been spoken about RSLs.

Not yet. I stress the uniqueness of community-based housing associations and the voluntary work by committee members that makes those housing associations unique. A lack of partnership and understanding between landlords dealing with homelessness does no good. I emphasise that at no point in all this talk has any evidence been produced—by anyone in the chamber or by any lobby group—that shows that housing associations do down homeless people. There is no evidence that when Scottish Homes guidance says homelessness categories should appear in their allocation policies they do not take their share of homeless allocations. I know from experience that many homeless people are housed directly by housing associations and indirectly through councils. If anyone can give me evidence to the contrary, I am willing to give way.

I can certainly comment on that. The homelessness task force is appointed by the Executive. I have great respect for the people on that task force, but we have to guard against complacency among MSPs who believe that only the representatives who sit on task forces are able to recognise what happens on the ground. There are very committed people throughout the country who work hard for no pay. They are volunteers because they happen to care about homelessness and they do their bit to work on it. They deserve a say as well. The Executive sits on task forces, discussing things and doing little deals, and we come along and upset the apple cart. [ Interruption. ]

We upset the apple cart and the Executive turns all its forces against us. Why do some MSPs in the chamber not think for themselves?

I have made no accusations; I have stated an opinion.

The SNP welcomes a stronger emphasis on equal opportunities. I acknowledge that the Equal Opportunities Committee worked hard to ensure that the bill enshrined the need for equal opportunities. There is a concern that many people in society pay only lip service to equal opportunities. I ask the minister to make some mention of a method of assurance. How will the provisions be implemented and appropriately monitored?

This afternoon's debate seems to be a meeting of the Kenny Gibson fan club. I am tempted just to say, "I agree with Kenny," and sit back down again. I agreed with everything that Kenny Gibson said about getting rid of CCT and with Iain Smith's comment that the Tories were just trying to  reintroduce it. In my speech, I will therefore focus on what I hope any proposals on best value will reflect. I have been reading the working group's very good suggestions for the key principles behind best value. For example, I particularly liked the suggestion that "Best value should be developed through partnership with minimum prescription." Furthermore, the working group suggests that any proposals should build on what is good and avoid new bureaucracy. I hope that the working group's proposed key principles of accountability, transparency, continuous improvement and ownership are reflected in any proposals that are introduced for the Parliament's scrutiny. I had some experience of best-value requirements when I worked with the performance standards set by Scottish Homes for housing associations. The standards were very prescriptive—sometimes verging on the ridiculous—as far as the level of monitoring and priorities were concerned. A small anecdote might help to keep those points in mind when the key principles for best value are introduced. One performance standard that housing associations had to meet was the length of time that an organisation took to re-let a house that had become vacant. A particular housing association had had only one house vacant in a particular year. However, the house had gone on fire and it had taken three months for the house to be brought back up to standard and re-let. Because of Scottish Homes' prescriptive performance standards, the housing association had had to divide those three months—or 93 days—by the one house, which gave a performance standard of an average 93 days before it re-let a vacant house. Nothing within the Scottish Homes guidelines allowed any discretion or special case status for that housing association, which was accordingly marked down. We must be able to consider individual circumstances and ensure that we do not make the rules too prescriptive.

I will be very honest. I have worked in three or four housing associations, and in one instance I recommended not using the DLO because it was not particularly good and did not perform well. However, that was mostly down to the fact that its level of service had been mucked about by Conservative policies.

No, it is not suspicious; it is a fact.

Yes, absolutely. As I said, I am speaking only from my experience, and I have not worked in the co-op sector in Glasgow. Nor can I give the figures for every different housing association. I suspect that what Andy Kerr says is right, and that council DLOs undertake an awful lot of housing association work throughout the country.

I am afraid that I have run out of the time that I am allowed for interventions, although Colin Campbell has offered me his. I conclude with two issues that I want to throw open to members. First, would the roads contract that recently went from local councils to the private sector have gone to the private sector on the basis of best value as the Executive regards it, bearing in mind the fact that cost is not the ultimate measure of best value? Secondly, I agree with Pauline McNeill that workers' rights and conditions must be protected, and I ask members to think about the likes of national health service trusts, in which the rights and conditions of workers have been eroded and ancillary workers' jobs sold off to the private sector.

I would love to speak about the benefits of independence for Scotland, but I will stick to the brief. The minister's motion "acknowledges the social, cultural, environmental and economic benefits that good architecture ... can bring". The most important point in the motion is the social benefits that architecture brings. Often, when we discuss architecture—and in the Executive document itself—it all becomes a bit high flown and we get away from the real benefits that architecture can bring. I am not especially criticising that, because it is a fault throughout  society that when issues such as architecture are mentioned, people say, "Oh, I don't really want to know about that." It then becomes a discussion for those and such as those. One of the observations of the Royal Incorporation of Architects in Scotland was that "The architecture policy consultation did not capture the imagination of the public". That is a fact. Mike Russell talked about the number of members of the public that turned up at meetings. That is noted throughout the consultation. We must address the issue, because architecture captures the imagination of the public, but only certain aspects of architecture. We must examine that and learn from it. It has been mentioned that although there have been a lot of disasters in housing, a lot of good work has also been done. I contend that most of the good stuff that has been done in housing is where it has captured the imagination of the public and there has been direct public input into the finished product. Housing associations are in the front line in the promotion of that. I have seen it in action. Architecture can capture the imagination of the public, if they are truly participating in creating the end product. We should promote that—it is stressed throughout the document. Page 6 states: "Because the purpose of architecture is to serve and sustain human life, it has all the complexities of life." That is wonderful; it does. The document also says: "We should develop a better understanding of the needs of building users, of their perception of space and place and of the ergonomics of use." My final quotation comes from page 44, where it says: "The essential and irreducible purpose of building is to meet human needs". Absolutely. However, something still bothered me. I asked one of the researchers to find out where the document mentions accessibility, because one of the issues about architecture that we must address is accessibility for everyone in our society, including the disabled. The researcher told me that accessibility is mentioned only on page 35. Sure enough, the word "accessible" is mentioned, but the document says only: "We need to make the vocabulary, grammar and language of building design accessible to all." That kind of talk does not make building design accessible to all. Instead of sending these glossy documents into the community, we should be offering people real choice and participation in architectural matters.  I have some serious concerns about architecture and the built environment in relation to the disabled. Part III of the Disability Discrimination Act 1995 comes into operation in 2004. As building regulations apply to any new building, rehabilitation or alterations, any buildings currently planned or under way are likely to meet the criteria outlined in the act. However, the act also impacts on existing premises and covers any property that provides a service. Broadly speaking, that includes public buildings such as shops and offices. It requires that reasonable adjustments are made to properties to make them accessible to the disabled. At this point, I want to go off on a wee tangent about the definition of disability. Architects, planners and those involved in building have too often been guilty of talking about only mobility in relation to the disabled. However, many other forms of disability are directly affected by the accessibility of buildings and the environment, and we should widen our scope on this matter. What worries me about the enactment of part III of the Disability Discrimination Act 1995 is that 2004 is not that far away and I have not seen much publicity about the need for premises to be adapted for disabled people. The Executive must start a publicity drive to make it very plain what people need to do to adapt their premises. I would be very interested to hear from the minister whether there are any plans to do so, because I hate the thought that 2004 will come around and nothing will have been done. Before I go any further, I should pick up on the point about the amount of time that people spend in buildings. The Royal Institution of Architects in Scotland has estimated that people spend about 90 per cent of their time in buildings which, as Ian Jenkins pointed out, include not just houses but hospitals, schools and leisure facilities. Such public buildings will need to meet certain criteria. I have recently received many representations in Lanarkshire that the new Hairmyres hospital building might not be disabled-friendly. As I am currently investigating that issue, I cannot make a judgment on it. However, I would like the minister's reassurance that the same stringent conditions that apply to publicly procured buildings such as the new Scottish Parliament—which will have a good level of accessibility—also apply to public buildings procured through public-private partnerships and similar private sector initiatives.

What a team, eh? I was pleased to hear that the minister is interested in hearing what all members have to say. I take that in the spirit in which it was offered. The vast majority of us in the chamber care about urban regeneration and want to find a solution that will make a huge difference to our country in the long term—and we have to think about the long term if we are being realistic. Kenny Gibson's  amendment was put forward in the same spirit of genuine co-operation and I ask members to consider the amendment in that spirit. One part of the amendment, in particular, that strikes me as eminently sensible is the suggestion that we should undertake "to carry out a comprehensive review of regeneration policy in our towns and cities with specific regard to infrastructure". The infrastructure of our cities, which has been declining, is one of the most important elements of this discussion. There seems to be a Glasgow bias in today's debate and I can speak about Glasgow as much as any other member. Having said that, Glasgow is a major city in our country and has suffered most from deprivation over the piece. There are, of course, positive stories in Glasgow, particularly in relation to the folk who take on board the community responsibility ethos and work to improve their areas. Bill Aitken mentioned the idea of individual responsibility. Individual responsibility is fine and we should all have it—although we might disagree about what it entails—but only collective community responsibility can make real differences in the regeneration of a city that has been run down in the way that Glasgow has. It is sad that many people believe that we can regenerate some areas but forget about the cities. I do not believe that. The only way in which we can regenerate west central Scotland is by regenerating Glasgow and examining the services that it provides, not only to the people who live there but to the peripheral areas. I am concerned by suburban creep. In my area, people in towns such as East Kilbride, Cumbernauld, Bothwell and Hamilton are not happy about some of the development processes that are going on. A lot of the problems are caused by the fact that Glasgow, which is the main hub—

I am not sure why Johann Lamont felt it necessary to make an intervention, as we appear to be on the same side of the  argument. I believe strongly that, to help west central Scotland, we must consider the positive parts of Glasgow and use them in our attempt to build a good and strong community in the area of which Glasgow is the centre. No one will ever hear me criticising input into Glasgow because, if anywhere deserves it, Glasgow does. Everybody should recognise the part that Glasgow plays in Scotland. Some concerns have been expressed in today's debate. The minister mentioned community planning. It is good for such a scheme to have a name, but, often, communities feel that they are being failed by their planning process. That is why I would like a review of urban regeneration. We have to ensure that people have an input. The process is about more than simply putting money into small communities and telling people that they have input and ownership and should get on with the task. We have to consider the wider infrastructure of the country. The planning regulations at present do not promote the regeneration of cities or their peripheral small towns. Many such small towns are dying and the only generation that is going on within them is housing; we are forgetting about the shops and the community facilities that have to be put in place as well. I ask the minister to take that in the spirit in which it is meant. I admire much of what is going on; I think that some of it could be done better, but that is the nature of politics—other colleagues will speak about that. We need to look at the whole picture, not just identify specific areas to put money into. Let us have a plan and a real vision for the future.

I find myself in a strange position today. I am speaking on behalf of my party's amendment, but I also have a certain sympathy with the amendment in the name of John Home Robertson. I have listened carefully to what has been said and have agreed with points on both sides of the argument. I will not reiterate the history of the situation, but I have to say that I also sympathise with the Tory stance on the incompetence and the element of deception at the start of the project to build our new Parliament. I certainly make no apologies for the Scottish Executive or for Westminster in that  regard, and I feel that it was a bit disingenuous to pass on all the responsibility to the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body. Having said that, I also feel strongly that we now have a job to get on with. As Mike Russell said, the Holyrood progress group was established in response to the need to crisis-manage a project that had been badly handled, in political terms, from the beginning. If we had done what the SNP sought to do a year ago and stopped for a period of consolidation, I believe strongly that that would have strengthened the project and saved a lot of what has gone on since then.

An amendment?

Yes.

Excuse me—I will come to the SNP amendment a bit later, if Mike Rumbles does not mind.

How childish—but that is what I would expect from Mike Rumbles. When my party agreed that, despite what had happened during discussion of the project, the important thing for Scotland was to move ahead and get a building worthy of Scotland, I had a certain motivation for accepting a place on the Holyrood progress group. The project has been referred to as the best of a bad job, but my first motivation for accepting the position was that I loved the design of the building. I said that right at the beginning. Even when I agreed—almost two years ago—that we should stop and look again at the whole project, I stated that I loved the design. I still love the design of the building, and believe strongly that design integrity has been maintained. Despite the farce and controversy that has shrouded the project from the beginning—courtesy of, among others, Westminster, the Executive and the Conservative party—I still believe that the uniqueness of the design shines through, and that it must be protected. I feel privileged to be part of the group that has been charged by the Parliament with protecting the integrity of the design and moving forward with the project. Another reason for my wanting to join the group was that I have some experience of the  construction business—albeit on a much smaller scale—and I felt that that would be usefully brought to bear in monitoring the project. Above all, it is my fundamental belief that honesty, openness and accountability are aims that every one of us who is privileged to be elected to this Parliament should aspire to and uphold in every single project with which we are involved. I am involved with this one. I thank David McLetchie for saying that he thinks I am an honest person. I am not sure where he got his quotation from—

Was it? Yet another misquote—that happens all the time about the Parliament building project. I assure everybody in the chamber that I am honest and that I believe that, in this project, we must be transparent and honest. There is no doubt that the progress group's full intention was to report to the Parliament if and when we believed that the cost was likely to go over £195 million. Note what I have just said: "if and when we believed that the cost was likely to go over £195 million". The cost has not broken that barrier yet. We are flagging up the fact that we think it is likely to do so. We are doing what is set out in our remit and approaching the corporate body. We fully expect the corporate body then to report to Parliament. I have never been naive about my position on the progress group. There have been accusations that we just sit there, listen to what we are told, swallow everything that we hear and then report. As well as being very honest, I am not daft, and I know when I am getting fed lines. I will not pretend that I sat down with the civil servants, immediately struck up a rapport with them and believed everything that they told me. I did not. In the beginning, it was fairly difficult to strike a balance between what Parliament and Executive staff thought that we should know and what we felt that we had to know. We have now achieved that balance and the group is working very well. There appears to be some naivety in the chamber. There are members who think that one can deliver everything, for everybody, all the time. That is impossible. Part of Scotland's growing up through the Parliament lies in recognising that fact and dealing with it. We do so by determining our priorities and deciding what is sustainable and which of all the competing demands is worth fighting to deliver. It is easy to stand apart from something. It is easy to carp and criticise from a base of limited knowledge and the odd piece of leaked  information. All politicians are good at doing that—some are better than others.

I do not pretend for one minute that the politicians on the progress group are running the contract. We are monitoring it. That is very important. With the Presiding Officer's indulgence, I will respond to what was said about the SNP amendment. The amendment mentions cost concerns, which we always wanted to be reported to the Parliament. It also calls for there to be a Tory member of the progress group; I ask the Conservatives to come on board and play their part—I can cope with that. Having a minister on the group may sound horrendous, but there should be accountability. I do not think that a minister should have a vote on the group, because it is a parliamentary body, but a minister should certainly attend in order to be able to report back and be accountable for what is being spent.

The Parliament will stand as a testament to Scotland. I want a brilliant Parliament building and I think that we will get one. I want it for the independent Scotland that this country will be.

Will the minister comment on the fact that, although the Executive insists on using quarterly comparators in an attempt to prove that homelessness is falling, its own statistical bulletin clearly shows that the number of homeless  applications annually is rising? Will she answer the concern of Shelter Scotland, among others, that repeat applications, which make up 25 per cent of the homeless applications received, are not shown in the statistics, even though it is clear that the system is failing 25 per cent of people who apply as homeless?

I welcome more money going into the rough sleepers initiative, but I have a genuine concern about how underspent the initiative has been so far. Has the homelessness task force undertaken to look at better ways of implementing that scheme so that full use can be made of the available resources?

My point arose from a parliamentary question.

I find the debate bizarre, because I will agree with Iain Smith on two points. The first concerns the naffness of the Tories coming here and talking about homelessness after what they did to housing in Scotland for 20 years. The second concerns Iain Smith's agreement with Tricia Marwick about the inadequacy of counting homelessness applications in Fife or nationally.

I welcome that. As I have said before, under homelessness legislation a code of guidance was issued to councils. As Tricia Marwick said, how councils operated that code of guidance depended on their philosophy. I hope that the Housing (Scotland) Bill will be amended to include provision of proper guidance. Fife is not my area. When I read Keith Harding's motion, I was quite surprised to discover how bad things are there, but the situation there is indicative of the national picture. Today, I examined the national picture. It is ridiculous. Our current measure of homelessness, by application, shows that homelessness has risen. The underlying trend is falling, but there is no denying that homelessness has risen every year since 1997. The figures are in the Scottish Executive's statistical bulletin.  What initiatives are in place to deal with homelessness? I studied the empty homes initiative in Fife. It is a five-year initiative that was put in place in 1997 and will run to 2002. Only a year remains, but less than 60 per cent of the available money has been drawn down. In Fife, the award was £916,842. In four years, only 38 per cent—about £348,000—has been drawn down. It is clear that that initiative has not worked as it was intended to. New housing partnerships affect Fife, like everywhere else. Only 50 per cent of the 2000-01 budget for new housing partnerships has been spent. Keith Harding mentioned the rough sleepers initiative in Fife. By the end of January, only 48 per cent of the agreed funding for the year had been spent. I would never dispute that the ideas are good or that the initiatives are great, but the implementation of the initiatives is important and has been lacking in the past few years. The extension of the right to buy in Fife and everywhere else, as is proposed in the Housing (Scotland) Bill, is ill informed. Each house that is purchased under the right to buy in Fife or elsewhere is a house less for allocation to the general waiting list or to a homeless person. Homelessness should be alleviated by keeping a stable and increasing housing supply. That supply should not be eroded.

It was nice to hear Donald Gorrie espousing SNP policy. Does the minister agree that, to alleviate the situation regarding rural homes, he should consider bringing legislation to the Parliament to make it necessary to apply to a planning authority to change the use of a home to a holiday home?

I noticed that a couple of members declared interests during the debate. I have three interests to declare in relation to credit unions.  First, I am a former member of a credit union that I joined when I worked in Clydebank and which, sadly, I had to leave. It has been a great sadness to me that I have been unable to join a credit union where I now live. I am delighted by Cathy Jamieson's announcement, as I will again be able to become a member of a credit union. Secondly, on volunteers day last year, when we all did our bit, I spent the day with East Kilbride Credit Union. The volunteers there work really hard, but I got totally confused when I was counting up the money and was sent to make the tea. Perhaps that is a mark of the adaptability of politicians. Thirdly, I have been sitting on tenterhooks, as I was sure that someone—Des McNulty, perhaps, as he mentioned Dalmuir Credit Union—would bring up my third interest. During the mid-1980s, I was in the promotional video for Dalmuir Credit Union, playing the part of a Dalmuir lady who was deeply in debt. I was almost certain that someone would haul out that video and start to show it, and I am terribly glad that Des McNulty did not do so. My colleague—and friend, up until that point—Fiona Hyslop said that I should not worry, as that was so long ago that no one would recognise me. Now that I have made all those declarations of interest, I would like to state that I am a long-time supporter of credit unions, as is the SNP. Our position has always been clear: credit unions have a valuable part to play in the development of small-banking services for people in the community whose income is too modest to be of any interest to the clearing banks and building societies. As other SNP members have said, we welcome the action plan and look forward to it being enacted. However, it would seem that much of the action in the action plan is to be undertaken by local authorities, sometimes in conjunction with the new Scottish credit union partnership that is to be set up as part of the plan. Local authorities seem to have been given a role in areas including feasibility studies, monitoring and supervision, premises—some of which are already supplied by local authorities—membership promotion and development of teaching materials. Are those areas being funded out of the funding package that has been announced? Will on-going funding be fed through to local authorities for that work? When will the new SCUP report back and how will it report to members on its progress? I am sure that all members would like to see the development of credit unions progress quickly. I mentioned earlier my sadness on having to leave the Clydebank credit union. That sadness resulted from the common bond and affinity that people need to have to become a credit union member. Although mutuality is important—indeed  it is everything—I am concerned about how the need for it can exclude people. I live in a small town, which is just outside East Kilbride, and even though it is in the same constituency, I cannot become a member of East Kilbride Credit Union. Will the new action group look at ways to try to widen access to and accessibility of credit unions? Members mentioned that, along with the issue of rural credit unions and how it is sometimes difficult to achieve a common bond. I would like to see a lot of discussion around how to encourage people to take part in credit unions. If that involves looking at affinity and common bonds, we will have to try to come up with a way that maintains the preciousness of where the movement started. The minister mentioned volunteers. All members should pay tribute to the amount of work done by the volunteers who help to run credit unions; I am not nearly as cynical about that as is Bill Aitken. One thing, however, that the minister said bothered me a wee bit—well, it did not really bother me a wee bit. She said that there can still be private money coming into credit unions and community participation. Sometimes when private money starts to come in, all of a sudden there is a regulation requiring financial bods on the management committee. I have seen that happen in housing associations. I believe and hope that that will not be put forward by the new grouping. I am aware that we are running out of time, so I will wind up with a final worry about the FSA. Many credit unions are concerned about possible additional costs in 2002 when they have to affiliate to the FSA. Will the minister let us know what is being done to alleviate their worries? What the Executive has come up with is great, and the speed with which it has come up with the proposals is much to be admired. I hope that it will be as speedy in advancing the credit union movement in Parliament.

Given that so little time was allocated for discussion of the bill, I am sad that circumstances have cut that time shorter. I am sad that some members have not been able to speak in the debate. Like Fiona Hyslop, I feel strongly that the bill represents a great opportunity missed. It has been said that the bill is for the social rented sector, but what about the private rented sector, where the most disadvantaged members of our society end up living? The bill could have examined that sector and issues such as sustainable development. It was an opportunity for innovation, embracing all the sectors, to regenerate our housing in Scotland. The proposals were meant to be a flagship policy. Robert Brown said that we cannot wave a magic wand. Perhaps not, but at least we could look to the future and try to get more than what the bill gives us. Various bits of the bill have changed since the previous minister first came up with her grand plans, which sounded so radical at the time. However, they do not seem at all radical any more. Tommy Sheridan mentioned harmonisation of rents; why can we not consider that proposal, for example? The policy memorandum objectives mention "successful balanced communities" and "better housing across all tenures". However, all the bill does is address the social rented tenure and come up with ways of eroding it. On insolvency, I know that everyone is rushing around trying to put together a statutory instrument that will widen the Parliament's powers to address the anomaly that the bill will allow between friendly societies and private companies. I back up Fiona Hyslop's earlier plea—if we are going to do that, we should be really radical and ensure that the Scottish Parliament has responsibility for housing benefit.

Well, that means that we are both disappointed. I am incredibly disappointed in the bill; the minister is incredibly disappointed in the SNP. There we go. I started work in the social housing sector at a time when tenements were being refurbished. We did not do the job properly then. The first lot of houses in Glasgow and the inner cities were done up on the cheap through a patch-and-repair system; now we have to redo all those houses. This is a bit of a patch-and-repair housing bill, and I can see us in an independent Scotland some years down the line having to go back and fix it. Let us hope that it does not need fixing sooner. However, as much as I am disappointed, this is a general principles debate and I will be gracious. We agree with the bill's general principles, although we wish that there were a few more general principles to agree to. I echo Sandra White's comments about the bill's principles on homelessness, which are great and are certainly welcome. We will make the utmost use of the stage 2 scrutiny process and I am sure that our many amendments will be welcomed for the purposes of discussion. The issue of codes of practice came up at the Equal Opportunities Committee. I have a great horror of codes of practice suddenly appearing after legislation is passed and I ask the Executive to consider introducing codes of practice for our consideration at stage 2. One of the problems with the Housing (Homeless Persons) Act 1977 was that the code of practice was introduced after it was passed, which meant that authorities operated it differently. We need something firm about codes of practice in the bill. I was asked by some housing people about regulation. In my experience, strategic powers for local authorities are a great idea—as that was, and is, SNP policy, we welcome it. However, on behalf of housing associations, I make a plea that, when local authorities are given such strategic roles, existing arrangements should be sacrosanct. We should allow development programmes to be completed as agreed; it is extremely important that we do not suddenly stop plans in midstream. It is also crucial that, when those programmes are completed, housing associations should be able to sustain investment. Of course, that brings us to the right to buy, although I will address that issue in a minute. Housing associations have been made to run as businesses and a business can run properly only if its asset base is secure.  I have some concerns about the cost to local authorities of the preparations that they will need to make. Worries have also been expressed about the non-independent status of the executive agency. I hope that those issues will be considered at stage 2. The bill seems to suggest that housing associations will be subject to much more scrutiny than local authorities will be. That situation should be equalised. It is often said that housing associations are not accountable; having worked for them for years on a voluntary management committee, I can tell members that there is accountability. Tenants are board members and there is nothing more accountable than tenants who run their own businesses.

No. It is not fair for a member who has just walked into the chamber to ask to intervene.

I will give way to Cathie Craigie.

Fine—I acknowledge that point. I apologise for bobbing up and down, but I am conscious of the time and I want to talk about the right to buy. When Fiona Hyslop was talking about the right to buy, she was asked whether the SNP wanted the Executive to revert to its original proposals. We do not want that. We want the Executive not to extend the right to buy—it is as simple and straightforward as that. Forget the extension of the right to buy. The excuse is always that the right to buy is necessary to sustain the single social tenancy, but that does not stack up. There are anomalies within the single social tenancy; fully mutual co-operatives, occupancy agreements, tied housing and travellers are not covered. We do not have any single social tenancies and we will not get any, great though they would be. Therefore, let us not pretend that we need the right to buy to have social tenancies. I am bothered by the Executive's insistence on the 80:20 split. We keep hearing that 70-odd per cent of folk would like to own their homes and that we must support that. However, 70-odd per cent of folk would like to own a Porsche or a Ferrari, but that is not going to happen. Let us be realistic.

Wonderful stuff. I suspect that the 80:20 split is about a UK strategy, following on from the strategy in England. I would like to look wider, to some of the most successful countries in Europe. Denmark has 51 per cent owner-occupation. In Germany the figure is 43 per cent, in the Netherlands it is 52 per cent and in Sweden it is 39 per cent. Some years ago, I was surprised when someone told me that the highest level of home ownership is in third-world countries. Perhaps we should consider that fact. While we are looking at the successes in Europe, we should also consider innovation and the co-op model. Johann Lamont mentioned housing co-ops. Those are run wonderfully in the Scandinavian countries. Why cannot we consider that idea instead of pushing all the time for the right to buy? Bill Aitken said that the success of a housing association lies in community ownership. I agree with that whole-heartedly. It is community ownership that matters, not individual ownership. The Labour manifesto for the election to the Scottish Parliament said: "Our aim is to encourage community ownership". It seems that we are now encouraging individual ownership and delivering home ownership targets on the cheap. For all the talk about balancing communities, we could end up disempowering communities. Johann Lamont said that community ownership empowers. Real empowerment is about having control of the rental stream, no matter who the landlord is. Our aspiration should be to give people a real say in their housing, real participation and real community empowerment. Members have talked about giving people choice over home ownership. What about the choice for future generations, when all the decent social rented housing has been bought up under the right to buy? Housing associations have been preserving that stock of decent housing, but it is going to be eradicated. We hear that right-to-buy sales will constitute only 2 per cent of sales a year. That will not be the case throughout the country. In some areas, the figure will be 0 per cent, because people will not want to buy.

I do not have time. In other areas, the figure will be 10, 11 or 12 per cent. My experience of housing development in rural Scotland illustrates that. In some areas, people want to buy their houses, and families club together to buy them. I worked, with others, on a scheme in Cairndow. We provided 10 social rented houses for a housing association in an area where people were living in winter lets and  caravans on the banks of Loch Fyne. Ten years down the line, we could end up having to start all over again because those houses will have been sold under the right to buy. We have talked about the single social tenancy, and the Executive is now talking about levelling the playing field for the right to buy. I counted this all up earlier—right-to-buy current rights maintained, right to buy preserved on stock transfer, new right to buy active, new housing association right to buy deferred for 10 years, new housing association right-to-buy opt-in, new right to buy suspended in pressured areas, and new right to buy suspended due to housing association financial viability. However, an awful lot of people will have no right to buy, because they will have no chance of getting a social rented house. Those people are the most important category of all.

Will Karen Whitefield give way?

Will the member give way?

Here we are again and practically every speaker has mentioned Scotland's appalling health record and winter deaths while quoting from Shelter Scotland and Energy Action Scotland. We have been doing that for two years now. Yet here we are, almost halfway through the first session of the Parliament and we are only now learning that fuel poverty will be addressed in the Housing (Scotland) Bill. The Executive has come forward with an amendment to that bill, but why was it not there right at the beginning?

Not yet. How many times do we have to debate the horror of what is happening in our country before we do something about it? I am not going to spend any more time with that. The minister seems to be quite happy to go into partnership with the UK Government and wait for the results of that before making a decision. We have heard that before. Why can we not just do things ourselves?

Minister, there is something that you guys seem to forget: you are the Government, you are in charge and you are supposed to come up with the solutions. You are not doing it. But  when we have an independent Scotland, it shall be done. Tommy Sheridan mentioned the oil. The SNP would use the tax revenues from oil to ensure the complete eradication of fuel poverty in this country. They do it in Norway, so why can we not do it? Why do we have a culture of no can do? The minister said that we suffered from low investment in housing stocks for two decades. Yes, we did. I am certainly not going to stick up for the Tory party. Its tenure of government was appalling for Scotland. However, we have to face the truth and be realistic about the problems in Scotland: there has been no investment in Scotland's housing for an awful lot longer than two decades. That started way back. The only decent council housing that we got in this country was after the second world war when we had the homes for heroes. We see evidence of that all over the country, and lots of it in Glasgow. The decent stock in Glasgow has now largely been bought up through the right to buy and is no longer in the social rented sector. Do not blame the Tories for everything. We have had successive Labour and Tory Governments in our country for years and years. Here we are in a brand-new millennium and we still have fuel poverty in our country. It is absolutely disgusting.

No, thank you. Labour members are all sitting there saying, "What would you do, what would you do? What's needed?" I will tell them what is needed. What is needed is not the piecemeal approach, as described by Shelter and mentioned by Keith Harding. We do not need a piecemeal approach with lots of initiatives that confuse everybody. What we need is some decent co-ordination. Donald Gorrie spoke about building standards and about the tolerable standard. I asked yesterday during the debate on sustainable development why a tolerable standard, including energy efficiency, cannot be part of the Housing (Scotland) Bill which is supposed to improve housing conditions in Scotland. Why can we not do that in our country? It seems to me to be fairly simple and straightforward. Why, before Glasgow's pensioners can access funds for central heating, are we waiting for the result of the ballot on stock transfer in November? That that is the case is confirmed in two letters that the minister has written to members of my party. I do not have time to quote them—

No, I do not have time. What is needed is real energy efficiency and real  sustainable development. We need to take this issue seriously. We need to get away from the standard assessment procedure ratings and start to consider proper thermal U-values that cover every element of building. This is not just about insulation, which, as Robin Harper pointed out, does not even help with fuel poverty; and it is not just about central heating, especially when, as Tricia Marwick pointed out, people will not get that central heating if they have any form of it at all in the house. We end up going way back to the 1960s again, to Parker Morris standards, but they still apply in the new millennium. That is absolutely out of order. We need to consider every element of housing, including roofs, windows and doors. We need to take advice, not from England but from Europe. They do these things. Can you not get it through your heads? They do it, and we can do it. It is perfectly easy. You have made an awfully big play about not having to wait for permission from London. I should remind you that in your manifesto you were quite clear that you were going to end fuel poverty in Scotland within two terms of government. It was a terrible assumption that you would get a second term—that shows typical complacency. However, you are now going with the UK figures and saying that it will be 2010 and perhaps 2015 before fuel poverty is ended. That is ridiculous. Why can you not stick to your original promise? Why must you wait for the UK strategy? In particular, I want an answer to my last question, because you did not give one to Fiona Hyslop or Sandra White. Where is the £350 million for the central heating programme coming from?

rose—

I intervene because I do not know a lot about this subject and I would  appreciate some clarification from the minister. Is there any establishment for the excellence of ballet, particularly in the Highlands and Islands, that is funded nationally, apart from the Dance School of Scotland, which is based at Knightswood Secondary School? I am talking about 16-year-olds who have shown a wonderful talent, as Richard Simpson said. We should nurture that talent and export it throughout the world to show what Scotland is capable of. Is there anywhere that is funded nationally that pupils over 16 can attend to develop those talents? If there were, those pupils would not have to leave home and go to other countries to study.

A horrible thought.

Sam Galbraith's motion is indeed fine and genuine. It is unfortunate that he has left the chamber, because I was going to suggest that, if he becomes a bit more gracious and answers questions when they are asked, he, too, might be described as fine and genuine one day. The Parliament should affirm its commitment to sustainable development and recognise, as the minister's motion states, "the importance of sustainable development to achieving social justice". However, the rightness of Bruce Crawford's amendment cannot be denied. Everyone in the Parliament and beyond must recognise that we have a great deal of work to do, in many fields, on sustainable development. Social inclusion must be at the heart of that. Kenneth Macintosh was right to use the quotations that he did to illustrate the fact that we can become a sustainable society only if we put people at the heart of our society. Last year, a Scottish Natural Heritage paper spoke of achieving social well-being and equality through sustainable development—that must be the bedrock of any sustainable development policy. That is why I have some concerns about the Housing (Scotland) Bill. The bill gave us a  wonderful opportunity to put sustainable development at the heart of legislation that would be of great importance to our communities. The policy memorandum says that the bill is intended to contribute to high-quality and affordable houses to rent and to purchase, and to improve the quality of Scotland's housing and deliver decent housing options for all. I am afraid, however, that the bill will not achieve that. We have ended up with a watered-down version of those great intentions. The bill deals with social housing, the right to buy and not a lot else. Except for a small increase in the powers of local authorities to make grants for improvements in the private sector and a tiny improvement in the tolerable standard, the bill fails to deliver. The tolerable standard was introduced as far back as 1969. We need radical changes to any level of tolerable standard in housing if we are to make a difference. I think that 1969 is an appropriate time to look back to. If my memory serves me right, the Scottish Office report on sustainable development suggested a 30-year programme. We can look back at the 1960s, which was 30 years ago, and see the results of the bad housing decisions that were made then and that have resulted in absolutely appalling living conditions for many people in this country. They have also resulted in fuel poverty, which we are debating in the chamber tomorrow. All those issues are sustainable development issues. We have houses in Scotland that people cannot afford to heat and houses that people cannot afford to live in. By chance, a magazine was delivered to me this morning. It says that, in a two-bedroom flat in Easterhouse that was built in the 1960s, heating, lighting and cooking costs the resident £35 a week. It also points out that, in a two-bedroom house in Easterhouse that has recently been completed to half-decent standards, heating, lighting and cooking costs only £13 a week. I cannot think of a better way to promote sustainable development than for the Scottish Parliament to decide to bite the bullet and get on with creating a housing bill that will truly make a difference to the lives of people in our community and will eradicate fuel poverty. That is not about saying that we will give all pensioners central heating if they agree to the stock transfer proposals. We have to admit that mistakes were made in the 1960s and agree that we cannot afford to make them again. We have to look forward and set ourselves indicators and targets—one cannot measure one's grand ideas unless one measures their implementation. I urge members to support Bruce Crawford's amendment.

Having stated in the chamber this morning that central Scotland's local authorities have failed in municipal housing provision, does the Scottish Executive agree that in order to make strategic plans work, there must be firm implementation plans? Will the Scottish Executive pay for them, monitor them stringently and review them regularly?

This should be a non-debate. Given the circumstances of Scotland's housing and the desperate need for investment, we should expect no one to oppose the principle behind the Scottish Socialist Party's motion and the SNP's amendment. I hoped that I would not have to speak because the minister would concede the principle of the motion and confirm her intention to rescind immediately the capital receipt set-aside rules, as the Labour party demanded when it was in opposition. However, I have long since realised that the Executive has a different perspective on housing and on many other issues from most Scots. Perhaps the minister needs to be reminded of  the housing issues that must be tackled. Approximately 25 per cent of Scotland's houses are affected by dampness or condensation—that is about half a million homes in which young people and particularly the elderly face significantly increased risks of respiratory and other illnesses. The problem affects as many as 370,000 young people and more than 100,000 of our elderly population. It is no wonder that illness and death beset our elderly at this time of year because of cold-related illnesses. Those deaths are not often headlined, but we know that they occur. We know why they occur, and we know what we should do to prevent them. Improving social housing stock would help enormously, but still the Executive dithers. Still, the Executive relies on the panacea of housing stock transfer to provide the resources for much-needed investment. Still, the Executive refuses to recognise that the right to buy means that fewer council tenants will foot the bill for council housing improvement and repair. That is why rents are rising. It is crazy and out of order that the majority of the proceeds from right-to-buy sales cannot be used to improve the lives of the people who remain in social housing.

No. Those funds cannot be used for even basic central heating—which is mentioned in the Executive's amendment. Why are we waiting so long? In Glasgow, is it because we must wait for the housing stock transfer? The set-aside rules and other factors have led to the massive reduction in public investment in housing. Since the rules were introduced in 1996, public capital investment has been reduced to half what it was during the preceding years of Tory rule. At first glance, this debate appears to be about unintelligible rules of public finance, but it should be about the impact of those rules on the lives of ordinary Scots and the people who look to the Parliament and the Scottish Government to make a difference. Before the election, the Liberal Democrats supported the call for greater public investment in housing. The Executive's programme promises only greater private investment, and that only if tenants can be forced to vote yes in a ballot. I ask the Liberal Democrats to use the debate to show that they are firm in their support for greater public investment in housing by supporting Tommy Sheridan's motion, as amended by me on behalf of the Scottish National Party. I move amendment S1M-1626.1, to leave out from "also" to end and insert:  "notes that the imposition of the capital receipt set aside rules is only one example of the attack on public investment in housing that began under the Conservatives and has been continued by the present UK Government and Scottish Executive; regrets that the Labour Government and this Labour/Liberal administration have continued this Conservative policy, and calls upon the Scottish Executive to rescind the capital receipt set aside rules with immediate effect and so inject much needed funding into Scotland's public sector housing."

In preparing for today's debate, I had a look back at a previous debate that had been called by the Scottish Green Party. The motion, like today's, was an admirable one, which the SNP was happy generally to support. It covered housing energy efficiency, a subject that is related to today's. Sadly, Robin Harper's motion was amended by the Executive in the now predictable, self-congratulatory manner. Today's motion, like Fiona McLeod's amendment, is ambitious and aspirational. That is what the Parliament and Scotland should be. I often think that the terminology that is necessary to describe green initiatives and alternative energy strategies seems a bit futuristic and does not quite touch people in the here and now. Let us face it: if someone is living in a house that is damp and badly insulated and that they  cannot afford to heat, they will not give high priority to meeting climate change protocols or worrying about greenhouse gas emissions. There are too many people in that situation. A 1996 Scottish house conditions survey showed that almost 180,000 households use more than 20 per cent of their income on heating and hot water. Fuel poverty has always been high in Scotland, partly because of the cold, damp climate. Other European countries have similar climates—the Scandinavian countries and the Netherlands, for example—but Norway, Sweden and Denmark have a long-standing commitment to energy efficiency in housing, using the tools of rigorous building regulations and innovative solutions that not only improve living standards in the domestic market but strive to achieve measurable results in the reduction of energy consumption and harmful emissions. Denmark and the Netherlands have implemented successful solar energy programmes that, as we have heard, have created considerable employment. What has happened in Scotland, however? BP has moved its solar headquarters out of Scotland and Shell announced last year its intention to cease its photovoltaic panels activities here. That is sad and shameful. Scotland has not embraced the philosophy of sustainable housing development. We have had innovative schemes here and there, which are to be applauded, but the fact is that nine out of 10 of our homes were built before the introduction of improved energy efficiency standards. Fewer than one in three homes have the desirable combination of central heating, adequate insulation and double glazing. There is a lot of catching up to be done and a lot of serious decisions to be made about Scotland's housing stock. We have to bite the bullet and not only radically amend building regulations for new stock but be truly committed to the improvement of existing properties. Our grant system is likely to be slightly improved by the Housing (Scotland) Bill, but why not commit to real improvement and innovative solutions such as take-up grants for the installation of solar water heaters and renewable energy technology? The Executive should be providing information and incentives. Achieving those goals would cost money. However, we should not think only of the initial capital cost, but try to achieve best value through lifetime, social and environmental costing. Our European partners in the Scandinavian countries have shown the way in developing energy-efficient homes as part of their environmental commitments. Such homes should be a central plank of our environmental, health and anti-poverty strategies. However, the long-term benefits will come only after the initial commitment and investment. I support the Scottish Green  Party's motion as amended by Fiona McLeod. I ask the Scottish Government to stop congratulating itself and to commit to and invest in Scotland's future.

Will the minister join me in welcoming to the gallery Diana Miloslavich Tupac, who is a human rights activist from Peru? As one of its first actions, the provisional Government in Peru has signed that treaty, and I know that the chamber would like to congratulate Peru on doing so.

Like other members, I welcome the introduction of this bill and congratulate Cathie Craigie on it. I was also pleased when the SNP tried to lodge a similar amendment to the Abolition of Feudal Tenure etc (Scotland) Bill some time ago, although it was not accepted. It should be noted that the proposed change to the law would already have been enacted if that amendment had been accepted and agreed to by the Parliament. I have some experience, through previous work, of homelessness due to repossessions. It is fairly common for people who work in housing to come  across people who, at the last minute, turn up at their door and say, "I am going to be homeless because my house is being repossessed." I regret the fact that Wendy Alexander did not fulfil her statement and invite consultation on this aspect of housing in the consultation for the Housing (Scotland) Bill. It would have been good to have an all-encompassing housing bill rather than one that deals only with social housing—especially because, as the minister said, the numbers for homelessness and repossessions are rising. In the area in which I worked, there was an especially high take-up of the right to buy, so there was proportionally less social rented housing for homelessness purposes. I find it horrifying that, in housing repossession cases in which people own their homes, local authorities can deem those people to be intentionally homeless—as if they do not pay their mortgage deliberately, rather than in situations in which they find it impossible to pay. I was pleased to hear that Cathie Craigie is willing to consider and accept amendments at stage 2. She has already noted that some are likely to go ahead. Because I am not a member of the committee that will deal with the bill, I would like to mention a couple of aspects of it for clarification, with the intention of possible future amendment. My first point seems fairly minor, but people who work in housing would say that it is major. Many members have mentioned that folk bury their heads in the sand when they are faced with the repossession of a rented house or the repossession of an owned house by lenders. The bill says that notices will be served by recorded delivery. Although that sounds good and proof can be obtained of the receipt of that notice, there can be no proof that the person who has received a recorded delivery letter has opened the envelope, let alone read and understood its contents. I have known cases when notices have simply been ripped up and thrown in the bin without being read—the ostrich syndrome. I wonder whether discussions at stage 2 could focus on how we can ensure that people realise what is likely to happen to them. It should not be about simply ensuring that they receive a letter. My second point is that I would like consideration to be given to section 24 of the Conveyancing and Feudal Reform (Scotland) Act 1970, whereby people can be taken to court by the lender for refusing to participate in maintenance of their property. That can be a big problem in tenement property, where there is common ownership of some aspects of the accommodation. I would like that part of the bill to be considered in more detail and perhaps expanded. There is a proposal for tenement law to be revised, and the matter could be addressed as  part of that revision. Cathie Craigie and other members mentioned that there should be some form of amendment concerning the Council of Mortgage Lenders, as some lenders have good codes of practice, but we should not forget that lenders also have obligations. The onus is on lenders to be realistic about people's abilities to make payments when they set the level of the loan. That applies particularly when new houses are sold with mortgages covering fixtures, fittings and carpets. In such cases, people can end up paying a mortgage over 25 years for a fridge. That is a bad practice and lenders should take a look at themselves in relation to it. Government also has a responsibility. I repeat what the minister told us today: repossession and homelessness are increasing. Maybe home ownership is not the answer to everyone's prayers. While many aspire to home ownership, for many people that aspiration can never be a reality. We should recognise that fact and the Government in Scotland should admit it and rethink its strategy of attaining 80 per cent home ownership. It should also reconsider the proposed extension of the right to buy, which will negatively affect the stock of some of the landlords in Scotland who play an active role in rehousing those who have their houses repossessed. My last comments aside, I warmly welcome the bill and look forward to its next stage in the Scottish Parliament.

The SNP commends the members of the Scottish partnership on domestic abuse on the report, and all the agencies and individuals that contributed to and informed the debate over the piece. Our party's position has long been that a national strategy is necessary and we are pleased that this Parliament has produced a working document. I say that the Parliament produced a working document, but not as an attempt to do down the Executive in any way. The Minister for Social Justice mentioned the cross-party consensus on this matter and it is important that the whole Parliament takes ownership of this issue and moves it forward. Over the past couple of weeks, the SNP has criticised the Executive's strategy papers on social justice and equality. I want Parliament to understand that our position was born not out of disregard for the fine principles in those strategies, but out of the frustration that we feel that, under the devolution settlement, we do not have the powers truly to implement them. That is not so this time. It is wonderful that, this time, the Parliament has the powers to address one of the biggest problems facing Scotland. With the commitment of all members, I am optimistic about the results. However, we should not get carried away and start to believe that the problem can be sorted quickly and simply by cash injection. We should recognise that the strategy must be implemented in two main areas: we have to deal with the symptoms, which can be alleviated in the short term, and we have to tackle the root causes, which is a long-term goal. As the minister said, the strategy's aims define those as the three Ps—prevention, protection and provision. Today's funding package will go a long way towards provision, and the consistency of that funding must be maintained. I was glad that that was detailed in the minister's speech. However, protection and prevention are a lot more difficult. Earlier this afternoon, it was made clear that many of us have huge concerns about the weaknesses in our criminal justice system and its seeming inability to cope fairly and equitably with all those involved in it, either as victim or as alleged perpetrator. We have generally recognised that institutional racism exists in our country and that it is often implicit rather than explicit. I think that, to some extent, the same can be said of institutional sexism. I have been appalled by some  of the recent decisions of the judiciary. We hear of a man who received only 200 hours of community service after raping his estranged wife, despite a record of previous violence. Another man received two years' probation and 200 hours of community service after stabbing his estranged wife. Something is very wrong when a Scottish judge justifies his sentencing decision because a stabbing was, in the judge's words to the perpetrator, "a reaction on your part to a very distressing set of circumstances created by the victim herself." Surely no set of circumstances can invite such violence. If such attitudes persist at the highest level, how can any woman be confident of protection? If we want to influence prevention of domestic abuse, the shortcomings of our institutions must be examined and their structures must be seriously revised. There is a distinct lack of female representation in the judicial system. Scotland has 32 judges, of whom only two are women. The first was appointed only in 1996. When I discovered that this morning, I was amazed. Of 128 permanent sheriffs, only 18 are female, and of 40 procurators fiscal, only five are female. Similar figures apply to high-ranked police officers, as I have said before. The minister said that the education process must start as early as possible. I was pleased to note the action plan for education and training in the strategy. In summing up, will the minister explain how the curricular content of the pilot project that is being set up in Edinburgh primary schools fits into the curricular framework? When is the pilot study intended to finish, so that we can implement the plan in all schools? We must find ways of teaching our children that we are all equally valuable. We all have the same right to expect our lives to be free from abuse, violence and discrimination, regardless of gender, race or sexual orientation. We must also recognise that violence can be caused not only by an abuse of power, but by feelings of powerlessness or inadequacy and by lack of self-control. I hope that we will be imaginative in teaching our children. We should not underestimate their understanding of the issues. Last year, George Lyon and I visited a seminar day at Dunoon Grammar School. First-year pupils were being given citizenship training as an introduction to secondary schooling. Presentations from the local Scottish Women's Aid group and other voluntary agencies were incorporated. We should consider teaching such matters as anger management, self-control and self-worth. That is probably the long-term road to prevention of abuse. The strategy that the Parliament has produced  against domestic abuse should be welcomed. It contains a lot of good stuff, but the debate should not stop now just because we feel that we have achieved something. As consistent and planned funding is necessary, so is consistent and planned monitoring and improvement. I was pleased when the minister announced that a national group is to be set up in early 2001 to monitor the plan. She also referred to the Zero Tolerance Trust report. Perhaps the Parliament could consider whether such a report could be compiled on a regular basis, as a way of tracking changing attitudes and charting the progress of our strategy. I close with a reaffirmation of the SNP's commitment to tackling the pain and problems caused by domestic abuse in any form and aimed at any person. I trust that members will all help to make real progress in the implementation of the Parliament's strategy to address domestic abuse in Scotland.

As Mr McAllion managed to go on for double the allotted time, I am afraid that I will not. Like the rest of my colleagues, I generally welcome what has been outlined by the Executive this week. It is a sensible and progressive way forward for local government finance and the improvements that have been announced have long been supported by the SNP. It struck me that we are seeing consensus politics in action in the Scottish Parliament, as the Executive seems to be agreeing with the SNP's ideas. Long may that continue. The SNP would go further, however, as we agree with the Local Government Committee and other commentators that a full review of local government is needed. Our membership agreed that policy. I hope that this announcement, although welcome, will be deemed to be interim and that Angus MacKay, unlike Jack McConnell, will agree that a full and comprehensive review of local government finance is required. Much could be achieved by such a review. I believe that Bristow Muldoon has already mentioned the continuing problem with local government workers' wages—we all know about Unison's days of action. That issue should be brought into the review. We should also record the idea of a contingency fund, which Gil Paterson mentioned. Anyone who has visited schools in their constituencies will have seen that we have many school buildings that were built in the boom time of the 1960s and which are now coming to the end of their natural lives and will fall down unless they receive huge investment. We could consider the reasons for some recent local government actions, such as the cuts in the home-help service, which average out across Scotland at 11.5 per cent. The poorest and most deprived areas were particularly hit: Glasgow had a cut of around 20 per cent. We have an opportunity to consider many such issues and to think about how we could create the best funding framework to deliver local government services. Des McNulty talked about having a comprehensive review of expenditure throughout Scotland, from the level of the Executive down to local councils. Having worked in the voluntary sector—for housing associations that were funded by Scottish Homes—I can see that the need for that is great. It would be good if those agencies  were able to deal with a three-year funding programme and did not have to go through the annual scramble for funds and deal with the bidding process that becomes a competition that uses up valuable staff time that could be used to deal with the issues that the voluntary agencies are set up to deal with. I hope that Mr Peacock will make clear whether, as well as councils being funded for three years, a recommendation will be made to councils that they grant the voluntary sector funding on a three-year basis. That would make it easier for voluntary organisations to get match funding when the Executive tells them that they can get a certain amount only if the council grants them the same. When talking about three-year funding, the minister said that grant support could increase where there were deemed to be new burdens or a transfer of responsibility. I understand that, but I want to know whether it would be possible for a council to increase its council tax in the three-year period if, for example, the Executive said that it could not fund a particular burden. Could the electorate be let down by finding that the three-year council tax that it had been led to expect is increased midway?

Some time ago in the chamber, I called Wendy Alexander "the lecturing, hectoring minister". I see that her apprentice has learned well from her. The minister spoke about peddling confusion and would not take any interventions as she did so. However, I have never heard so much confusion from the Labour benches as I have  today.

Our motion says that we are opposed to wholesale stock transfer. I will repeat that: we are opposed to wholesale stock transfer. However, the motion does not say that we are opposed to the idea of stock transfer as such. For example, the facts that were given about what is happening in Dumfries and Galloway were wrong. SNP councillors there have moved for a moratorium on stock transfer until the housing bill has been introduced. Despite the millions of pounds that have been spent, the publication of a framework document in April and the promise of a housing bill for more than a year, Glasgow tenants are no nearer a solution than they were at previous parliamentary debates on the subject. I was disappointed to hear the deputy minister say that the policy was not under review. I had hoped that the delay might have some positive aspects. For example, could it have been used to investigate the situation and review the policy? It is ridiculous that such an option was not even considered. The deputy minister said that partial transfers are appropriate in certain situations. If so, why is it not appropriate for Glasgow tenants to have the choice of partial transfer? What is wrong with Glasgow? Why can the city not be treated like everywhere else?

No, I will not give way, because Jackie Baillie did not allow any interventions and carried on far too long. We must nail the myth that wholesale stock transfer is the only solution. At a Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee meeting on 2 February, David Comley said: "If the current debt were removed and the council were able to borrow a sum that rental incomes could sustain, yes, we could achieve investment on a faster time scale."—[ Official Report, Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee , 2 February 2000; c 573.] The Executive trusted that guy to head up its initial proposals, so ministers should not sit there and look as if they think that he does not know what he is talking about.

No, I will not take an intervention. It works both ways.

No. We are getting used to having no information from the Executive. We must also nail the myth that the SNP has a problem with community-based housing  associations and co-ops. That is not the case. Those associations are already established and I am proud of the ones in the west of Scotland, which have brilliant track records. They are run by people elected within the community and are serviced by highly committed paid staff. Although those tried and tested organisations know their stuff, they have not been offered as alternative landlords for their tenants. Is that the great plan B that we have been hearing about? Wonderful. At another Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee meeting, members discussed that great plan in connection with the housing stock transfer report. A proposed recommendation said: "The Scottish Executive should examine ways for its empowerment objectives to be achieved even where tenants choose not to pursue stock transfer as an option." It is very disappointing that the deputy minister voted against the inclusion of that recommendation in the report.

Okay.

I did not want a speech. The fact of the matter is that Margaret Curran voted against the investigation of a plan B for the Glasgow stock transfer. Why is the Executive not considering the tried and tested model being used to offer new small-scale organisation in Glasgow's localities for local residents? Is it because it could be a more expensive option? It could be, but what price social inclusion? Is it because too many tenants would be empowered to make real change in their area and would become highly organised and demanding? I think that it is largely due to a mixture of the desire to keep Glasgow City Council happy and the Executive's patronising and maternal attitude to tenants in Scotland. Glasgow's tenants—and tenant activists across the country—are no numpties. They know what is going on and what the Executive is doing.

No.  Tenants are smart folk, who are perfectly capable of taking informed decisions when they are offered realistic choices. The choice in the Glasgow stock transfer—wholesale stock transfer—is not realistic.

No, thank you.

He is not that nice. This morning, Charlie McFadden from South Lanarkshire Tenants Confederation nobbled me outside the chamber and we had a quick chat about stock transfer in general and about the role of housing associations and housing co-operatives. I like community-based housing associations and co-operatives. Charlie McFadden does not.

I will get on to that in a minute. Perhaps Charlie McFadden and I will get together some time to discuss stock transfer further, but the point is that if we agree to differ, that is fine, because it is an informed choice. That is what Glasgow's tenants are not being offered. I know that new Labour has a problem with multi-option referenda, but the choice for Glasgow's tenants should be more than a choice between transferring in a wholesale stock transfer and getting money spent on their house or staying with the council, having their house fall down round about them and not getting central heating installed. Robert Brown tried to say that the Executive's proposal was the only option because of Treasury rules. That is rubbish. So many things could be done if we used imagination and we have heard many of them today. It is a myth to pretend that wholesale stock transfer is the only solution. I believe that Scottish independence would be the best solution, but even under the limited devolution settlement there are things that the Executive could do to empower tenants, to give them real choice and to allow them to control their future. That is what is important.

Will the minister give way?

I start by giving a general welcome to the idea of social justice. The ambitious goals set by the Executive are to be admired—they are very aspirational. However, they are based on indicators, targets and measurements. The targets are so vague as to be merely broad statements. The social justice document says that the Executive will assess itself on whether it has increased the "quality and variety of homes in our most disadvantaged areas." How vague is that? How about the Executive being assessed on real targets, such as ending overcrowding, eradicating dampness and ending fuel poverty? I suggest that the target that I quoted is a reflection of the chaos in the Executive's housing policies. The targets are no more than flannel. The real issues are dealt with and the resultant policies are set by the Westminster Government. Employment, fiscal and economic policies are excluded from the powers of this Parliament. That is a great excuse, which the Executive uses over and over to allow it to set easy-to-achieve objectives and then wallow in self-congratulatory trumpet blowing. It is not only the SNP that recognises that. I enjoyed Donald Gorrie's contribution. He said clearly that benefit reforms were much needed. Would not it be wonderful if we could take that idea by the throat and shake it here in Scotland, rather than having to run down to Westminster all the time? Tommy Sheridan mentioned unemployment and poverty traps, which are a direct result of our benefits system and unfair  taxation system. My colleague Fiona Hyslop hinted earlier at concerns that the Executive was manipulating targets to suit itself and to make them easier to achieve. That is best illustrated by the watering down of the 50 indicators with specific measurements that were devised by an evaluation framework team, led by Scottish Executive officials. They were watered down into 28 weaker and vaguer social justice targets; the other 22 indicators were ignored altogether. I suggest that those indicators were ignored because they made for uncomfortable reading. I would go so far as to refute as absolute nonsense Wendy Alexander's statement in the debate a year ago.

We are considering the headline stuff now. The document also talks about reducing crime rates in disadvantaged areas and about ensuring that communities can live together in safety without being overshadowed by fear of crime. I will go away and look at all this stuff and see whether I can work out just how the Executive will achieve that. As I was saying, I refute as nonsense Wendy Alexander's statement in the debate a year ago. She said: "This is the most tightly drawn contract ever between the governed and the Government in Scotland, with its commitments on unemployment, income, education, early years, health and housing."— [ Official Report , 24 November 1999; Vol 3, c 819-20.]  How will the Executive honour its side of the contract when it has absolutely no power at all to affect the things that could really make a difference? Regardless of the targets, indicators and measurements, much of what has been said has made worthwhile listening. Sylvia Jackson referred to Mark Shucksmith's report and Richard Lochhead referred to the Joseph Rowntree Foundation. Mike Rumbles mentioned the real problem of rural poverty and how it can be assessed. I agree that we should have a data bank: great studies have already been done that we could use to build it up. Kenny Gibson talked about urban poverty in Glasgow. We must all recognise that Glasgow is a specific and special case. Everything possible must be done to raise the aspirations of those in disadvantaged areas in Glasgow. I will not waste much time on the Tories. I was rather annoyed by all that talk of personal  responsibility from a party that set out to disfranchise many Scots in disadvantaged areas and communities. Indeed, I wonder whether the Tories still believe that there is no such thing as communities.

I remind Mr Monteith that society is made up of communities. The problem with the Tories is that they have never realised that.

I will not waste any more time on Mrs Thatcher or Brian Monteith. Mike Rumbles made a great play of social justice and reform being fundamental to liberalism. If so, what is more important to Mike Rumbles, the principles of liberalism or the Labour-Liberal coalition?

Oh dear. I have so much to say. I will move on to Fiona Hyslop's amendment. Everyone in the chamber would affirm their commitment to creating a fairer society and to combating poverty. If that commitment is genuine, it follows that the most sensible way to proceed is to set targets and measurements that can be sustained over future Administrations. That can be done only with all-party parliamentary agreement and I remind members that there are six parties in the Scottish Parliament, not just two or three. I take issue with Trish Godman and Johann Lamont, who seem to think that such agreement is a ridiculous concept. They are wrong to scoff. In Ireland, the national anti-poverty strategy was set with cross-party agreement. We should emulate that. There must be general recognition that some policies are undermining progress on combating poverty in our country. If the Labour back benchers cannot bring themselves to admit that, surely some of the Liberal Democrats can. If they will not lobby Westminster to allow Scotland more powers to benefit its people, they should at least lobby the Government to change the policies at UK level. I urge members to support the SNP amendment.

I will open by quoting from last year's debate on equalities. My colleague Fiona Hyslop said: "Parliament must be getting used to its regular fix of motherhood and apple pie from the Executive".— [ Official Report , 2 December 1999; Vol 3, c 1213.]  It seems that the menu has not changed.

Fiona Hyslop was speaking about the habit that Labour ministers have developed of talking a good game and filling pages with froth. Mike Watson will be glad to know that I do not have a problem with the cover of the document. The aims of the equality strategy are well intentioned. That is laudable, but not enough. The words must be translated into plausible action. A strategy should deliver. Irene McGugan showed us how the child strategy has not delivered, and I am not sure whether we can ensure that the equality strategy will deliver without enhancing the Parliament's powers to embrace legislative competence for equal opportunities. Meanwhile, is the Government of Scotland prepared to use the additional powers under section L2 of schedule 5 to the Scotland Act 1998 again and again, as Fiona Hyslop said, to impose duties that would ensure compliance with the strategy? I hope so, but even such action would not go far enough. There has been much talk today about  institutional racism in relation to crime. At about this time last year, I submitted a written question about the percentage of female officers at each rank in each Scottish police force and in the Scottish Crime Squad. The answer showed how far we must still go in Scotland to ensure equality of opportunity between men and women. At that time, Strathclyde police was the only force in Scotland to have women officers above the rank of superintendent. The figures for the Scottish Crime Squad were even more damning. Of its constables, 16.6 per cent were female, and no officers above that rank were female. I suspect that even though targets have been published and established, there has not been much movement in the past year. In public office, women are under-represented. Fewer than 25 per cent of councillors are female and there are just over 36 per cent of us in the Scottish Parliament. We know that women earn only 72 per cent of men's average weekly wage and are more vulnerable to poverty than men. We know—Elaine Smith mentioned it—the horrendous figures associated with domestic violence towards women. Another disadvantaged group are the people whose sexual orientation does not match the norm, as dictated by our society. In Scotland, approximately 150,000 people are gay or lesbian. I was horrified at the findings—noted by Fiona Hyslop—that nearly a third of gay men and lesbians believe that their educational achievements were negatively affected by attitudes to their sexuality. I heartily applaud the repeal of section 2A as an equality measure, but it is not enough to eradicate, for example, homophobic bullying in our schools. Schools in England and Wales were surveyed on that question: 82 per cent of schools surveyed were aware of homophobic bullying but only 6 per cent referred to the unacceptability of such attacks in their anti-bullying policies. I have no reason to believe that the situation in Scottish schools would be any different were such a survey to be conducted here. I can accept that awareness raising, as mentioned by the minister, is important. I can accept that awareness raising and promotion of good policy in society is necessary, across the board, for all disadvantaged groups. What I cannot accept is that that is enough. Firm action is required. The minister's answer to Fiona McLeod's question about the inadequacies of the Transport (Scotland) Bill in relation to the disabled proved that in Scotland we are to be allowed only good intentions, rather than laws. If this Parliament is serious about equal  opportunities as a cornerstone of social justice, it must recognise that we cannot properly build social justice in this country without equal opportunities legislation, or while such legislation is reserved to Westminster. Please support the SNP amendment.

How does that commitment square with the number of people from ethnic minorities on the Executive's staff? They make up only 0.3 per cent of employees in the core departments.

In a members' debate earlier this year, the then Deputy Minister for Culture and Sport, Rhona Brankin, assured us that the national cultural strategy would at last address Scotland's traditional arts. We now have the strategy, but I do not feel that it does. There are more fine words, although not that  many, about Scotland's traditional culture. In her introduction, Rhona Brankin says: "The development of the Cultural Strategy has been a stimulating and invigorating experience". I am pleased about that, but there should be stimulation and invigoration of Scotland's traditional arts. Page 17 of the document tells us that "excellence in the traditional arts" is what is being promoted. We already have excellence in our traditional arts; it is the promotion and funding that is the problem. I asked this question before, but it was never answered, so I will ask it again: why does the core funding for the municipal arts contribute substantially to the wages and fees of performers of those art forms while there is little support for the performers of traditional music? Adequate core funding is what is required. Let the practitioners of the traditional arts spend their time doing what they do best, which is not administration and filling in lottery applications, but performing, teaching and passing on their art. We learn on page 19 of the brochure that the Executive will "Investigate the feasibility of identifying national centres of excellence in traditional arts". What on earth does that mean? I do not know. No one in the traditional arts whom I have spoken to knows what it means either. There is a worry that excellence implies a selection process, but how will it be decided who is included and who is excluded? I ask the minister to explain in plain language what "Investigate the feasibility of identifying" actually means. The strategy document, which is welcomed by the SNP, reflects culture as part of the education portfolio—an admirable and sensible grouping of responsibilities. Education and culture are inextricably linked and, rightly, the strategy wishes to extend young people's opportunities to learn instruments within and outwith the school setting. Traditional instruments—and I include voice as an instrument—must be given their rightful place. Teachers and examiners who are skilled in the traditional techniques must be identified. It took a long fight to convince the establishment that traditional music should be examined at all. Our Parliament should commit to ensuring that traditional music is given its rightful place and importance. Pilot schemes are not enough. We are talking about our country's heritage, but we are committing only £1.5 million over three years. Members should compare that with the rescue package—funding that was taken from  education, mark you, by the minister last year—that was given to Scottish Opera, which allowed it to produce Wagner's ring cycle. What a difference to the teaching of traditional arts and music in our schools that £3 million could have made. Earlier, the minister outlined further consultation plans. I look for more reassurances from the Executive this time. I ask for a commitment to a distinctly Scottish cultural strategy—and by that I do not mean that we should be insular or parochial in our cultural outlook; I contend that to understand and cherish other cultures we must understand and cherish our own.

Will the minister also guarantee that Scottish touring theatre companies will be considered? There is a bit of a crisis in Scottish touring theatre. The minister may remember, for example, that the SAC refused to provide further funding to the Wildcat theatre group last year.

I welcome the minister to her new post. Shelter has commented on the increase in homelessness that is apparent from the bulletin. Has the minister responded to Shelter's allegation that the right to buy has exacerbated the situation? Will she listen to the community-based housing association movement and abandon her predecessor's obsession with the extension of the right to buy?

I will be brief—I am not an expert on this subject, which some members in the chamber obviously are. Until today, my only real involvement with MS was through a very close friend, who was diagnosed within the past five years as having MS. The horrifying thing for me is that Patricia has been ill for about 15 or 16 years, but for most of that time no one really knew what was wrong with her. It would seem that she was treated for the symptoms rather than the cause. I have heard from others today that that seems to be fairly common, and that bothers me terribly. It also bothered me terribly to discover, as I did by reading the MS Society's booklet, that the society is almost the sole funder of research in the  UK—and, therefore, of course, in Scotland. It seems a sad state of affairs, in the country with the highest incidence of multiple sclerosis, that we do not have any direct Government funding into research to try to find a cure for this disease, which affects so many of our people. Others have focused on care for MS sufferers, so I will not go into that, except to echo Michael Matheson's concern about the situation in Forth Valley. In Lanarkshire, too, where there is a huge incidence of MS, there is no specialist MS nurse. That seems entirely unreasonable to me. My plea to the Executive is to consider direct funding into some of our excellent research centres in Scotland to assist the society in further research. Let us aim very high—not just in treatment, but to find a cure for this disease.

That sums it up.

Until they are working.

Will the minister give way?

I am surprised by what Helen Eadie said. In the light of recent opinion polls I would have thought that Labour members would have been trying to rush PR in so that they can represent the people who vote for them at the next election. We have PR in the elections to this Parliament; it is a fair system and people are well represented by the list members. The next logical step is to introduce PR in local government—the government that is closest to people. Studies have shown that people are in favour of it—people in  Scotland are inherently fair and it is obviously fair that the political balance of councils should reflect the votes cast. I find it difficult to understand how anyone can disagree with that. In South Lanarkshire Council, Labour, with 50 per cent of the vote at the most recent local government election, has 81 per cent of the seats. That cannot be fair. Perhaps if there was a better political balance, councillors would not be selling off all the green space in East Kilbride. In North Lanarkshire Council, with 55 per cent of the vote, Labour has 64 per cent of the seats. Perhaps there would not be the same problems with privatisation of the direct labour organisation there if there was a better political balance. I am frustrated by the Liberal Democrats. Their 1999 manifesto came out for STV in multi-member wards. They allowed that commitment to be watered down by their coalition partners and are now talking about a commitment to make progress on PR in local government. Come on—we have had the McIntosh and Kerley reports; how many reports and consultations do that lot need before they do something?

It is time that the Lib Dems stood up for themselves on the issue.

Well, sit down. They did not stand up for themselves on tuition fees or, last week, on the Sutherland report. They should put their money where their mouth is—and stand up for themselves today by voting for the SNP motion.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether the Scottish Qualifications Authority has been able to complete its full programme of moderation of the internal assessment of all educational units for which it has responsibility. (S1O-2276)

When are the moderation procedures likely to be completed and how many candidates are affected? To what extent have students who have completed the higher national certificate and higher national diploma courses not been given their final qualifications because the SQA has not validated their courses?

Will the minister give way?

The first consideration of any well thought out transport initiative has to be the integration of different modes of transport, so that each mode of transport contributes its full potential and people and goods can move easily between them. Such an initiative should also ensure that a national public transport timetable is implemented, which is coupled with improvements in bus and rail connections to airports and ferry terminals and, as Robert Brown mentioned, through-ticketing. Those admirable statements of intent, with which the Scottish National Party agrees, were made in July 1998 by our First Minister when he had John Reid's job—I am quoting Donald Dewar from "Travel Choices for Scotland". What do we have now? We have a crisis in our country, which was well addressed yesterday by many of my colleagues, but which can be properly addressed only when the Westminster Government wakes up to the fact that the public have rumbled its game of raising tax revenue from fuel and motorists to fund vital public services. We also have a transport bill that does not address any of the objectives to which Donald Dewar referred in July 1998. Those objectives have been watered down so that we now have an excuse for a transport policy. Despite the hype and the rhetoric, we have a bill that covers only one mode of transport: buses. The minister says that train information is coming soon. How about some integration of research on policy? The bill enables the establishment of local transport strategies, but is not backed up by a national strategy. Even the travel concession  schemes are not proposed on a national, let alone an international, basis. Why should an international travel concession scheme not be possible? Part 3 of the bill enables road user and workplace parking charging. The key word is "enables"; perhaps it would be more honest to say "delegates", as what the bill enables is the buck to be passed yet again to local authorities. Cost implications are noted in the financial memorandum, but—as is becoming the norm for the Executive—no realistic note is given of how costs will be met. As many members have pointed out, this is a bus bill. Even on buses, the bill is disingenuous. It mentions choice for local authorities in providing bus services, and the minister talked today about local solutions for local needs. However, there is no real choice; quality partnerships must come first. Indeed, Cathy Jamieson expressed concern about that. In the bill, a quality contract will be introduced only when a quality partnership fails, and only then with the Executive's permission. So much for the fine words about freedom of choice for local authorities; surely those best placed to make decisions about local bus services are in the locality of such services. Try telling people in East Kilbride, Kilmarnock or Hamilton that the minister knows more about their bus services than they do. At the Transport and the Environment Committee on 21 June 2000, the minister said: "I do not want all the local authorities in Scotland to follow their first instincts and go for contracts." Although the minister recognises that local authorities know what is needed, they will not be allowed to implement it. At the same meeting, the minister said that she worried about re-regulation of the bus service. So what? Is the Labour party admitting that it was wrong to denounce the Tories for privatising the buses? How can anyone have faith in new Labour today? Furthermore, the minister is not totally confident about her proposals for bus services. She said: "If every local authority had contracts . . . there would be only one bus company on each route."—[ Official Report, Transport and the Environment Committee , 21 June 2000; c 717-18.] Not according to the policy memorandum, which mentions a "single operator" or "group of operators". Proposals for workplace parking charges have been cobbled together and are, as the Transport and the Environment Committee recognised, clearly unworkable. I am glad that the minister has agreed to issue more details on issues such as exemptions.  The Executive talks a lot about joined-up government; however, let us consider the reality. National planning policy guidelines insist on parking provision for employees and visitors as part of any development. However, we will now charge employers for the spaces for which they were obliged to take responsibility in the first place. Will the planning review take that point on board? The workplace parking charge is in fact an extra tax on business. Gavin Scott of the Freight Transport Association told the committee: "It is not a workplace parking levy . . . it is a visitors' . . . and everything else parking levy."—[ Official Report, Transport and the Environment Committee , 21 June 2000; c 773.] There is no disincentive for the vehicle driver, and we all know that carrots work better than sticks. Where is the carrot to the employers and the motorists? Janis Hughes asked about exemptions for hospitals. However, public buildings and further education colleges are already strapped for cash. Many mature and part-time students use their cars when they go to college. Will the colleges have to pay the tax for the spaces used by students as well as by staff? Perhaps we should get innovative and consider renting out car parking spaces owned by companies and colleges for park-and-ride facilities, assuming that we can get decent bus services first. I am convinced that, like motorway tolling, workplace parking charges will be dropped. Both policies were lifted directly from our nearest neighbours and are inappropriate and unworkable in Scotland. They are not Scottish solutions to Scottish problems. Congestion is a huge problem in Scottish cities. As many members have said, we cannot walk away from our responsibilities. However, although there is a case for congestion charging in cities, it can work only if alternative modes of transport are in place first. Councils have obligations; the public know the score; what we need is some national guidance to cut congestion and resulting emissions. We need a transport policy with targets for reducing climate change emissions and levels of traffic, and I ask the minister actively to consider that suggestion as the bill progresses. I have heard nothing today that gives me much confidence that the bill will result in any real solutions for Scotland's transport problems and environmental responsibilities. As Kenny MacAskill said, the SNP will support any serious attempt to integrate transport in Scotland and to fulfil our international obligations to the world's environment. However, we should not pretend that there is any way to achieve those ends other than  by real commitment to the carrot before the stick. I ask the minister to get serious, get down to London and take on the Treasury.

Would Mr Mundell accept that, if people became used to the idea that there was a national police line that they could call and be diverted to a local police station, that problem would be alleviated?

Before speaking to the motion directly, I would like to outline the current situation with regard to contacting the emergency services. The current system is somewhat centralised. There are call centres that handle 999 calls all over Britain. When a call is placed, it goes to an operator who determines the service that is needed and rings the appropriate agency. On pick-up, the call is the responsibility of the emergency services. On average 26 million emergency calls are made every year in the UK and 50 per cent of those calls are screened out as being non-emergency. In some areas of Scotland, nearly 10 per cent of 999 calls are abusive, nonsense, malicious or a hoax. That affects all three emergency services. Only this month, the Parliament's Audit Committee reported severe problems with hoax calls to the Ambulance Service. Such abuse has expanded over the past five years as mobile phone ownership has increased. However, not all non-emergency calls are malicious. The increase in ownership of mobile phones has caused specific problems to the emergency services, which have been much publicised lately. Non-emergency calls may be the result of 999 being dialled accidentally, if, for example, a phone is stuffed in a bag or a pocket—999 calls can be made from mobile phones even if the number lock is on. Lothian and Borders police deals with up to 50 unintentional calls a day. That is the background to the substance of my motion.  As a response to the problem, individual police forces are carrying out their own campaigns to minimise the number of non-emergency calls. Some members will have heard the recent commercials on radio, publicising the campaign that is being jointly managed by three of Scotland's police forces. I can understand why the police feel it necessary to educate telephone users in the proper use of the system, just as I can understand the frustration that operators must feel when they are dealing with a potential hoax, a silent caller or a routine inquiry, knowing that someone else may be genuinely at risk and is not being dealt with. That raises two issues. First, surely in this day and age the technology exists to deal with such calls quickly, perhaps by diverting them to a non-emergency line for call tracing. Secondly, we must consider the individual who telephones 999. Whatever the rise in the number of hoax calls, unintentional calls and so on, most people who ring 999 do so for genuine reasons. Although the stark definition of an emergency as "threat to life or limb, or an ongoing serious incident requiring immediate police assistance" may be logical in the cold light of day, in times of stress or danger such logic is unlikely to be applied. One of the great strengths of our police force lies in the fact that people who are in danger, or who perceive themselves to be in danger, automatically want a policeman. Whatever criticism is made of our police—justified or unjustified—we should do nothing to jeopardise such a relationship between the public and the police. Members may have seen the reports of my recent experience in which I encountered road rage at first hand. Indeed, that was the incident that sparked off this debate. I shall say what happened in brief: 999 was called and the response that was given was such that we felt uncomfortable about having made the call. The point is that I felt threatened and in the circumstances it was impractical to look up the number of the local police station in a telephone book or to phone directory inquiries. Since the event, I have received correspondence that suggests that several other people have had similar experiences. It must be recognised that, when a caller feels threatened and calls 999 to ask for the police, for that caller the situation is real and an emergency. It worries me that, in our attempt to minimise hoax and meaningless calls, we will discourage genuine callers, who may now feel that they will be assumed to be stupid for making such a call. With the advent of the car telephone, people can more easily call the police if they feel that  something is worth reporting, such as a situation or incident where police action would be advantageous. I recently had a conversation with a constituent who, driving on the A71 on a stormy night, noticed that a temporary traffic light had blown over and felt that that could have caused a road accident. He did not know the number of Strathaven police station and admitted that he had not phoned directory inquiries because that would have cost £2.50 on his mobile phone. He spent the rest of the evening worrying that he should have reported the incident and that an accident might have occurred that he could have averted. In such situations, it would be an advantage to have a national contact number for the police to enable call diversion to a local police station. That service would be fairly easy to implement and, given adequate advertising, would not only assist the general public but, in time, lessen the number of non-emergency calls to the emergency police service. Many years ago in Glasgow, all police stations had the phone number 1113, preceded by the appropriate area code, which made it easy to telephone those stations. Many police officers to whom I have spoken support the idea of such a central telephone point. Lothian and Borders police has suggested a national police inquiry line and the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland supports the idea, despite understandable reservations about funding. My motion—which, for the record, is motion S1M-999—is therefore clear. It asks the Parliament to urge any "members of the public who believe themselves to be in danger to contact the relevant emergency service by dialling 999 without hesitation". There should be "a full examination of the implications for the emergency services of the continuing expansion in forms of communication such as mobile telephones". Finally, the Scottish Executive should initiate discussions with all interested parties on the "setting up of a central call system which could connect callers to the local police station". I look forward to the minister's response.

Unlike Donald Gorrie, I would like to state, "My name is Linda and I am a folkie." I would like to talk about funding for the traditional arts. Lack of funding is the primary reason for the demise of not only the Edinburgh Folk Festival but many such initiatives over the years. What has been lacking is a national framework for the development of our traditional arts, or a national strategy such as that operated in countries such as Spain and Ireland. In Ireland, the traditional culture, which is very similar to ours, has been cherished at all levels, resulting in a great pride in the country's indigenous music and dance, which is complementary to their wonderful poetry and prose tradition, both oral and written. The national cultural strategy is out for consultation. Within that, I would like there to be active promotion of and a commitment to adequate funding for our traditional arts and recognition of their long-term advantages—advantages not only to our country's children, but to the economic value to its tourism, businesses and media. I mention children because when I have attended any event where youngsters are introduced to the instruments, voices and dance steps of their heritage, they love it—every minute of it. It should not be a one-off, participatory event, but a continuing movement. I have attended many events at which adults of all ages have participated for the first time in their own tradition and culture. Again—great enjoyment, which should be built upon. Some are trying. A growing number of local authorities have traditional musicians in residence. I was delighted to learn the other day that the local authority within whose area I live has its own traditional arts officer, who is actively encouraging appreciation in the area. Small local initiatives, while admirable, are not sufficient. The raft of small purses of money available—lottery and new opportunities funding and so on—does not serve the purpose. No traditional arts organisation in this country is funded to anything like the level that would allow it adequately to carry out its core tasks, let alone to prepare the extensive and time-consuming applications required to secure partnership and sponsorship. The core tasks are what are important—that must be recognised and matched with core funding. Let the traditional arts administrators spend their time on what they do best: performing, teaching and passing on their art. I very much enjoy ballet—if Alex Fergusson would like to accompany me some time, that  would be nice—opera and classical music, but those art forms are less important to me than those of my own country: our music, song, dance and oral tradition. Why does the core funding for the municipal arts contribute substantially to the wages and fees of performers of those art forms while there is, at present, no direct and very little indirect support from the Scottish Arts Council for the performers of traditional music? Note the £3.4 million rescue package last year for Scottish Opera alone. It is quite clearly not fair. Let the Parliament lead the way: support our traditions and arts while being respectful and appreciative of others. That would seem fair to me.

If we are to allow surveillance in our country, we must be confident that any surveillance that is undertaken is justified and—in the spirit of freedom that we expect in our democracy—necessary. We must also ensure that it is compatible with the ECHR. For those reasons, it is vital that the codes of practice relating to the bill are given greater weight than appears to be intended at present. To ensure that there is no concern about lack of accountability, we have to be sure that the codes of practice are comprehensive and are backed by the full force of the law. My worry is about the wording of section 22(2), which states: "A failure on the part of any person to comply with any provision of a code of practice for the time being in force . . . shall not of itself render the person liable to any criminal or civil proceedings." The bill will require those wielding the powers of surveillance that are enabled by it to have regard to the provisions of any code of practice that is issued by ministers. However, ignoring the code of practice would be neither a criminal nor a civil wrong, and could not be penalised in court. In the eyes of the public, that will be seen as carte blanche for unscrupulous members of the security services and the police—that is not acceptable. The forces of law and order must not be above the law. Equally important, they must not be perceived as being above the law. For too long, there has been a perception that our security forces operate on the margins of acceptability and frequently breach the spirit, if not the letter, of the law. That must not be the way of things in the new Scotland. A simple pledge that anyone who fails to observe legislation that is passed by Parliament will be punished would go a long way toward changing that perception. I urge the Executive to address those concerns, take full responsibility for the outcomes of the bill and not leave our police officers carrying any burden of suspicion.

To ask the Scottish Executive what measures are in place in Glasgow to ensure that refugees and asylum seekers who live in the city receive timely, appropriate and accessible health care services. (S1O-1837)

Will the minister commit to investigating fully the report of the Audit Commission, which was published today, to establish its relevance to Scotland so that we can learn from and avoid the mistakes that have been made in England and Wales? If additional funding is necessary to avoid those mistakes, will the minister commit to asking the Treasury for extra money?

Can  the minister commit to offering new money to local authorities to provide viable alternatives to the car—alternatives such as accessible, efficient and safe park-and-ride facilities—rather than achieving the desired traffic reduction by hammering motorists again?

Surely the Parliament has the power of protest.

I welcome, as do my colleagues, the implementation of at least some of the recommendations of the Macpherson inquiry. As we have said before, equality is no more and no less than justice. That is why I support the SNP amendment. It is bad enough that we have immigration laws that are debated and approved at Westminster, which are clearly racist in conception. However, the Race Relations (Amendment) Bill compounds that by continuing the exemption of immigration officers from charges of racist behaviour. It is positive that we now recognise that institutionalised racism exists in our country as well as in the rest of the United Kingdom. Scotland, as a growing-up country with its own Parliament, can now make some headway in addressing the problems of intolerance that face many of its people. However, it is perhaps because we are beginning to recognise Scotland's problems that the contradiction between the fine words here and the actions of the Westminster Government is becoming so stark.

We are talking about different issues. Every country has to have immigration policies; in this debate, we are talking about whether it is acceptable for a public officer in our country not to be open to complaints of racist behaviour. Jim Wallace told the first meeting of the Stephen Lawrence steering group that he wanted the group to deliver real, practical changes in the way in which criminal justice agencies addressed racial issues. Jackie Baillie has identified the need to target institutionalised racism as a priority.  Those are admirable sentiments, but compare them to the reality of how Scotland is obliged to behave by Jack Straw—possibly the most illiberal Home Secretary whom Tony Blair could have appointed. Compare the sentiments expressed in this Parliament with the Home Secretary's policies of forcible dispersion of asylum seekers; forcing asylum seekers to live below poverty level; using vouchers that make them a target for exploitation; and even the regrettable photo opportunity, with people being pulled out of the back of trucks. It is little wonder that Bill Morris denounced Jack Straw for creating a climate of racial intolerance towards asylum seekers. Straw has created an environment in which the Tories can begin, once more, to play the race card. William Hague's recent rant about a massive influx of bogus asylum seekers hardly embodies the spirit of humanity, yet it could just as well have come from a Home Office press release. Neither Hague nor Straw will let facts get in the way of a good prejudice. Less than 5 per cent of the world's refugees come to Europe, never mind the UK. In the European Union, the UK ranks ninth in the number of asylum seekers per head of population, nor are most asylum seekers bogus—nearly 60 per cent of applications are granted. Even a regime as intolerant as Jack Straw's has to admit that those cases are deserving. Among the others, there are many whose cases fail for procedural reasons. When we consider the sentiments that were expressed when our Parliament was opened, it is surely gross hypocrisy to treat potential Scots in the way that we do. This Parliament should, as Jackie Baillie said, send a strong signal to Westminster that—reserved matter or not—that is not on. We should also send a signal that discrimination is discrimination, no matter who discriminates. The police and immigration service officers have to deal with people in the most traumatic circumstances. The events surrounding the Stephen Lawrence case have created a climate in which it is no longer acceptable for the police to be exempt from race relations legislation. We in the SNP argue that there is no excuse for the immigration service to be exempt from that legislation. I commend the SNP amendment.

Today we are debating the bill that will enable national parks for Scotland. The Scottish National party believes that the aims of the bill should apply to the whole of Scotland. This Parliament, representing Scotland here in Glasgow today, should be enhancing and conserving the natural and cultural heritage of our country. We should be promoting the sustainable use of our natural resources—Scotland has special qualities, which should be understood and enjoyed—and we should be promoting economic and social development throughout the country. It is our belief that each national park should be established through legislation that is unique to each area. However, what has been presented by the Executive and well discussed by committees is enabling legislation. The SNP will be constructive in its attempts to ensure that the bill delivers the best possible framework for the secondary legislation that will follow, which will be specific to each area that is affected. National parks are national assets, and we all have obligations towards the preservation of our environment. We must also look after the interests  of the local communities that are affected. I take this opportunity to welcome David Green, the convener of Highland Council, who is here with friends. The Parliament should think about repaying the compliment by holding a debate on a later stage of the bill in Badenoch and Strathspey or Loch Lomond and the Trossachs. SNP members have some concerns about the bill, which have been raised in the appropriate committees. I shall outline those concerns now, and my colleagues will expand on them. The main thrust of our concern is on matters of consultation, representation and funding. At an early stage, once the enabling legislation is in place, proposals will be brought forward for parks to be established in specific areas. We have concerns about the process at that stage. On the receipt of a national park proposal, the reporter, who will be chosen by the Executive, must send a copy of the proposal to every local authority that will be affected, and must, under the bill, "determine the period for which the copy proposal and requirement are to be made available for public inspection". The stated method of publicising the proposal is "as the reporter thinks fit". Those powers remain with the Scottish ministers if a reporter is not appointed; as the bill stands, the length of that consultation could be merely a week. I do not for a minute doubt the minister's integrity in this matter, but the legislation will stand in our statute book for years to come. We must ensure that an adequate consultation period is established for the future. The framework must be solid. I am pleased that the Minister for Transport and the Environment conceded that point in committee and I look forward to her specifying today the minimum period that will be required for community consultation on each national park proposal. On the designation orders, the bill requires that the secondary legislation must be given at least six weeks of consultation before its submission to Parliament. Three parliamentary committees and other respondents to the consultation exercise expressed concern about proper scrutiny of the designation orders. The minister should take those concerns on board. She should consider the recommendations that have been made and reconsider the current proposals so that they allow for proper scrutiny and transparency. Following consultation, a national park authority will be set up. "Set up" is indeed the correct term. Schedule 1 to the bill clearly lays down the rules for membership of the authorities. Half the members will be appointed by the Scottish ministers and half will be appointed on the nomination of local authorities. There is no  provision to ensure that members of the communities that will be directly affected by the national parks are appointed or nominated to sit on the national park authorities, which will, essentially, govern the area. We will have more quangos. The Scottish Government will take on the role of the Secretary of State for Scotland prior to devolution—the role of making appointments. It has been argued that the local authority nominations will provide for local representation, but the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities has conceded that the local authority appointees are likely all to be local authority councillors. What about the community councils? What about those who live and work in national parks? There is no guarantee that they will be represented. Instead, local interests will be relegated to membership of advisory groups and committees of the park authorities. [Interruption.] There must be something about Alex Johnstone's seat.

I will move on. The number of advisory groups and committees to be established will be determined by the park authorities. The number of advisory groups and committees could, therefore, be limited, which would also cut local people's ability to voice directly their opinions on the governance of their communities. Surely that cannot be acceptable. The bill makes assumptions about community membership and involvement but does not specifically support it. The minister said in committee that we might be able to add some "local flavour"—as she put it—to the national park and designation orders through consultation with local people. That is not enough—the minister must think again. Flexibility is fine, but the rights of local communities should be enshrined in legislation. I know that my colleagues will speak about those issues in greater depth, so I will move on to funding. We cannot, I admit, know the precise cost of each park and I know that we must rely on projections. It seems to me, however, that the complete picture has not been fully scrutinised—neither have all reasonable questions been answered. The Executive has pledged to pay the entire cost of the parks. Will the funding come from the funding for other rural and environmental plans, or will the local authorities in the areas suffer cuts so that the parks can be funded? What about the additional costs that local authorities might incur—for example, for their roads infrastructure and higher-quality development requirements? Do the figures that we have been  shown include the funding that might be necessary for national park authorities to buy land immediately they are established? Those questions must all be answered. The main question, however, is whether there really will be new money. The matter of planning and development is also relevant to local authorities. The bill must be clear about which body is responsible for planning functions. Will it be the local authority or the national park authority? Those who live in the park areas and whose livelihoods will be affected have expressed valid concerns. We must get this right and I urge the minister again to take on board the concerns that have been raised and the recommendations that have been made by committees in that regard. It is of the utmost importance that the economic well-being of those who live and work in the parks is protected. Planning and economic issues might result in disputes. It is intrinsic to the bill that conservation will prevail, under what is commonly referred to as the Sandford principle. We should ensure from the start that in cases of conflict a clear policy is put in place and that a recognised system of conflict resolution can be followed. There must be a measured and reasonable process that can be gone through during conflicts to avoid hostility between local people, local authorities, park authorities and the Parliament. I am also concerned that, on matters of environment and conservation, we might be in danger of focusing all our efforts on national parks. In "Making it work together: A programme for government", the Executive promised to introduce a whole new system of nature conservation in Scotland. We must ensure that such aims remain for our country as a whole. My final point concerns marine national parks. Scottish Natural Heritage had to come clean and admit that it did not start by considering a purely marine park. The minister told the Transport and the Environment Committee: "Our legislation will be targeted at a terrestrial concept, and at terrestrial law, which might not be appropriate for marine parks."—[ Official Report, Transport and the Environment Committee , 8 September 1999; c 21.] I believe that there is genuine recognition, including from the minister today, that not enough consultation has been carried out on the concept of marine national parks, especially where there is no terrestrial element. The Rural Affairs Committee considered this matter in great detail, and I know that members of that committee will make contributions to today's debate. I ask the Executive to examine marine national parks in much greater detail before Parliament is asked to consider the bill at stage 2.  There are many questions to be answered before the bill reaches its next stage. I urge the Executive to consider members' concerns fully, to answer the questions that are asked today and to allow this enabling legislation to be the best that it can be.

Will the minister confirm that, in a review of building regulations, advice will be taken about considering the banning of lead solder in water-pipe applications?

Can it be banned completely under the new building regulations?

In 1726, Daniel Defoe wrote: "Glasgow is indeed a very fine city . . . 'tis the cleanest and beautifullest, and best-built city in Britain". Mistakenly, he added, "London excepted", but we  can ignore that. We should have aspirations to match those words. If the Parliament does its job properly, this will be the first of many times when we consider how we address Glasgow's needs. There is a danger that we see the city only as a problem; it is also a great opportunity. I have heard it suggested that the potential of west central Scotland could be realised without tackling Glasgow's decline. I do not agree. Doing so would not be in the interest of the adjacent communities either. Glasgow should be the hub of west central Scotland. It is a major resource for employment, shopping and other services and provides up to a quarter of a million jobs, with earnings above the Scottish average. The city has a positive as well as negative international reputation. Its shopping, leisure and service sectors are developing apace. Officials and politicians wax lyrical about the remaking of the city. A number of years ago I was involved in a housing campaign that many here will remember, with the slogan "Glasgow's Miles Better—Miles to go". That remains an apt summary of Glasgow today. Part of the city's international reputation is based on its community-based housing associations' work in regenerating the inner city. It is ironic that, 25 years after they started that work, in many parts of Glasgow the Executive's commitment to social inclusion is being drowned out by the return of the bulldozer as an instrument of urban policy. Even without the addition of further sites, the backlog of vacant and derelict land undermines the city's competitiveness. Glasgow contains almost a quarter of Scotland's vacant derelict urban land. Although it is worse in Glasgow, the problem of derelict land is Scotland-wide. Almost 40 per cent of Scotland's vacant and derelict land has lain unused for at least 20 years. The minister has identified that the present situation is a waste of resources; the question is, when will concerted action be taken to tackle the problem? In its stock transfer plan, Glasgow City Council identified proposals to demolish up to 15,000 properties. If that programme is badly handled, that scale of demolition will represent a major risk to the city. The evidence from previous clearance programmes is that, when people are detached from their communities, it is difficult to determine where they will settle. Neither the city nor Scotland can afford the continuing draining away of Glasgow's population. Between 1981 and 1996, Glasgow suffered a net population loss of 95,000, which is clearly the principal component of Scotland's net loss of 52,000 people during the same period. Members will be aware that  Professor Arthur Midwinter has warned that, if that process continues, the city's finances will be unsustainable. Despite the warnings, I remain optimistic about Glasgow, which has been called the city that refused to die. To date, central Government has failed to support Glasgow's efforts to reinvent itself. In the interests of Glasgow and Scotland, this Parliament must change that situation.

I am pleased to speak in this debate. The first report of the Transport and the Environment Committee is the result of a great deal of investigation. Committee members have worked well; they have achieved consensus and a result that, if implemented, would be in the best interests of the people of Scotland. It is regrettable that the summary report of the Stewart inquiry was not available to members until this morning, particularly given that the media was telephoning me—and I presume other members of the committee—last night, asking for comment on the report, which had been issued to them. I would have thought that the Executive and the Government in London would have realised by now that journalistic spin is not an acceptable alternative to democratic accountability. However, that is an on-going issue, which the Scottish Parliament will have to deal with properly in the near future. Today, we are dealing with the proliferation of mobile telephone masts across our country and the legitimate concerns surrounding that issue. All members will have had some representation from concerned parents about masts being erected near schools, or from people who have arrived home to find themselves in the shadow of such a mast. As our convener said, in some cases, such as Lister Tower in East Kilbride, the masts are erected on the buildings themselves. In all those cases, there are valid concerns about the reports of potential adverse effects on health and the impact on the visual environment. The Transport and the Environment Committee tackled the task of reporting on those concerns very seriously. We took evidence from a range of bodies during the inquiry; we received more than 100 written submissions and heard evidence from 20 organisations and individuals. The report was agreed unanimously and our main conclusion is that the erection of masts for mobile telephones should be a matter for full planning controls. That is the only way in which the views and concerns of people most directly affected by the masts can be properly addressed.  In addition, planning authorities confirm that the work load for councils is almost exactly the same for planning applications as it is for the prior approval system previously favoured by the Executive. However, the suggested fees for the prior approval system are lower. If the auction of licences to the industry can rake in £22 billion for Gordon Brown's daily inflating war chest, why should Scottish councils have to subsidise the same industry's on-going approvals? Health, environment and the right of the public to notification and consultation are just some of the reasons why I have concerns about the Executive's seeming reluctance to accept in full the recommendations of the committee. I suspect that the Executive will now move some way towards full planning controls, but I am concerned about the statement issued by the minister in which she worries about neighbour notification. The people who live in the areas where masts are being erected have the right to prior notification and to have input into the siting of such masts. The minister is adamant that we should not lose sight of the beneficial effects of the expansion of the mobile phone system. However, I am confident that local authorities, local government officers and, most important, the people who have to live, work, play and go to school in the shadow of the masts have the intelligence and wit to weigh up the pros and cons of where those masts are sited. After all, who knows the needs of an area better than the people who live and work there? I exercise the precautionary principle in welcoming the Executive's response that it intends to move some way towards the committee's recommendations. I give a cautious welcome to the minister's announcement to the press on Tuesday that she will act quickly in examining the matter. However, I contend that the matter has already been examined—by the Transport and the Environment Committee and by the Stewart inquiry. Now it is time for action.

I note that the report is expected at the end of July. Will the minister give a definite date for completion and publication of the report, and will she tell members the target dates for commencement of work on the M74 extension and the Larkhall rail link?

I still like Señor Miralles's design. What I do not like is the incompetence of the client management of the project.

Does Colin Campbell agree that, contrary to the statements that were made by the Executive on its commitment to attract a wider range of candidates to the boards of public bodies, the recent recruitment advertisement for the board of Caledonian MacBrayne actively discouraged applications from anyone other than people with identical backgrounds to the ones of those who were already represented?

Does Colin Campbell agree that, even during this consultation process, we are talking about more jobs for the boys and the establishment elite?

Will the member tell me how stock transfers will achieve an improvement in the physical condition and energy efficiency of the stock?

Stock transfers.

To ask the minister whether the Scottish Executive has made any attempt to have returned to CalMac the ferry sold at rock-bottom price to Sea Containers Ltd on the order of Michael Forsyth, then Secretary of State for Scotland.

I am sure that the minister would agree that all relevant sectors of our economy should contribute to meeting the climate targets. Are there sector-by-sector targets for Scotland and, if not, how will ministers judge progress?

I join those who have given the document a cautious welcome, because it has provided an opportunity to have the debate. However, the problems that face Scotland's manufacturing sector are beyond the scope of Parliament's powers. My Scottish National party colleagues and I reserve the right to argue, with the support of the Scottish people, that Parliament should assume the wider powers that are necessary to address those problems.

What, already? Okay.

In the short term, we would place the same importance on exports as we do on inward investment. The minister's Westminster colleagues are again condemning the SNP's proposals, which they say threaten Scotland with economic upheaval. Where I live, families face economic upheaval right now. More than 200 workers at Philips Lighting in Hamilton, some of whom have worked there for 30 years, are facing redundancy, despite having the highest performance standards in Europe for delivery and quality. Sometimes being highly skilled just does not matter a jot. In East Kilbride, even the buoyant mobile phone sector has suffered almost 200 job losses at Vodafone. Many people in Scotland, including voters in next week's by-election, take a different view from that of Dr John Reid and his cohorts. The message that is coming through strongly is that Scotland is fed up with a union that delivers stable but steady economic decline. If the minister were here, I would remind him—in his absence, I shall remind his deputy instead—of the words that he spoke during the initial debate on this topic on 29 September last year. He said: "We are preparing an overall economic strategy for Scotland. Our manufacturing strategy will be set in that context."— [ Official Report , 29 September 1999; Vol 2, c 811.]  Reactions to the minister's document demonstrate how far it is from the strategy that he tells us he wants to put in place. The responses have concentrated on the major issues that affect our manufacturing sector, and especially on the strength of sterling, which, if it continues, will undermine all this Parliament's efforts.  I shall revert briefly to my interest in housing. It is a widely shared view that an obsession with owner-occupation is one of the factors that force up interest rates in the UK and undermine manufacturing investment. Perhaps the minister could have a word with his colleague the Minister for Communities and persuade her of the merits of a well-functioning housing market, instead of pushing more and more people into marginal owner-occupation. Perhaps he could also have a word with the UK Prime Minister this afternoon and ask him whether Scottish manufacturing jobs are a price worth paying for cooling the economy in London and the south-east. I make a plea for this Parliament to take globalisation seriously. The results of globalisation are already with us. As an example, I refer again to Philips Lighting in Hamilton. The 223 jobs that are disappearing from Scotland will be relocated in Poland. Over the next few years, no other issue will have as much impact on our manufacturing base as globalisation will, and the minister referred to that in his speech of 29 September and again this morning. It is all very well for the minister to refer to those matters, but if this Parliament has no arrangements to monitor international developments, he might as well not bother. I make no apology for drawing attention once again to developments around the World Trade Organisation. It is time that this Parliament established a committee to monitor the WTO and other international developments. When that happens, this Parliament might be able to make a serious effort to develop a plan for manufacturing, rather than simply approving reports on what the Executive is doing to cope with the problems created by its Westminster colleagues. I commend to the Parliament the amendment in John Swinney's name.

The women of East Timor have suffered greatly over the past quarter century. They have watched as their fathers, husbands, sons and lovers died for the cause of freedom. They have watched their children starve and their teenagers flee the country as political exiles. They are still counting the cost of that freedom as they await the return of their families from camps in Indonesia. In addition, the women of East Timor have suffered gender-specific crimes—systematic rape, enforced nudity and sterilisation. The only women's rights agency in East Timor has now reopened in Dili. It is run by local women, who have decided to mark International Women's Day for the first time ever in their independent country. I ask women MSPs in our new Scottish Parliament to show their support for the work of that women's rights agency. I have e-mailed all women members the details. Please send them a message.

I am delighted that the Scotland Act 1998 incorporated the European convention on human rights. I welcome the convention becoming fully operational in October this year. In this country, when we consider human rights, we think internationally. However, we should recognise that protection of human rights is primarily a national responsibility. It demonstrates a lack of commitment to the principles of human rights to shirk that national responsibility or to allow the perception that Europe is to blame every time problems arise in our existing institutions and structures.  It is clear that the Executive and the UK Government did not pay enough attention to the consequences of incorporating the ECHR. They may indeed suffer further problems up to and beyond October. In fairness, however, we cannot be aware of all the problems that may yet emerge. Practitioners everywhere are scrutinising current and proposed legislation and practice, checking compliance with the ECHR. The introduction of that counterbalance to those in power in favour of individuals and independent organisations is to be welcomed, although it may lead to some unpredicted consequences. As an example, members may not yet be aware of the potential challenge to the plan of the Minister for Communities to extend the right to buy. It is not unreasonable to suggest that forcing housing associations—particularly those not in receipt of public funds—to sell off their housing stock would fall foul of the convention. I will not be sorry to see the minister's harmful proposals defeated in the courts if Labour members betray their convictions and support the minister. If the European convention on human rights is to be properly incorporated into Scots law, Scotland needs its own human rights commission in the form described in the Scottish National party amendment. The role of the commission would be to "advise both the Parliament and the Executive, issue guidance and promote good practice in public authorities, promote greater access to justice and advise on wider international human rights obligations." The commission should have powers and objectives consistent with international standards, as laid out in the Paris principles referred to by Michael Matheson, as adopted by the UN Commission on Human Rights in 1992, and as endorsed by the UN General Assembly in 1993. The model is there. We must establish a system of monitoring human rights abuse, and provide assistance for individuals and groups to pursue claims through the Scottish courts. We must ensure that human rights education is established in schools and for public servants. Members may recall last year's controversy over the World Trade Organisation talks in Seattle. Had they gone as planned by Europe and America, we would be on the way to what has been described as "the constitution of a single global economy", providing multinational corporations with a mechanism for enforcing their interests, even when they run counter to domestic legislation. The UK Government supports that, while the Scottish Executive colludes. Would not it be ironic if the Executive now refused individual Scots and Scottish organisations an equally effective  mechanism for protecting their rights against action by this chamber or by the Westminster Parliament? I repeat my commitment to the principles of the ECHR. Scots law has a tradition of sovereignty, which rests not with royalty, nor with Parliament, but with the people. Human rights belong inalienably to all of us, and should be monitored independently of the Government. I urge the Executive not merely to consider the possibility of establishing a Scottish human rights commission, but to commit without delay to its establishment.

Does the First Minister share my concern at the under-representation of women at senior levels in police forces across Scotland? Will that issue be discussed with the chief constables?

Is that what happened? [Laughter.]

I join my colleagues in welcoming the consultation document; it is clear that this area of policy must be updated. The document demonstrates that much of the existing law centres on the rights of parents or those caring for children rather than on the rights of the child. The Executive and the Parliament will be criticised by some parents for interfering with their rights. Parental rights are important, but in a civilised society a child's right to protection must take precedence over a parent's right to chastise. I look forward with interest to the outcome of the consultation; I hope to hear the views of parents and young people, rather than those of the professional reactionaries. Before dealing with my principal concern, I want to state my doubts about having a complete ban on the physical chastisement of children, even by parents. Although I welcome the intention to make progress in this area, I am not yet convinced that an outright ban is either justified or practical. I draw members' attention to the findings of the MORI poll that was conducted on behalf of the Children are Unbeatable! campaign. The poll found that 78 per cent of parents and young people believed that children should have the same protection under the law on assault, provided that "they can be sure that parents will not be prosecuted for trivial smacks." I take on board Scott Barrie's point that the threat of such prosecution might be an erroneous perception; however, the perception exists and must be tackled. Although, after much consideration, I endorse the views expressed by that 78 per cent of people, the law must be more comprehensive and must take account of the situation where other adults find themselves in a parental role. The issue is how we proceed in a way that achieves cohesion, a greater understanding of the issues and a better future for our young people. Although much in the consultation document is commendable, the Executive has not yet properly focused on the rights and interests of the child. That is most clearly illustrated by the debate about protection for children who are in child care centres and private pre-school centres, and who are looked after by child minders. I commend to the Executive the application of the non-discriminatory approach to children's rights contained in the 1989 UN Convention on the  Rights of the Child. During the consultation, we must consider whether it is acceptable to ban corporal punishment of children in publicly funded pre-school centres while permitting the same punishment of children in privately funded pre-school centres. From the perspective of children, I can see no justification for such an approach. I question the equity of some children losing their right to protection from assault simply because their parents belong to a certain social or economic group. Human rights, including those of children, should not be removable through the application of a cheque book. The Executive's position that we should move forward with legislation at a different pace in the public sector from that in the private sector is deeply worrying. If it is impossible to address the issue under the Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Bill, I urge the Executive to initiate discussions with a view to introducing parallel legislation for both the public and private sectors. The commitment to a child's most fundamental right must be more specific than a statement of future intent.

I wish to speak on an issue that was originally proposed for inclusion in the census form by the Equal Opportunities Committee. That proposal has been withdrawn as it was refused by the Executive. It was on the question about the language that is spoken in the home. If it is accepted that Government—central and local—has a continuing need for data on the size and characteristics of the population, we should use this opportunity of agreeing the content of the 2001 census form to best inform it of the diversity and needs of those who live in our country. That would enable policy to be informed, services to be  planned and resources to be distributed according to need. In 1991, a question on ethnic grouping was included in the census for the first time. The data that were provided on ethnic groups have enabled public authorities to take account of the needs of different ethnic groups in service planning and delivery. In our evolving society, enhanced categorisation—as detailed today—is welcome. To the benefit of our society, Scotland has, through the years, become home to various ethnic groups. Imminent changes to immigration and asylum legislation mean that Scotland is likely to welcome more new residents—an estimated 6,000 before the census data are taken. According to current figures, the majority of those people will become bona fide residents. It is important that support agencies and public services have adequate information to service the needs of those residents. The ability to communicate is a basic necessity. Consider the case of asylum seekers. They are not only socially excluded by the stigma of using vouchers for food until a decision is made on their cases, there is also the possibility that they will be unable to communicate if no translator can be supplied. Agencies have already expressed concerns about the difficulties of support services when translation services are limited, for example for speakers of Turkish Kurdish, Maghrebi Arabic and Pushtun. The census should be forward looking. With rises in the general population, the role of language as an identifying factor is likely to increase over the next 10 years. Challenging social exclusion must involve uncovering issues that interested agencies do not yet fully understand. In terms of information gathering, why not use the most comprehensive survey—the census for 2001—as the baseline and then build upon the information given? Output from census information would inform a national strategy on interpreting and translating. No effective equivalent is available from survey information, as any survey is, by definition, undertaken on the basis of a sample and therefore can provide only supplemental information. It cannot replace the value of the census. That applies also to any proposed household survey question on language spoken in the home, whatever size the sample. The census is one of the main ways of ensuring that fundamental human rights are protected, by ensuring that the rights of minorities are strengthened and that there is proper legal, social and cultural integration of immigrants and ethnic minorities. I must mention the Scots language, which my colleagues have discussed already. Of course  Scots should be included as a defined language in the census. After all, as Irene McGugan said, Scots is recognised by the European Bureau of Lesser Used Languages as one of Europe's minority languages, and it would be ridiculous if Scotland's own Parliament did not recognise it as such. Surely Scotland would benefit from a national strategy on monitoring that addresses the historic lack of data on ethnic minority communities and that, at last, defines Scots as a significant language of Scotland. I ask the minister to reconsider his position on a question on language spoken in the home, and I ask members to support the SNP motion.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether the Scottish Prison Service has had any discussions with potential buyers of the former prison at Dungavel House. (S1O-1128)

Can the minister confirm the article in The Scotsman on 25 January, which said that Premier Prison Services had shown interest in purchasing the prison? Is he aware that there would be a public outcry if Dungavel were sold to a private company for prison use?

Is the Executive confident that the necessary procedures will be in place for 1 April?

There is obviously a broad consensus on the need for sustainable development, so I will not recycle all the platitudes. Instead, I will use my time to focus on an element of sustainable development that has been mentioned only in passing, although it has a direct impact on all consumers in our society: housing. My colleague, Kenny MacAskill, who has been much quoted this afternoon, is noted in the Transport and the Environment Committee for citing European examples to inform the debate. I will take that liberty this afternoon. The Scandinavian countries, which can be said to have climatic conditions comparable to those of Scotland, have sustainable approaches to housing development that are streets ahead of ours. Norway, Sweden and Denmark have strategies for energy efficiency, and sustainable approaches are taken in all parts of the community. In Scandinavia, there is a general philosophy of sustainable development. Sadly, in our country, as Sylvia Jackson noted, there is as yet no such commonly held philosophy. That is why I particularly welcome the minister's inclusion of an education representative on her panel. Housing and community building have suffered for too long from compromise between quality expectation and supply cost. We must move on from that. I was delighted when, two weeks ago at a meeting of the Transport and the Environment Committee, the minister gave a categorical assurance that the purpose of the next review of the building regulations this summer is to improve insulation standards and energy efficiency for residential properties in order to meet the climate requirements in Scotland, tackle fuel poverty problems and improve the level of environmental emissions. That is admirable and to be welcomed, and I have no reason to doubt the minister's sincerity. However, if the Parliament is truly committed to sustainable development, we must look further than that and I suggest that the minister discuss with her colleagues more innovations. We could consider expanding and easing access to direct grant aid for improving the insulation standards of existing housing stock. We could be really innovative and provide take-up grants for the installation of solar water heaters and for the use of renewable energy technology. I make those suggestions in a spirit of co-operation. I am sure that no members will disagree with the basic principles. However, now comes the rub: it will cost money. While it is true that taking a sustainable and ecological approach to housing need not lead to  increased costs, it is also true that our choices are driven by cost. We select the cheapest materials and the smallest spaces. I speak from many years of experience in housing development in urban and rural locations. It is likely that a commitment to sustainable development in housing will lead to increased individual unit costs. We have to take that on board. Allowances must be granted, to increase cost limits and grant funding for social housing, to cover the relatively small extra investment in housing stock. Not long ago, the Minister for Communities pledged that a number of homes would be built in Scotland in the next three years and promised that the extension of the right to buy would not result in a decrease in the number of social housing units. I ask the Minister for Transport and the Environment to fight to ensure that her sincere desire to implement sustainable development standards for our housing stock is not compromised by budget constraints and the need to ensure another department's credibility. Scotland's housing provision has suffered for too long from short-sightedness and—as the minister said—we must look at the future, not just the present. It is not all doom and gloom, however. There are examples of sustainably developed housing schemes. There is one in the east end of Glasgow, where the innovative energy and insulation standards have resulted in an annual heating and water heating bill of less than £100. That is fantastic. That is what we should be aiming at: a real opportunity to combat fuel poverty. While the minister's motion, with its noble sentiments, cannot be opposed, it is essential that true commitment is shown through a detailed strategy with stated Scottish criteria. That will please Helen Eadie. I ask members to support the SNP amendment.

I seek further clarification from the minister. Given that carbon dioxide is a major pollutant and that SEPA has identified the need to tackle carbon dioxide pollution along with other air pollutants, why does it not feature in the national air quality strategy?

rose—

rose—

Will the minister give way?

It is increasingly clear that the Executive has no coherent housing policy and is merely extending the Tories' policy further than even the Tories ever did or would have dared to do. The Executive's arrogance is evident, especially in the minister's reaction to critics of extending the right to buy. Far from being the listening minister, she is the lecturing, hectoring minister. The list of those who, in the minister's opinion,  have got it wrong goes on and on. She says that housing professionals are out of touch with their tenants, so their views are dismissed. She says that housing association committees are interested only in the survival of their organisations, so their views are dismissed. She says that the Council of Mortgage Lenders does not understand housing finance, so its views are dismissed. My working experience, however, tells me something different. On the issue of extending the right to buy, it is the minister who has got it wrong and whose views should be dismissed. The minister uses as her excuse for that policy the adoption of a single social tenancy to equalise tenants' rights. Three parties in the chamber campaigned on such a policy. None of them included the right to purchase as a necessary part of such a tenancy, and certainly not at a discount. Perhaps the Executive can expand on its commitment to the equalisation of rights. What about tenants in tied housing and tenants of private landlords? Do not they merit equal rights? What about the rights of those who aspire to be tenants of decent, affordable social housing? Were the homeless consulted about the extension of the right to buy? I think not. The minister rejects the notion that the current right-to-buy arrangements have had an adverse effect on communities. We are told that only 2 per cent of the stock will be sold anyway and that the Executive will easily find the money to replace the lost stock. That is a thoroughly dishonest presentation of the situation, and it demonstrates how far the minister is from understanding Scotland's communities. The Scottish Federation of Housing Associations has demonstrated that the rate of sale of housing association properties can vary a hundredfold, depending on the stock's location. There will be further sales in areas already dominated by owner-occupation, leaving other areas with enforced concentrations of people with no option but to rent. That is moving Scotland further towards American-style welfare housing. It appears that the minister has now been forced to recognise the special difficulties that face some rural areas. Properties are seldom sold on in the local housing market, but are, in some cases, kept or sold as holiday homes. I encourage the minister to pursue the issues further and to recognise that there are also urban areas in which there is a desperate need to retain housing for rent. In the 1980s, the new towns competed aggressively in the house sales stakes. The result is that East Kilbride now exports homeless people to Glasgow because it has so little social rented accommodation to offer. Properties in East Kilbride, bought over the years under the right to  buy, now form the basis of a growing private rented sector. The rents in that sector are too high for the local authority to use the houses for homeless people, because housing benefit levels are lower than the rents. People are making money out of the right to buy, and the minister is encouraging that further.

I am opposed to the principle of taking away tenants' rights. I understand that tenants with the right to buy have to retain it. What I am opposed to is the extension of the right to buy, which will erode further our rented stock, which is needed by the people of Scotland. All the evidence shows that extending the right to buy is a recipe for social exclusion, and I urge all members to put pressure on the Executive to lecture less, listen more and act in the interest of Scotland's fragile communities.

I am genuinely glad to take part in this debate. One of the most exciting elements of our reconvened Parliament was the realisation that we, in Scotland, could at last address the issue of land reform. The abolition of feudal tenure is long overdue and, as previous speakers have stated, the Executive's initiative is warmly welcomed. Having worked in rural community development for some years, I would like to remind the Parliament that the concept of feudalism in our society goes beyond legislative issues. Abolishing this archaic legislation should be considered by us all as a step towards changing ingrained social attitudes. However, I want to raise some specific issues, which I ask members—particularly those on the Justice and Home Affairs Committee—to consider in their future deliberations. Sections 7 to 11 of the bill, which have already been touched on, relate to the abolition of feuduties that superiors are entitled to collect from their vassals and to the payment schemes that the bill will introduce. Often, feudal superiors have not bothered to collect their feuduties for some years, which has resulted in the accumulation of arrears. Owners often do not realise that, in law, they owe money.  My concern is that the prospect of abolition may prompt feudal superiors summarily to demand payment of those arrears. I want to reinforce what the Justice and Home Affairs Committee has stated—that people who live in properties that are subject to feuduties that have been unclaimed for many years may find themselves presented with an unexpected demand for an amount of money that, to a person on a low income, could be substantial. For example, Tricia Marwick referred to the plight of the elderly. A feu of £60 a year may not sound much, but back-dated and with the current formula applied, the demand could cause acute financial difficulty and a prolonged period of indebtedness. The Executive has conceded that it cannot realistically quantify such amounts. The problem is so complex that, with the best will in the world, no one can estimate the total. By common consent, the purpose of this reform is to abolish the duty scheme and to end an archaic system. We must be careful that the bill does not unduly disadvantage those whom we are trying to help.

I would like to focus on one issue that has already been mentioned: the lack of consultation by Glasgow City Council. While council members insist that they have consulted widely, it is a fact that the local community council has had only one meeting with them. There has been neither a public meeting nor direct consultation with those who will be affected by the council's decision. That is despite a petition with 4,000 signatures and 600 letters sent directly to the council. Why has Glasgow City Council refused properly to consult the people of Pollokshaws? How can it justify to local people the fact that it is closing the only facility of its kind in the area? How can it justify the fact that, although it readily bandies about projected refurbishment costs, no actual assessment of what work needs done has taken place, let alone been costed? Glasgow City Council has refused properly to consult the people of Pollokshaws because those in control of the council have created a culture of arrogance—a belief that they know best and that their decisions are beyond reproach. Witness the complete lack of consultation with city tenants over the housing stock transfer. This is more of the same. Glasgow City Council should note that it does not necessarily know best. It should try listening to those most directly affected by the decisions that it takes. It could start by listening to the people of Pollokshaws and reverse the decision to close Pollokshaws sports centre.

It still is.

I agree with the minister that waste going into landfill sites means risks for the environment. Will the minister therefore consider using some of the £40 million that is taken from Scotland and sent to London to compensate local authorities that pull out of any landfill operation and move towards recycling? The Cathkin Brae landfill site in the East Kilbride constituency was approved by Mr Dewar earlier this year and is only at site preparation stage.

I congratulate Cathy Jamieson on drawing Parliament's attention to an extremely important sector of Scottish society and—which is sometimes overlooked—an important part of the Scottish economy. Scotland has played a leading role in developing co-operative and mutual institutions—the Trustee Savings Bank, public lending libraries, parochial schools, working-class housing societies and, most recently, rural community co-operatives. The Executive has recently drawn attention to the increasing exclusion of many communities from the rest of society. The withdrawal of the banking industry from any kind of presence in Scotland's most deprived communities undermines the financial sector's argument for reducing regulation of its activities. Like Cathy, I have been pleased by the focus on the potential of credit unions to fill some of the gaps that have been left by the banks. I, too, am a great supporter of credit unions and would like to see a steady increase in the proportion of the population that has access to them. Another mutual sector that is close to my heart is the housing association movement. I know that members from all parties hold the movement in high regard, and I have heard many individuals refer to the valuable work that is done by their local housing associations and co-operatives. I would like to make a plea for members to turn the rhetoric of support for the movement into active support. I address that plea in particular to the back benchers of the governing parties who, in the  press of other priorities, may have overlooked just how much the actions of the Executive are damaging housing associations and co-operatives. I have time to refer to only two of the most significant ways in which the Executive's actions are damaging. The first—and perhaps the most easily demonstrated—is the withdrawal of resources from housing associations and co-operatives. Over the period of the expenditure plan that was published by the Minister for Finance, the resources available to Scottish Homes will drop from £319 million to £264 million—a reduction of almost 20 per cent. That will cause major difficulties, not just for the organisation, but for the people who depend on it. I do not have time to address the second element of the Executive's approach, but the policy is disastrous. I ask the Minister for Communities, who basks in the title of the listening minister, to try trusting communities and to listen to them properly before forcing decisions on a no-choice option. Please abandon the big-bang approach, and invest in a proper success story. It might not go down well in John Wheatley House, but it will go down well in John Wheatley's home of Shettleston, which is now represented by the Deputy Minister for Local Government.

Having lived and worked in Argyll for many years—some of that time in Campbeltown—I am pleased to endorse George Lyon's concern about the state of the economy in Kintyre. Like many parts of rural Scotland, Kintyre depends on good-quality transport links and an investment in its infrastructure. Though much maligned, Caledonian MacBrayne is a crucial component of the transport infrastructure of Kintyre and of the whole west coast of Scotland. Members will be aware that CalMac was ordered to dispose of a ferry, which they needed, at a rock-bottom price to a private sector company. The Argyll and Antrim Steam Packet Co, a subsidiary of one of the Conservatives' favourite companies, Sea Containers Ltd, was hand-picked by Michael Forsyth, then Secretary of State for Scotland, to run one of the most promising recent developments in the Kintyre economy—the Campbeltown to Ballycastle ferry, which has already been referred to. It is becoming obvious that that was a blatant example of the private sector asset-stripping the public sector. Recently, we learned that the Argyll and Antrim Steam Packet Co had sold the ferry and was leasing it back. That financial engineering benefits no one, except the Argyll and Antrim Steam Packet Co. It certainly does not benefit the public purse or, indeed, the people of Kintyre. This week, the Executive has confirmed that Argyll and the Islands Enterprise, having invested heavily in providing the harbour and infrastructure for the ferry, may now have to repay up to £1.3 million of European regional development grant in the event of the withdrawal of the Ballycastle-Kintyre service. I believe that this episode warrants full public investigation by the National Audit Office or another appropriate agency. We need that investigation to determine whether Michael Forsyth properly exercised his powers as a principal shareholder in CalMac and as a guardian of public assets. An SNP motion to that effect will be lodged, and I invite members from all parties to support it. The Tories try to portray themselves as the friends of rural Scotland, but I see that Kintyre has only one wee pal in Jamie McGrigor sitting here today. Any party of Government that gets a contract between the public and private sectors so badly wrong should be grateful to be labelled as just incompetent and nothing more. In conclusion, my main concern is, of course, the economy of Kintyre. In that respect, my concern about the current Executive is its  tardiness in realising that this issue was going to come up and hit it between the eyes. To partly atone for that oversight, minister, pressure should be put on the Scotland Office to underwrite any potential financial loss to Argyll and the Islands Enterprise and, therefore, to Kintyre.

I will use my allotted time to address an issue that is noted in our amendment and to which Michael Matheson and others have alluded: I wish to  speak on behalf of the victims of crime. According to the most recent Scottish Executive figures, 20,000 crimes are committed every week in Scotland, around half of which are never reported to the authorities. Every year, one in 20 adults is the victim of a personal crime. Everyone in the chamber has been affected by crime in some way. Perhaps some of us have even been direct victims. I have never been the direct victim of a serious crime, but over the years I have suffered petty crime and, on occasion, the fear of potential crime. That felt bad. Although I have met and spoken to the victims of serious crimes, I cannot begin to imagine the trauma and stress that is experienced by people who are personally damaged or who lose a loved one through crime. As Victim Support Scotland tells us, the physical and emotional toll of crime on victims can be enormous. Its experience is that, above all, victims seek recognition of their suffering. Our present system denies victims that recognition. It also denies them the benefit of effective programmes to alleviate the effects of crimes. In 1985, the general assembly of the United Nations adopted the Declaration of Basic Principles of Justice for Victims of Crimes and Abuse of Power. Although the UK Government signed up to that declaration a year later, we have a long way to go to ensure that Scots victims of crime have the same level of rights as people elsewhere, including people in other parts of the United Kingdom. It is true that, due to our criminal justice system, we may need to use different remedies, but the needs of victims are the same from Glasgow to Greenwich. With the right spirit, this Parliament can move ahead in this important area. The minister's commitment today to support and strategy is not enough. Victims require and deserve defined rights. As Michael Matheson said, in England and Wales there is the victims charter; in Northern Ireland there is the code of practice for victims of crime. Those documents cover standards such as the provision of case progress information, witness support, and protection. The England and Wales charter sets out 27 standards of service that victims can expect from the criminal justice agencies. It explains which agency is responsible for providing which service and how victims can complain if they do not get the promised level of service. Current pilot projects include one to enable victims to make a statement to the authorities about the effects of the crime, and there is a witness support service in Crown and magistrates courts. That all sounds like good practice that we should pursue here. Michael Matheson charged the Executive to introduce proposals for a victims  charter. I believe that such an initiative would receive cross-party support, and we might even achieve consensus. A first step would be to support Michael Matheson's amendment and, in doing so, recognise that our present system does not serve victims of crime well.

Will the minister give way?

I am pleased that this matter has been raised so early in the life of the Parliament. However, the motion that we are being asked to approve at the end of today's debate is one of the finer examples of civil-service-speak—I hope that the chaps at the front will forgive me for that comment. It pulls together  many of the issues and promises partnership and enhanced opportunities, but ultimately it fails to describe what we should be working towards. We will not get to the leading edge of the industries that have arisen from the new technologies simply by stating the objective. Rather, we will do it by carefully planning out the route. It is quite clear that the route will be defined by how we organise and exploit the mass of information that modern technology has the power to place at our fingertips. That challenge will be met only if the people of Scotland have the basic skills and competencies, but we are told that approximately half of the men and women in the UK lack those basic skills. We can have no confidence that the position in Scotland is any better than that in the UK as a whole. To date, much of the Executive's work appears to be focused not on core skills and competencies, but on the technology and physical access to it. Core skills and competencies are essential—fewer than 2,000 students in Scotland are studying mass communication. We need to increase student numbers in relevant fields and encourage adult returnees to further and higher education. The issue will be much debated following the outcome of the Cubie report. The minister has urged us all to be excited about his latest initiative. I agree: CD-ROMs in Dundee are exciting and cybercafés in Wester Hailes and Barrhead are impressive, but not if people lack the skills and confidence to use the technology. We must ensure that the technology is available to all of our people. The School Library Association, for example, has stated that "for the whole population of Scotland digital literacy skills should be fostered by introductory and SVQ linked courses" and it suggests that staff in all libraries should be adequately trained in information and communication technology. That means focusing on people, not technology. The technology will be relevant to people only if it is applied in situations that are relevant to them: at home, in the work place and in the community. Many people have no interest in information and communication technology; it is something for big business and bureaucracies. That perception will be reinforced by the make-up of the minister's task force. The minister said that he considered inclusiveness to be a key aspect of the task force membership, but where are the community voices or the working teacher? Who will speak for those who work with special needs clients? If the minister wants the initiative to connect with the people of Scotland, and not simply work as a route  into Government for special interests, he should look again at his task force recruitment, this time aiming at the consumer, not the technology provider. Scotland has tremendous economic potential; everyone in this chamber recognises that. To realise that potential, Scotland needs to be an information society in terms of provision of knowledge and skills and of products and services. We already have a good base on which to build. I am pleased that my part of the country, East Kilbride, has a major stake in that base. Our technology park houses many small firms that have benefited from, and are assisting others to benefit from, European social fund and local authority initiatives. Gael Quality Software, last year's winner of Lanarkshire's best small business award, is an example of a success story. It has expanded from two founders to ownership of a factory that employs 40 people. That is a fine example of a co-ordination of training and enterprise that is surely the way forward. I would like to inject a note of caution, though. East Kilbride also houses firms such as Motorola and JVC, both of which are well known for their success in technology. Unfortunately, both companies are suffering employee disputes. We know that there is employee unrest in some call centres. We must ensure that in our enthusiasm to welcome new technology industries, we do not allow a return to industrial revolution standards of employee rights. While it is well meaning, the minister's plan shows a lack of strategy. My colleague, Fiona McLeod, has lodged an amendment that I encourage members to consider in detail. Approving the amendment would spell out clearly what this Parliament wants Scotland to be and I commend it for members' support.

What is the Scottish Executive's defined remit for membership of the task force? Will the membership remain the same for the duration of its activities?

Of all the debates in the chamber to date, few can have been as highly anticipated. While we thought that we were gathering today to discuss the strategic roads review, as evidenced by today's contributors to the debate, the events of the past few days have clearly illustrated the wider problem of an absence of any real transport strategy for Scotland within which this review should have taken place. Selective further research may be welcome. I will return to that point. I will not dwell on the plans outlined in the Minister for Transport and the Environment's statement. Kenny MacAskill and other colleagues have demonstrated the inadequacy of the programme to deal with Scotland's current and future transport needs. On behalf of the Executive, the minister has put a brave public face on a poor announcement. Clearly, Gordon Brown's determination to prioritise Labour's ever-growing war chest has condemned Scottish drivers to paying the highest fuel prices in Europe, while driving on a crumbling road network. The Government's own figures show that almost a third of the current trunk road network has a residual life of less than 10 years. Like our public transport system, the country's roads require investment. Indeed, an effective public transport system requires effective roads. The background to today's announcement is the white paper "Travel Choices for Scotland." That paper promised an integrated transport policy to help make a more inclusive society, and a policy that is appropriate to support Scotland's economy. Recent weeks have demonstrated that the Executive does not have enough understanding of Scotland's transport needs to develop such a policy. In 1997, the Scottish Office central research unit  published a review of Scottish travel data sources. I would like to place the conclusion on record: "Transport policy in Scotland clearly requires a resource, which has the potential for sub-regional analysis in order to address differences between the more densely populated areas of the central belt and the more sparsely populated rural areas . . . At present, policy and surveys conducted in Scotland are not addressing the context within which the travel decision occurs. This is a serious flaw, given the desirability in current policy terms to understand the relationship between social, fiscal and transport aspects of the behaviour of individuals and households." The white paper was premature and the Executive was not properly informed. I suspect that the minister, due to her respected experience in the field, has always been aware of that deficit of current, relevant information. I hope that she will take steps to properly inform the Executive and the Parliament by appropriate further research carried out timeously. I have with me a sheaf of parliamentary questions that have not yet been answered—questions lodged up to five weeks ago, which request basic information to enable my party's own response to a transport bill. That basic information is noted in the aforementioned Scottish Office central research unit report as being required. It seems that we have not moved on since then. The information that we do have is revealing. The more cynical members among us may see the Executive's policy direction as merely following the latest Westminster diktat. I hope that the minister has won her battle and that the announced further research will be appropriate. We can then return to discussing Scottish answers to Scottish questions. While London may be in gridlock, Scotland clearly is not. According to the Executive's own figures, between 1985 and 1997, the average number of commuting and business trips made by Scots dropped from 207 to 203. The length of time taken for Scots to commute to their main place of work barely altered, increasing from 22 minutes to 23 minutes. The Scottish Executive, with some assistance from other parties, has tried to present the transport debate as a simple choice between its politically correct anti-car policies and the views of the rest of us, who, it alleges, are hell-bent on wrecking the environment. I reject such a simplistic approach and will continue to press the minister to address the wider impact of her policies. For example, we need to understand why progress in reducing injuries and fatalities from road traffic accidents is now being reversed. The roads programme should be only part of a wider transport policy. I urge the minister to accept that a holistic approach is best for what we are all trying to achieve. Sensible road infrastructure, through improvement or new commitment, has a place in the overall objective of ensuring effective  public transport and addressing environmental and safety issues, both nationally and locally.

Will the minister give a time scale for the reviews that she has announced?

Do you accept that, because of the new housing partnership funding, an awful lot of money is wasted by many organisations with aspirations? Hundreds of thousands of pounds are wasted on consultancy fees. If the brief for the new housing partnerships had been a bit tighter and more clearly explained, many organisations would have realised the futility of spending all that money. I am not knocking the system, I am saying that it needs to be examined more carefully, to make it more effective all round.

Before I was elected, I was employed in the voluntary sector. However, I have never worked for a charitable organisation and I would like to point out to the Conservative party that voluntary organisations and charities are not necessarily the same thing. In the past 17 years, I have seen at first hand the impact of Government decisions on voluntary organisations. Many of those decisions have served to reduce the independence of the sector. Like others, I welcome the publication of "The Scottish Compact" as the beginning of the process of re-establishing the independence of the voluntary sector. It is very important that the compact recognises the right of the voluntary sector to comment on and challenge Government policy. There has been a danger recently that the voluntary sector might go down the same road as local government and end up acting primarily as a vehicle for the delivery of Government policy. However, one of the strengths of the voluntary sector is that it provides an opportunity for many different approaches. It can accommodate organisations as diverse as Crew 2000 and Calton Athletic. Long may it continue to do so. I am especially familiar with the voluntary housing movement, within which there is a comparable diversity. Housing associations and housing co-operatives range from large national associations that are dominated by establishment figures to local community organisations that are dominated by tenants. Each model has its place and it is important that, in our desire to achieve the objectives of Parliament or the Executive, we do not damage that diversity. Make no mistake, however: even within the voluntary sector, the diversity of approaches creates tensions. At its best, it is a creative tension. Experience of work in the voluntary sector breeds respect for the contribution that even a small group of dedicated volunteers can achieve. If politicians try to colonise the sector, it will be at their peril. Effective partnership is much more  productive than command and control. The compact is strong on partnership, which is to be welcomed. However, the reality is a long way from the rhetoric. In the distribution of resources, for example, too many initiatives are being launched, many of them based on wasteful competitive bidding. I am sure that many voluntary workers would echo that sentiment, none more so than those in the voluntary housing movement. The Executive should, in distributing resources, guard against practising a form of divide and conquer. The recently reported fiasco of the 21 st century halls programme is a case in point. In the third round of the initiative, 93 projects were submitted for consideration and only 16 awards were made. Under that programme, approximately £300,000 to £400,000 of speculative expenditure has been made by the voluntary sector, and much effort has been wasted. Similarly, the new housing partnership programme saw housing associations waste substantial resources bidding for projects, only to see the money ring-fenced for local authority debt write-off. Before I am lambasted from across the chamber, I will make it clear that I am not criticising the decision to write off local authority debt. Indeed, it was my party's policy long before many others were able to understand the concept. If housing associations and housing co-operatives had known how few resources were to be made available to support the work that they do very successfully, many of them would have avoided wasteful expenditure and effort. It is the SNP's policy that there should be much more openness and transparency in the distribution of public resources. That applies to funding for the Arts Council and sportscotland and to the distribution of lottery funds as much as to the distribution of resources in the Scottish block. We believe that that is one of the aspirations of the Scottish Parliament. The practice of using agencies such as Scottish Homes, the Scottish Arts Council and sportscotland to distribute resources can be valuable, and it should be kept under review. To make the compact effective, the Executive must move on to implementation as quickly as possible. All departments and non-departmental public bodies must produce their plans for implementation. Those plans should be the focus for wide consultation in the voluntary sector. As noted by my colleague, Lloyd Quinan, we must not fragment the sector by creating a two-tier voluntary sector—those who have signed up to the Executive's initiative and those who have not. The SNP's amendment would go some way to ensuring that that does not happen, and I urge  members to support it. Volunteering is at the heart of civic society in Scotland, and the Parliament must value and respect the contribution of those who give their time freely for the benefit of others. To paraphrase: if Parliament agrees the compact, let us give those people the tools and let them get on with the job.

The minister explained last week why he was asking an independent committee to consider teachers' pay and conditions. Maybe we need more Scottish history taught, not just in schools, as some members propose, but to the minister and his colleagues. Perhaps Murray Tosh could help to set that up for us. The minister's script could have been lifted from the Tory archives. This is a rerun of what happened in March 1986 when Malcolm Rifkind, then Secretary of State for Scotland, was desperately looking for a way to end the teachers' dispute. He announced an independent inquiry and the Main committee was set up. It took seven years for the Tories to get into that mess, yet here we are in the same position in the first term of the Scottish Parliament. Unlike my colleague Nicola Sturgeon, I was not at school during the last series of teachers' strikes, but I do remember them and the damage that they did to our young people, then and since. There was two years and six months of disruption—work to rule, missed lessons and no extra-curricular activities. Lloyd Quinan has mentioned the damage to sport. The problem was, then as now, that teachers' pay had been seriously eroded, with those in power unwilling to make a straightforward settlement, and there was a decent pay rise only for the lucky ones. No promoted posts this time, though, but their removal so that savings can be used to fund the present offer. Now, as then, there is a strong case for a pay rise for teachers and there is also a genuine need for reform. Those two issues need not be too closely linked, unless the minister intends to use pay as a means to blackmail the teaching profession over conditions. On reform, why is there constant harping on about teachers having to be willing to change? As others have said today, teachers have for many years been receptive to change. The minister tells teachers that they must put children first. How patronising. He overlooks the fact that the vast majority of teachers put children first every time that they teach a lesson. When the millennium review was reported, the EIS general secretary said: "I believe strongly that the outcome is a very positive one for schools and teachers and offers now the opportunity for  substantial improvement in the delivery of education and for improved salaries for teachers." No, teachers are not opposed to change; teachers are opposed to erosion of their pay and conditions and the imposition of ill-considered change. For reasons known only to himself the minister is being hostile to the teachers, as he never was to his own professional counterparts when he was health minister. Already his approach is bearing fruit. He has achieved more than Mrs Liddell did during her short time as teacher and nat-basher general. Even she did not manage to turn a confirmed 98 per cent of the teaching profession against her. I echo Nicola Sturgeon's call for honesty in this debate. Labour is spending proportionately less on education than the Tories. That is confirmed by a letter from the House of Commons library, dated 21 September. It states that "although spending on education is planned to increase as a proportion of GDP during the Comprehensive Spending Review period, it will not return to the levels recorded in the early 1990s". The minister should stop pretending that the teachers have caused this problem. The dispute could have been settled by negotiation, with the minister playing a constructive role. Instead, he chose to sit on the sidelines issuing threats—having, I suspect, already decided to abolish the SJNC and to bring the teachers to heel. Again, we are reminded that in education, as in many other areas, new Labour is taking forward the old Conservative agenda. The minister is treading a well-worn path—a path that has seen this country slide even further down the international education league tables. Teachers are not shirkers who demand more pay for less work. Most are committed professionals, who strive to educate their charges in the face of immense social and economic challenges. The teaching profession and the education system are indivisible. We cannot attack one without hurting the other. The minister, like his predecessors, is severely damaging our education system by his incessant and unjustified attacks on those who deliver the service. That is to the potential detriment of those about whom we should care most—our children and young people. I urge members to support this motion.

It has become plain to me this morning that, of the many transport issues in Scotland, none can be considered in isolation. Some of the problems—especially road congestion in urban environments—are common to many parts of the world. However, some of our problems are particular to us, especially those that relate to islands and our remote communities. Just over a year ago, the Government produced a white paper called "Travel Choices for Scotland", which outlined many of those issues. I think that most of us would agree with much of the analysis in that paper. The figures confirm that Scots travel further and more often now than they did even 10 years ago. The paper also catalogued the failure of the Conservative party's transport policy. Perhaps that is a misnomer; I should say the Conservative party's privatisation policy. As has been said, the amount of travel by every form of public transport has fallen.

As Kenny Gibson said, Mr Tosh should tell that story to Duncan McNeil and all the people waiting on platforms at 6.30 this morning. If we examine the Scottish statistical surveys, we see that railway privatisation has not been a success. The western world must face the fact that all transport issues affect the environment. Given the scale of the problem, the Executive's response to the "Travel Choices for Scotland" white paper is disappointing. "Tackling Congestion" is a fig leaf to conceal another tax-raising measure rather than  an attempt to tackle the problem. We have been told that rural issues are the most important. I welcome that, as I lived on an island for many years and experienced the problems faced in rural areas. Until now, the focus has been almost exclusively on the central belt; it has been anchored in the distance travelled between Glasgow and Edinburgh. Even in that area, the Executive has run into difficulties. No one supports its ridiculous proposal to apply a toll tax to the M8. It is clear to everyone—apart from the Executive—that the toll tax would simply drive more traffic on to minor roads.

No, this is a winding-up speech. Andrew expressed concern for the environment, but I wonder how the people who live along the A71 will feel about their environment being wrecked. The minister may take some comfort from the local authority response to her proposals to tackle city centre congestion in Edinburgh, but she will take no comfort from the slating that the proposals received from her party colleagues in Glasgow. The SNP position on city centre congestion is clear. Congestion is the responsibility of local authorities; it is a separate issue from motorway and trunk road tolling. It should be clear to the minister that her proposals lack credibility. She has been found out because she is trying to get something for nothing.

No. Perhaps Andrew will be lucky the third time that he asks. Many people would leave their car at home and some would not even buy a car if there were real alternatives. I will not become anecdotal by talking about the problems that I have had in getting to work without the use of my car. Other folk have outlined their problems. We cannot hammer motorists unless they have a viable alternative.

We call it a toll tax because it is a toll tax. At the moment, public transport is not an option for most people. Public transport must be good enough to make people want to get out of their  cars; it must be decent, clean and affordable. Security issues must be addressed and park and ride must be secure. Women must feel that they can leave their car, use public transport and not feel threatened at night when it is dark. Helen Eadie and Malcolm Chisholm accused the SNP of not having an environmental agenda and remarked on the fact that we had linked up with the Greens in Europe. We have linked up with the Greens, but only on the recognition of our distinctive positions, including on the fuel escalator. That coalition is not a compromise on principle, unlike the Labour-Liberal Democrat coalition, which has ditched principle for political expediency. The minister's press launch for the consultation paper "Tackling Congestion" was a debacle. She was attacked for confirming that she did not propose to ring-fence the funds raised from road charging. The paper states: "The proposed legislation will not, therefore, restrict expenditure entirely to transport-related matters." We had a memorable U-turn.

Yes; I said that I would probably give way the third time.

Scotland has been paying through the nose for years. The SNP does not believe that the answer to everything is to cut income tax and impose hidden taxes on consumers. I look forward to finding out from next year's bill whether the funds raised will be ring-fenced. The minister's excuse for her U-turn—she has allowed it to stand on record—was that she was badly advised by her civil servants. That excuse is an unfortunate precedent so early in the Executive's life.

Are you saying that it was not the civil servants who made the mistake?

I am sorry, Presiding Officer. Will  the minister state here and now that it was not the civil servants who got it wrong, but the Executive?

It would have been nice if Sarah Boyack had refuted that sooner. We have the opportunity in this Parliament to discuss, through the Transport and the Environment Committee, all aspects of Scottish transport and the environment. As the minister said, we have the opportunity for realistic and honest debate, which will result in the best solution for Scotland. The SNP would welcome that and, as a member of that committee, I look forward to discussing the responses to the Executive's consultation paper. I suspect that the Executive will find that everyone is out of step, except oor Sarah, so I hope that oor Sarah is willing to make some more U-turns. Andy told us that we have a listening Government in the UK and in Scotland. Along with many others, I await the proof of that bold statement in relation to transport and the environment.

It is sad that, yet again, we are debating what should be a cross-party matter but has been reduced to either backing or opposing the Executive.  I instinctively agree with the case that Scotland's new Parliament should be in a new building that reflects modern Scotland. I like Señor Miralles's design-in fact, I adore Señor Miralles's design. [Laughter.] We will not pursue that.  I have no problem about drawing on the lessons of other countries, but I worry about the Executive's haste to proceed and its unwillingness properly to share decision-making on this matter. I have spent a large part of my professional career assisting communities to initiate and control construction projects. Voluntary groups in communities expect-and rightly demand-full information on which to base their decisions. The members of this Parliament have not been afforded the courtesy of that opportunity.  A press report this morning quoted an unnamed member of the Executive as saying that if the Parliament agreed to delay construction, it would cost £1 million. I have learned this morning that the costs under the penalty clauses might amount to £2 million. The more important question is what it will cost us to allow this project to go ahead ill-prepared. We are being asked to approve a project that will probably cost in excess of £100 million with less information than would be available to a local authority building a community  centre.  The information that we have been given is long on timetable but short on cost analysis. That suggests that more weight is being given to bringing the project in on time-and to prestige-than to getting it right in facility at appropriate cost. The papers circulated to us raised many questions, and I will submit them to the corporate body, whatever the outcome of this debate.  I will support the amendment. If it is passed, and Holyrood emerges from the process as the preferred option, it will be a better project, a better building and-more important-the decision will have been made by this Parliament.

My first concern when there is talk of setting up new Government organisations and of changing things is always the control of such organisations, which Dr Jackson mentioned. That concern is understandable, given the years of Conservative rule when privatisation was the name of the game and when decision making, even for institutions with a public remit, was controlled by unelected representatives.  Unfortunately, despite Labour's promises at the 1997 election of quango bonfires, the quangos of Scotland are still with us and their number has increased. Will Dr Jackson let us know today her party's real intention for the control of the national park? Will it be controlled by Labour party selection or by democratic election?