As the minister indicated, the Forth and Clyde canal plays a significant part in the economic regeneration of my constituency of Glasgow Maryhill and Springburn. I am grateful to the Minister for Local Government and Planning for agreeing that the projects in my area should be included in the national planning framework 3. That is a major boost. Does the minister agree that the opportunities that are available along the Forth and Clyde canal, including the redevelopment of the Diageo site, will be a major economic factor in the area for at least the next 10 years, and that the project is well worth the commitment and ambition of the partners involved?

I add my congratulations to Stuart McMillan for securing the debate. I joined the Labour Party at the time of the miners’ strike in the 1980s. I vividly recall collecting foodstuffs to help support striking miners and their families at that difficult time, so to find myself, 30 years later, standing at a supermarket, collecting food to be distributed to needy constituents, quite frankly appals me. What do that time and this one have in common? It is quite simple: the Conservatives are in charge. The Conservatives are a party that knows the price of everything and the value of nothing and that seems to be insulated from the reality of the lives lived by so many of our constituents. It surely is no coincidence that the number of people relying on food banks has risen as welfare reforms bite, food and fuel prices increase, and wages are pegged. Unexpected delays in processing benefits do not help, either. Single people, pensioners, families, those who have recently come to our country and are particularly vulnerable, those without work and those with work are having to look to someone else to help to feed them and their families. Across the country, food banks have to support more and more people every week. Even in the radio programme, “The Archers”, a recent storyline featured one of the families having to use a food bank to get by, but that was fiction and not the grim reality that faces so many across the UK and beyond. Local police have indicated that the demographic of shoplifters has also changed significantly in the past few years, with more and more of those who are apprehended being identified as having stolen because they just cannot afford to buy food. If the need for food banks appals me, and it does, the commitment and dedication of those who volunteer and organise food banks inspire in equal measure. In my constituency, the Greater Maryhill Foodbank is the largest and best known. Starting with a few people associated with Maryhill parish church, it has grown, and in less than nine months now has some 21 partner organisations and several outlets covering more than half of my constituency. It has organised Christmas lunches and Christmas presents for children, and it depends entirely on donations and volunteers, like so many other food banks that we have heard about today. I am pleased to say that it also has significant help from our local supermarkets, which is welcome. I know that the volunteers who staff our food bank do it because they see need around them and because they want to help their neighbours. They do not do it for praise or for recognition, but I want to single out a few people and, through them, acknowledge all the others who help out. First there are the inimitable Deacon Jim Hamilton—if Jim did not already exist, we would have to invent him, so ubiquitous is he in the life of Maryhill—and Sheila Ramsay, the parish worker who, with Jim, sparked the idea in the first place. I should also mention Julie Hyslop, whose enthusiasm for her community knows no bounds but who has found herself working for the project on an almost full-time basis. I mentioned that the Conservatives are responsible for much of the problem, and they are, but there are measures in place that we can pursue. I hope that, in closing, the minister will be able to say what other measures can be taken to ensure that the money that exists for the welfare fund can stop being in council coffers and be pushed out to those who need it most. I wait and work for the day when everyone at the Greater Maryhill Foodbank is redundant because no one in our communities needs the service that it so faithfully provides. Let us hope that that day comes soon.

As we have heard, there are only 174 days to go until the start of the Commonwealth games. At times like this, I am always grateful to the Commonwealth games 2014 website for that little reminder. It is appropriate that we take stock and consider the progress that has been made, and perhaps even areas where more work needs to be done, if the Glasgow games are to be the resounding success that we all want them to be and if we are to be on track to guarantee the promised legacy. We know from the evaluation reports delivered by the Commonwealth Games Federation evaluation commission that it is more than satisfied with the progress that has been made and the state of preparedness of the games organisers, which is very welcome. In that regard, I join the minister in recognising the efforts of Mike Hooper, who has announced today that he will be standing down as the chief executive of the Commonwealth Games Federation. I first met Mike at the Commonwealth youth games in Bendigo in 2004. I take this opportunity to thank him for his guidance in advance of the bid for the 2014 games being submitted—and won—and his unflinching support for Glasgow ever since. I wish Mike and his family all the very best in the years ahead. We know from the evaluations that have been done that the venues are up and running, and many of us have been able to see for ourselves just how good they are. Others are also able to report from personal experience that the process of recruiting volunteers has been professional, not to say robust. Of course, great strides are being made behind the scenes in the organisation of the events. Around the city of Glasgow and in other areas that will host events, hotels and businesses are gearing up for the influx of visitors that we can expect in a few short months. Our athletes, with support and assistance from their sports’ governing bodies, sportscotland and the Institute of Sport, are preparing to perform and compete in front of a home crowd. As we heard from the minister, almost all tickets have now been sold and those that are still available will go to community groups and schools to ensure that our young people and those with a direct interest have an opportunity to see a world-class sporting event live. The 5,000 tickets from the Scottish Government for those involved in delivering the legacy are very welcome, as are the 6,000 from Glasgow City Council. We know that every ticket will also act as the spectator’s travel ticket for access to the venues. That is an important and worthwhile facility that has been provided in perhaps only two previous Commonwealth games. It is certainly a recent and good innovation that we do not hear so much about because it is perhaps not as exciting as some other aspects of the games that we discuss from time to time, so it might be quite helpful if the minister could tell us in her closing speech a bit more about the transport arrangements for the games. It occurs to me that park-and-ride facilities will be required, and I know that there have been some discussions about that. If I may, I will make a personal point in that regard, because there are a number of unused brownfield sites in my constituency that might meet the requirements for park and ride. I am sure that I will not be alone in making such a point. I am also sure that any disruption to local residents during the games might be remedied by improving the landscaping or lighting of such areas. I know, too, that the subway network in Glasgow will be a very important element of the transport plan. I wonder what negotiations have been held with Strathclyde Partnership for Transport about how it will be reimbursed for the additional costs that it will incur and how the transport plan for the games will fit with the city’s other transport requirements over the period of the games. We have heard today about the excellent support for and response to the baton relay. It has been fascinating to watch the baton’s progress on television. It has also been fascinating to see the schools in my home city and constituency involved in their own little baton competitions, the participants’ enthusiasm and the imagination that they are bringing to how they prepare for the games that they have heard so much about. Of course, that means that expectations are high, and so they should be, because a great deal of public money has gone into making these Commonwealth games the best yet. We all want to ensure that that is money well spent. There has to be a commercial aspect to the games—public money alone will not fill all the funding gaps that there might be—and sponsorship is important in that regard. Although many of the sponsors are welcome, I mention one sector that gives me cause for pause. Given the depth of cross-party feeling in the chamber on the issue of payday lending, I sincerely hope that no such company will be able to take advantage of any opportunities for sponsorship that the games might offer.

I agree with Mr Mason entirely, which is why I couched that part of my speech in the language that I did. It is a hard judgment call to make, but I think that payday lending is a little bit different, as there is only one thing that those companies do. We all know what it is and I think that we all abhor that practice. There is no dubiety. I do not think that they are fit to be involved in the games. From the earliest discussions about the possibility of a bid to host the games being made, it was clear that the legacy that could be delivered by a successful games was as important, if not more so, than the games themselves. As the minister knows, it was expected that the games could deliver on our ambitions for the economy, help to raise Scotland’s profile in the world, encourage tourism and promote Scotland as a destination. The legacy would also deliver in terms of social cohesion, by bringing all Scots together with something to celebrate. Of course, perhaps the most significant part of the legacy was that we wanted to make more people in Scotland more active, more often. At the time, we were told that big sporting events did not produce that kind of legacy, that it had not been done before and that Scotland could not do it either. That is why the legacy became as important a part of the planning as the games, and why successive Governments have, quite rightly, been committed to making the idea of a lasting legacy a reality. Some big sporting events have delivered on some of those targets. For example, Barcelona was put firmly on the map by the 1992 Olympic games and its new infrastructure, which included the creation of two miles of beachfront where derelict industrial buildings once stood. However, it is argued that no host city had been able to demonstrate an actual increase in physical fitness and involvement in sport as a result of hosting a large-scale games. That is where our biggest challenge lies. The big question in today’s debate must be whether we will secure that legacy and whether more Scots will be more active, more often as result of the Commonwealth games. We know that good work is going on. The minister outlined some of it and it was good to hear about that. I add to that list the interesting work that Scotland’s colleges and universities have done in organising their game changer awards—I understand that the closing date for nominations is tomorrow—and the efforts of companies such as Sainsbury’s, which is committed to encouraging 20 million children to become more active by 2020 through its active kids programme, which has dovetailed with the Commonwealth games legacy. Closer to home, the Evening Times active 2014 challenge is an excellent contribution to that effort. The partnership working between the newspaper and Glasgow Life and the health board will, I am sure, be a major contribution to achieving a legacy in Glasgow. But—there is a but—the legacy must be for the entire country. The data supplied by the most recent social attitudes survey is revealing, if not worrying. It tells us that there has been no progress in getting children active; that the proportion of children meeting the physical activity guidelines has not changed significantly since 2008; and that children’s participation in sport, which increased between 1998 and 2009 from 69 to 73 per cent, had declined to 66 per cent by 2012. We also find that those with a disability or long-term illness are less likely to participate and that the greater the level of deprivation of the area in which someone lives, the less likely they are to be involved in sport or physical activity. I know that the Scottish Government will share my concern about those figures and that efforts are afoot to address them, but I hope that in closing the minister will talk a little more about the additional work that the Government might do to address that particular problem. I have been interested in the legacy leaders network, which is an important aspect of the work that is being done. However, a recent freedom of information request that was submitted by my colleague Siobhan McMahon resulted in some interesting if worrying reading. Siobhan McMahon asked all Scotland’s local authorities whether they had employed someone as a Commonwealth games legacy officer and 16 of the 19 local authorities that replied did not have anyone in that role. Of those authorities that did, one indicated that it had 0.4 per cent of a full-time post devoted to the task. I argue that, although the appointment of a dedicated legacy officer may not be the only measure of an authority’s activity, it is surely quite worrying that there may not be such a clear focus as we would like in some areas.

That would be helpful. I am grateful to the minister for that offer. Although I would expect a local authority to be precise in answering an FOI request, I would also expect that, if it were doing other things that explained its stark response, it would take the trouble to explain that. I cannot cover all the issues that I want to raise in the time that has been allotted to me, so I will address some of them in my closing speech. In bringing my opening speech to a close, I say that I share the minister’s pride in much of what has been done. We should all share that pride. As the clock ticks down and the games come closer, we will all have great reason to celebrate and I very much look forward to the games’ arrival. It has been a long time in coming, but I think that it will be worth it. I move amendment S4M-08879.2, to insert at end: “; believes in the ability of sport to inspire social change and improvements to the nation’s health; calls on the Scottish Government to make further efforts to improve participation in physical activity and sport for all, and believes that, with the right approach, the Commonwealth Games is a chance to encourage all Scots to become more active more often”.

I hope that I am not pre-empting the minister, but in the course of the debate I have found out that in an answer to a parliamentary question lodged by my colleague Kezia Dugdale the minister has indicated that the Scottish Government would not support any proposal for a payday loan company to become a games sponsor and that the games organisers have made it clear that there is no sponsorship category for payday loan companies and no intention to seek sponsorship from such companies. I think that we would all welcome that answer.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I will be guided by you on time. The debate has been very good and wide ranging. However, I have to admit that John Mason, James Dornan, Sandra White, John Pentland, Marco Biagi and Alison Johnstone made me feel incredibly jealous because, although I am a Glaswegian and represent a Glasgow constituency, I am afraid that we will not have any events in my constituency. Somebody is responsible for that. However, all is not lost, because my constituency is clearly as enthusiastic about the games as everyone else and, although it does not cater for Commonwealth sports, I like to think that the Pinkston watersports centre in my constituency, which will open this year, will contribute to the legacy, regardless of whether it is a Commonwealth facility. I was intrigued by James Dornan’s comments about his feelings when we were all at the Old Fruitmarket. Unlike my colleague Hanzala Malik, I was there, as I was not fortunate enough to be in Sri Lanka. I shared James Dornan’s sense of excitement. There was huge excitement—in fact, I remember being asked to speak on the radio and, frankly, not being able to, because I was so excited. However, I did not share Mr Dornan’s sense of apprehension or anxiety about the responsibility that would be coming our way, great though it would be. There is a simple reason for that, and I ask SNP members to hear me out before they judge me on this one. The reason is that I knew how robust the bid that had been submitted by the Labour-led Executive was. However, I also knew from conversations that had taken place that the incoming SNP Government was just as committed and determined as we had been to take forward the bid and deliver an excellent games. I knew that there would be good co-operative working, so I did not have a feeling of anxiety. I knew that the Government, of whatever complexion, working with its partners in Glasgow City Council and the Commonwealth Games Council for Scotland, would work hard and deliver an excellent games with a legacy to go with them.

I am happy to.

I understand Mr Dornan’s point, and that was a justifiable feeling but, fortunately, by that point, I had been to a Commonwealth games and a Commonwealth youth games, so I had that experience to draw on and I knew from those examples that Scotland and Glasgow could do it and do it well. I think that we can agree that it was a great day and that there are a great many more to come. I apologise to the minister if I pre-empted anything that she wanted to say in her closing speech about payday lending, but that is an issue that is close to me and my group. I am grateful to the minister for the response that she has given to Kezia Dugdale on payday lending and the games. We very much welcome that. In my earlier speech, I mentioned the importance of securing a legacy that leads to a more sporting and active country, and I will return to that theme in closing. First, I say that Scottish Labour will support the Scottish Government motion and the Conservative amendment. I am grateful to the Conservatives for the sensitive way in which they have worded their amendment. None of us would want anything of a compulsory nature to be put in place, because competitive sport is not for everyone, albeit that many of us think that there is no reason why it should not be. We need to begin with children in school. Indeed, we might want to look at the early years and consider what we can do to encourage all children to be physically literate. Children have to have the basic skills of running, throwing, catching and swimming, and we need to ensure that children with a disability do not lose out. We must also consider how we can encourage young people in years 5 and 6 at secondary school to continue to take part in activity. The current physical education target does not apply to them, but those two years are the point at which young people make the transition to adulthood and possibly to further involvement in sport, or not. That is an important time, and it is an area that the active schools co-ordinators could usefully target. We must also give children the widest possible opportunity to engage with sport, because we know that the more opportunities a young person has to try different sports, the more likely they are to find one that they will stick with. Mark McDonald was absolutely right to make that point about the project that he mentioned in his area. It is the case that the wider the spread that children get at the beginning, the more likely they are to find and choose a sport that works for them. To make the experience of sport meaningful, it needs to be overseen and taught by people who understand the sport and can give the best possible advice and training to our upcoming athletes. Given that many of our coaches are volunteers, it would be helpful if employers looked at ways in which they can facilitate volunteering, perhaps by giving accredited coaches paid time off. The Scottish Government might even incentivise such an approach. The Scottish Sports Association has a number of excellent ideas in the area, and it practises what it preaches by allowing its staff to volunteer. Members were right to talk about the importance of community and school facilities. Professor Leigh Robinson, from the University of Stirling, always makes the point that access to sports and other facilities in schools should be free. Sandra White made the same suggestion. I think that we would all like such facilities to be free, although it is a big financial and logistical ask. Perhaps we need to discuss the issue and see whether we can take it forward. Marco Biagi mentioned Sir Peter Heatly’s success as a diver, which was indeed tremendous. Sir Peter’s record is second to none in the Commonwealth, and he has continued to be an important and extremely highly regarded ambassador for his sport, for the Commonwealth Games Council for Scotland and for the Glasgow games. It is important that people like him are recognised in debates such as this one. An aspect of the legacy that I want to mention is the environmental impact of the facilities. The issue is important. The energy efficiency of the athletes’ village will be a lasting legacy of the games, and the village will provide good homes for people to live in, as John Mason said. The food charter that has been agreed is also important. Scotland is a fair trade nation and it is important that we maintain standards. In my opening speech, I said that people who live in deprived communities are less likely to be involved in sport or physical activity. As the minister knows, I have long argued that the communities that are most blighted by crime, which usually also suffer from high levels of deprivation, should be given a greater share of the money that is distributed through the cashback for communities programme. Perhaps a weighting system should be applied. In my view, the social attitudes survey backs up that call. We need to do more to encourage the good ideas and projects that there are in many communities. The digital agenda was raised at the cross-party group on sport’s meeting last week, which I was unable to attend. There are valid points to be made, particularly in the context of encouraging women’s sport and role models in that regard. I am always grateful to BBC Alba for its coverage of a team that I support, Glasgow City Football Club, which is a women’s team. Unlike some other teams in Glasgow, the team consistently plays at European level, but I have to watch the games on BBC Alba. If any other Scottish football team was competing at European level, I suspect that the match would be shown on BBC 1.

I will do my best, Presiding Officer. Mr Dornan might remember that we were both at that game and that the team plays in my constituency—I am staking a claim. We can all support the team, because it is the Glasgow team and it does very well. Our excitement and anticipation are increasing as the games approach, which makes me wonder what it must be like for athletes at this time. They must be wondering whether their performance will win them a place in their team and how they will perform on the day. They must be conscious that they are role models for the more active Scotland that we all want to see. We might not all be able to compete for our country, but we can be inspired by their dedication and skill—and perhaps encouraged to take up a particular sport. I wish the athletes well in their training and preparation and I wish them well when their competition day comes around. I know that they will do their very best. I hope that the home crowds will do their job and cheer on our home athletes and the athletes who are visitors to our country.

I would be grateful to the minister for that information. While I was doing my own research for the debate, I found an excellent document from Dumfries and Galloway Council, and I was surprised to hear about the information that councils are providing. It seems to me that, frankly, they are selling themselves short.

I very much welcome the debate and congratulate Angus MacDonald on securing it. I also welcome the fact that the Scots pine has now been designated as Scotland’s national tree. It is fitting that the public were able to have their say and it is no bad thing that there was some competition for the title. As most people will recognise, symbols are important; indeed, I stand to speak proudly wearing a red rose, the symbol of international socialism. Symbols help to mark one from another and give people a sense of identity. As Angus MacDonald has pointed out, the idea came from a public petition suggesting that a national tree—the Scots pine—be adopted, and my constituent Alex Hamilton is to be warmly congratulated not only on proposing the idea in the first place but on his prescience in correctly identifying that the Scots pine would come out on top. It is absolutely correct that the Scots pine has been identified as Scotland’s tree. The rowan tree is, of course, very beautiful and its individual attributes make it worthy of consideration but, to me, the pine best symbolises Scotland and is most recognised as being attached to and part of our country and the world’s view of it. As Angus MacDonald has suggested and, as was previously made clear in Joan McAlpine’s interesting members’ business debate, the Scots pine’s reach is wide and, indeed, stretches almost around the world. It is known, welcomed and encouraged in many countries. Of course, the fact that it bears our country’s name is particularly important. The Scots pine is also a most utilitarian tree. As we have heard, it is very useful not just in building but in enhancing buildings and making products that are useful to our economy, and the fact that the material is easily worked means that people enjoy using it. Angus MacDonald also said that the designation will make an important contribution to our country’s biodiversity—indeed, the same issue was touched on in the previous members’ business debate—and that element of the Scots pine must be developed and encouraged. Moreover, its contribution to reforesting parts of our country will play a very useful part in our drive towards mitigating the effects of climate change. The designation of the Scots pine as Scotland’s national tree is, of course, a good and wonderful thing, but we need to go further and educate our country’s young people on the tree’s importance and, in turn, use that to educate them about the importance of our other national plants and animals, our biodiversity and our ecosystems. Like, I am sure, other members, I have gone from school to school, looking at what they are doing to get their green flag award. The green flag scheme is wonderful, and the enthusiasm that is felt by those young people is always taken home to their parents, who are also encouraged to become more aware of their environment. We should bear in mind the educational facility that the Scots pine could offer. I again congratulate Angus MacDonald on securing the debate; Joan McAlpine on leading the previous members’ business debate, which I think very much helped to stimulate interest in Forestry Commission Scotland’s competition; Forestry Commission Scotland on its work; and everyone who took part in the decision to designate the Scots pine. Of course, I reserve particular congratulations for Alex Hamilton, without whom we would neither be having this debate nor have a national tree.

9. To ask the Scottish Government how it supports job creation in north Glasgow. (S4O-02785)

The funding to both those projects is welcome. However, there is another important project in Royston in my constituency, which has been supporting young people who are hardest to reach in the employment market. It is called Royston at work. Indeed, the cabinet secretary’s colleague Ms Constance was delighted to be able to give out awards at the project’s last awards ceremony. Unfortunately, however, it appears that the project might not be able to continue because none of the agencies has been able to come up with an appropriate amount of cash to assist with it. The project is very highly regarded in the area and has made a significant difference to hard-to-reach young people trying to get into the job market. Does the cabinet secretary have any suggestions for other sources of funding to which the project might look?

I congratulate my colleague Paul Martin on securing this important debate and I wish Broagan McCuaig a full and speedy recovery. The motion rightly recognises that the Control of Dogs (Scotland) Act 2010 was a major step forward in tackling the problems that are experienced in many of our communities. The Control of Dogs (Scotland) Bill, which Christine Grahame introduced, sought to ensure that it was not the breed but the actions of a dog that constituted an offence, recognising that it can be difficult to establish the breed, as Christine Grahame said, and that in the right—perhaps that should be “wrong”—circumstances, almost any dog can become out of control and cause problems. We have read in our newspapers and heard during the debate many harrowing stories about dog attacks on children—young people whose minds and bodies are scarred because a dog was out of control. The fact that there have been so many instances in the past years suggests that the legislation perhaps does not go far enough or is not being resourced to the level that would make it as effective as it could be. I accept that no legislation, however robust it is, can entirely remove the possibility of someone being bitten by a dog. However, we must ensure that we have done everything in our power to reduce as far as possible the threat that out-of-control dogs pose. Let me say that I am a dog lover, like most other members. I regret very much that the lifestyle of my household is such that it is not sensible for us to have a dog. Indeed, it would be downright selfish of us to own a dog, because our working hours are such that there is rarely anyone at home and we could not provide a dog with the amount of exercise or attention that it would need. However, some people seem to see a dog as a status symbol, a fashion accessory or, frankly, as a sign of how tough they are, and give little thought to whether the environment and life that they can offer a dog will meet its needs. The consequences of having a frustrated, angry or out-of-control dog are all too obvious. Paul Martin is absolutely right to call for all dogs to be microchipped and their owners’ names and addresses to be registered on a database that can be checked by the police, or by dog wardens, who now have the prime responsibility in this area. Let me demonstrate briefly why I think that a register is needed. Last year, a constituent of mine was out walking her daughter’s small dog in her local area. Out of the blue, a larger dog, which lived at the home of her neighbour, ran out of its owner’s garden, grabbed my constituent’s dog and savaged it to such an extent that the vet had to destroy it an hour or so later. However, the story does not stop there. My constituent and her daughter were distraught and reported the incident to the police. That is when the problems really began, because the people who owned the house where the dog was on the day in question denied that they were its owners. It belonged to their son. When questioned by the police, the son also denied ownership and claimed that the dog belonged to his partner. She, in turn, said, “No, it’s my uncle’s dog.” The upshot was that it became difficult to identify the owners, which made my constituents’ experience even more difficult than it was already. We need to have a way in which dogs can be easily identified and in which their owners can be traced with some certainty. Microchipping dogs at the point at which they are sold or exchanged should be compulsory. I accept that there are problems attached to that but we can legislate in this country for the movement of livestock so surely it is not beyond the will of parliamentary draughtsmen to put in place something that would work. As I have said, when we consider the way in which some dogs are trained or bred to be violent or are denied the amount of exercise or stimulation that they need, it is perhaps no wonder that they sometimes go wrong. In previous times, all dogs had to be licensed but that system did not work either. Perhaps we now need to consider licensing the owners but only after they have proved themselves to understand their dog’s needs and are committed to training their dogs, and looking after them, as befits their breed type and the owner’s home circumstances. For now, at least, let us get the dogs microchipped and have a real debate around the very welcome consultation that the Scottish Government has undertaken to ensure that we put in place a regime that is not only robust and properly resourced but of which we can be proud, and which gives us some certainty that we have done everything that we can do, as legislators, to try to resolve the issue.

The minister is absolutely right to reinforce the point about prevention, but my colleague Jenny Marra hit the nail on the head when she said that not everyone is aware of the rights that they have so they do not always report it when a dog is beginning to exhibit such tendencies. It might be worth while to have an education programme or advertising programme to help with that.

I am grateful for the opportunity to speak in the debate. As colleagues will know, I am not a member of the Justice Committee, but I listened to the committee’s deliberations on the Title Conditions (Scotland) Act 2003 and read with interest the papers that the committee and its witnesses produced during the inquiry. As colleagues heard from the minister, in the previous session of Parliament I took through a member’s bill to regulate the factoring industry, and it is from that viewpoint that I offer my observations on the committee’s report, particularly as it relates to switching factors. I must admit that I had a feeling of déjà vu when I read the report, because many issues that the committee heard about were all too familiar from my experience. How do we make it easier for owners to switch factors, when there are so many complicating factors? What changes can we make that would be fair to everyone involved? The committee has explored the area thoroughly and identified the problems. In most situations, a two-thirds majority of owners is required before a change can take place. However, what do people do when they cannot persuade two thirds of owners to come to a meeting, or when the majority of owners rent out their properties and are not easily accessible? The obvious answer is to reduce the number of people who are required to make a change, but how low do we go without making the process inherently undemocratic or unfair? How do we prevent a small group of people from making decisions that have an effect on the majority, albeit that the majority might be silent or even apathetic? I understand from the Scottish Government response that the Government plans to consider whether the code of conduct for property factors should be changed to allow factors to give owners the contact details for other home owners in a development or property. I can understand why the Government wants to consider the approach, which I agree would be a step forward. However, I sound a note of caution. Owners who are resident in an estate or building can easily contact other resident owners simply by putting a mailshot through their doors. The mailshot does not have to be addressed; it can just be delivered. As members know, the problem arises when an owner is not resident in the property. In my experience, a non-resident owner who has not put in place a mechanism that makes him or her contactable is unlikely to be interested in changing the factor or in getting involved in discussions about doing so. Indeed, they might not co-operate at all if a cash outlay happens to be in the equation. By making it possible for factors to give out contact details we might enable people to fulfil a requirement to contact all owners, but that will not guarantee owners’ co-operation, which is the important aspect. Another area that I hope the Scottish Government will consider and perhaps act on is the agreements that are put in place for new developments. As we heard, the developer often makes an agreement with a property factor before work is completed on the estate or properties. The arrangement will often specify that the deal is in place for a period of, say, two years after the project’s completion. Therefore, people who buy properties in the development should know what the agreement is. However, in many areas developers have left developments uncompleted because of the economic downturn, so that first hurdle has become almost insurmountable. That means that owners can be left in limbo, finding that they just cannot switch. I have dealt with a difficult case like that in my constituency and, thanks to the work of a determined and committed group of owners, a switch eventually took place, but I wonder whether the Scottish Government will consider how the issue might be addressed, preferably without people having to have recourse to the courts.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I hope that the Scottish Government will consider people who do not have a factor but need one. Properties throughout the country are deteriorating rapidly, simply because factors are not in place. I would have liked to have talked about land-owning maintenance companies, but I do not have time to do so, other than to say that the position is complex and I do not know how we can make it more simple—if I did, I would wave my magic wand and do that today.

I sincerely hope that the minister will take my intervention in the way that it is intended. I draw her attention to the fact that, when I originally proposed that we should regulate property factors, the Government’s attitude was that we should not do so but instead have a voluntary code and, if that worked, that was fine but if it did not, it would then look to legislate. Had we gone down that road, we still would not have any legislation to regulate property factors. It might just be worth thinking about whether the same might apply to landowning land maintenance companies.

I am sure that the minister is aware, in presenting those statistics, that when the Parliament was established very few new PE teachers were being recruited. I think that something like nine new PE teachers were recruited in 2003-04, and by 2004-05 the figure had gone up to 80. That increase clearly feeds into the statistics on activity and PE, in particular, and is something that we should all welcome.

I am pleased to speak in the debate. For reasons that will become clear later, I am also pleased that the minister chose the quotation that she did from Nelson Mandela. I will come back to that near the end of my speech, but perhaps it would be appropriate if I, too, cite Nelson Mandela on sport. He famously said that sport reaches “areas far beyond the reach of politicians.” Perhaps that is something that we should all remember. I record my thanks to the minister for bringing the debate to the chamber at this stage in the development of the strategy. I have to say that, at the moment, the strategy needs a little bit more meat on its bones. I hope that today’s short debate can influence its final content, although I suspect that there will be many areas that we will not be able to cover in the allotted time. Perhaps we will have the opportunity to come back to it on another occasion. I acknowledge the involvement of the young people’s sport panel and congratulate it on its efforts and ambition. It has identified some important areas of work and provided a clear focus for the strategy, which is welcome. However, a number of challenges remain at the heart of the debate. How do we reach the young people who are not involved in sport or who are not physically active? Where is the money that will be needed to underpin the strategy? Can the strategy’s ambitions be achieved when we have not reached the targets for PE, as the Conservative amendment highlights? There is also an issue about quality. I, for one, do not mind if the people who teach PE at primary school are properly trained primary school teachers, but I would not want it to be left to the luck of the draw. That is at the nub of the Conservative amendment.

Progress is always to be welcomed, but we must recognise the challenges that remain. We would be doing the young people about whom we are talking a huge disservice if we did not acknowledge those challenges. Of course, at the same time, there is an overall decline in physical activity, as Scottish Labour has noted in its amendment. A useful starting point would be to ensure that all young people are physically literate before they leave primary school and that primary school PE concentrates on supporting them to enable them to run, jump, throw, catch and swim with confidence. The optimum age for that seems to be between about eight and 12, so primary school time coincides with the most crucial period for that development. That is incredibly important, because without those core skills young people will struggle to progress whereas, with them, they will be equipped to develop in the sport or sports of their choice. The involvement of teachers and education policy makers—including the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning—is vital to that agenda. I hope that the minister will assure us that such a commitment exists. I note that sportscotland has reported that many schools are now well equipped to take forward the agenda—which is welcome—but that some serious challenges remain. If we really want to change the culture and increase the number of young people who are involved in sport, we have to invest in it. I hope that the minister’s colleagues in health, education and justice will contribute financially from their departmental budgets. The Scottish Labour amendment draws attention to the decrease in physical activity that has occurred in recent years. We recognise not only that that is a complex matter for the health and wellbeing of our nation, but that it is a serious one that needs to be addressed by the combined efforts of Government departments. Similarly, and in recognition of the transformational nature of sport in relation to community cohesion, the justice department must bring its resources, in terms of diversion and cashback for communities moneys. There seems to be a particular problem with the level of young people’s involvement in sport after transitional times in their lives, when they move from primary to secondary school and from secondary school to further and higher education or employment. We need to find a way to encourage them to remain involved. We must ensure that there is a pathway for them to find the club, gym or track that will allow them seamlessly to continue their involvement, and to progress to the limits of their ambition. Active schools are very important in the transition between schools, which is a transition not only educationally but in terms of sport and activity. One can complement the other. The minister knows of my concern that young people who have disabilities should have as many opportunities as their peers who do not have disabilities. I was pleased to note that the draft strategy mentions Scottish Disability Sport’s inclusion training, but it could go further. I hope that the final version of the strategy will acknowledge the additional benefits of physical activity to young people who have disabilities and will ensure that that is recognised and supported. As I have mentioned previously in debate, I hope, too, that the additional cost of adapted equipment is recognised. We read that young people want to see their hard work and dedication respected, recognised and rewarded. They are quite right to highlight that. For that reason, I welcome the school sports awards, which all schools will strive to achieve. However, perhaps we could go further. As the minister said in opening, earlier today we celebrated the life of Nelson Mandela. I suggest that there might be a tangible way in which we could recognise his achievement, his legacy and Scotland’s respect for him. As we know, Nelson Mandela was a keen boxer in his youth and was someone who truly understood the value of sport and the importance of the symbolism that often accompanies it. I will repeat the quotation that the minister gave; it bears repeating. In Monaco in 2000, Nelson Mandela spoke of the transformational nature of sport when he said: “Sport has the power to change the world. It has the power to inspire, it has the power to unite people in a way that little else does. It speaks to youth in a language they understand.” Perhaps the minister would consider establishing in the name of Nelson Mandela a scholarship fund to help the sporting or academic achievement of young people from low-income backgrounds or people who have shown a real commitment to using sport to help to break down barriers. I hope that she will at least consider the idea and recognise that sport can help to encourage people to work together for the good of their community. The debate is all too brief, but I sincerely hope that it will provide an appropriate launch pad for the consultation on the youth sports strategy. I move amendment S4M-08546.2, to insert at end: “; voices concern at the findings of the Scottish Health Survey 2012, which highlighted that the proportion of children meeting physical activity guidelines ‘has not changed significantly since 2008’ and that, while children’s participation in sport and exercise increased between 1998 and 2009, levels have been declining since; believes in the importance of promoting inclusion and solidarity through sport and physical activity, and believes that the Youth Sport Strategy should address these issues”.

As I said, we very much welcome the increase in the number of young people who are accessing physical activity through PE. However, I point out to the minister that the baseline figure was for two hours, not two periods, so we are not comparing like with like. In addition, we were originally talking about quality PE delivered by PE specialists.

Like the cabinet secretary, I thank all those who worked so hard and diligently to bring the 2011 census to us. It is often not an easy task, but it is important and we value it. Of course, censuses are historical methods of gleaning information—a point on which my colleague Lewis Macdonald will expand—but they remain an important tool. I rise to move the amendment in my name and to speak in the debate as a member of a majority group—not the majority group at present in the Parliament, but certainly the majority group in demographic terms, because we learn from the census that women make up 51.5 per cent of the population of the country. The census provides us with interesting information about the population of Scotland. It does what a census should do, which is to allow us to pick out trends. Perhaps most important, it gives local and national Government, the voluntary sector, businesses and those who provide services an idea of the trends, which they can use to plan efficiently for the future. Some intriguing facts emerge from the survey. For example, just over 1 per cent of the population speak Gaelic but, by a coincidental quirk, some 1 per cent of the population speak no or very little English at all. We learn that 86 per cent of households in Aberdeenshire have a car or van available to them whereas in Glasgow the figure drops to 49 per cent. That particular statistic can of course be partly accounted for by the rural nature of Aberdeenshire and the need for people to have their own transport, but it will in large measure be a result of the differing economic profiles of the two areas.

I am happy to do so, Mr Stevenson.

I think that I made that point before Stewart Stevenson intervened. I said that the rural nature of Aberdeenshire was probably the cause but that the economic diversity between Aberdeenshire and Glasgow perhaps accounted for some of the difference, too. I do not think that even he would deny that. I hope that the Government takes into account such matters when planning and—more important—funding bus and train services in constituencies such as mine, where the car ownership level is even lower than the average. A similarly stark fact is that, in the Orkney Islands, the Shetland Islands and Aberdeenshire, 3 per cent of the economically active population were unemployed, whereas that figure rose to 10 per cent in Glasgow. We welcome very much the increase in the number of people who live in Scotland. Like the cabinet secretary and others who are here today, I have been a member of the Parliament long enough to have heard many of the debates over the years about what we need to do to increase Scotland’s population, so it is good to see the work of Governments of whatever complexion beginning to bring dividends to our country. There was a time when we were almost despairing about the drop in Scotland’s population. It is fortunate that the position appears no longer to be as critical as it was, but we must not take our eyes from that. The number of one-person households—they form 35 per cent of households—bears further investigation, to establish whether they involve mainly older people whose circumstances mean that they are living alone or predominantly young people who are perhaps living outside the parental home for the first time. Such questions suggest that we need to consider carefully our priorities for house building in the private and social rented sectors, for example. As the motion suggests, overall, the census demonstrates how diverse and dynamic Scotland is. It gives us a snapshot of Scotland. We must pay heed to a number of the statistics that have been revealed to us. Nowhere are they more stark than in relation to our ageing population. The strapline for the census was, “Shaping our future”. None of us can predict with certainty what our personal, political or constitutional future might look like, but of some things we can be certain. The number of people who are aged 80 and over has increased by 19 per cent since the previous census, in 2001. We have arrived at a situation in which our population is ageing faster than that of the UK as a whole. For the first time, more people in Scotland are aged 65 and over than are aged under 15, which must give us pause for thought. Professor David Bell’s report “Social Protection in Scotland” suggests that that trend will continue. It predicts that the number of Scots pensioners will increase by 80 per cent between 2010 and 2060. Most of that increase is to occur from 2010 to 2035. Medical advances, better nutrition than previous generations enjoyed and a greater understanding of the value of keeping healthy mean that people are living longer. Of course, we all want that trend to continue, but we must recognise that it brings challenges in how we support and care for our older citizens. In its “Fiscal Sustainability of an Independent Scotland” report, the Institute for Fiscal Studies predicts that spending on health services, long-term care, pensions and public service pensions will grow more in Scotland than in the UK in the next 50 years.

I am happy to do so.

I am sorry, Presiding Officer. The Scottish Government’s fiscal commission noted that Scotland’s dependency ratio will increase more rapidly than that of the UK, which reflects the particularly sharp increase in Scotland’s pension-age population. The challenge for us is to have an honest debate about how we manage the growing numbers of people who will have support needs in coming years and how we will find the money to pay for that. It is clear that we put ourselves at a distinct disadvantage if we decide to separate from the rest of the UK. The evidence suggests that, if we took control of our welfare benefits and all the issues that go with that, we would need to raise additional revenue to meet the increased costs of state pensions, not to mention the cost of setting up an entire bureaucracy to underpin a new structure.

Sharing risk and supporting one another are a key component of the political union that is the UK. The evidence from the census strengthens that case. I move amendment S4M-08461.1, to insert at end: “; notes that the census demonstrates that Scotland’s population is ageing faster than that of the rest of the UK, and considers that this presents major challenges to policy makers and to those delivering services in Scotland’s communities.”

The points that the cabinet secretary has made latterly have thrown up the challenges that come from the census. I do not want to be in any way provocative; I simply want to ask the cabinet secretary a question. What action is the Scottish Government taking to review the findings of the census and react to them? More than a white paper will be needed to deal with those matters.

Will the Deputy First Minister advise the Parliament what discussions have taken place with EU member states to back up the statement that, to ensure that the current UK obligations and provisions apply to an independent Scotland, “the necessary Treaty amendments will be taken forward with the agreement of member states”? In the event that the consent of EU member states has not already been obtained, does she agree that it would be more honest for the document to explore what concessions might have to be made to secure EU membership? Which of the UK opt-outs would she be prepared to concede in order to ensure Scotland’s membership?

I congratulate Mike MacKenzie on bringing to the Parliament a timely and interesting subject for debate. I perhaps disagree ever so slightly with Mr MacKenzie on one small point. I think that architecture is highly regarded in Scotland and I know that Scottish architecture is highly regarded internationally. When I had occasion to speak about Scottish architecture in other countries, I found that people recognised the buildings and architects that I was talking about and rarely had anything but praise for what our architects are doing. As Mike MacKenzie said, we should celebrate Scottish architecture; we should also consider ourselves fortunate in the architects that we have in this country and their work. This year’s shortlist includes stunning entries, and the buildings vary greatly in their architecture and in the use to which they will be put. They range from family homes to community art centres and from work and commercial areas to contemplative spaces. After examining the photographs of many of the buildings, visiting one or two of them and reading architects’ comments, I am sure of only one thing: I would not want to be a member of the competition’s judging panel. Looking at the range of buildings on offer, it is clear to me that there is a great deal of diversity of architectural type and design in Scotland. The architects have been influenced by the locality, and by the criteria of functionality and purpose that the brief has asked them to consider. However, influence has also come from a great deal of imagination and consideration of what will work, and what will inspire and allow people to stretch their own imaginations. Two of the shortlisted projects—the Beacon arts centre in Greenock and Mareel in Shetland—are in themselves part of the creative arts. I do not think that anyone looking at those buildings and their settings could fail to be inspired creatively to do the best work that they can do. Similarly, the Sir Duncan Rice library in Aberdeen, which is a cube of ice and light reflecting the weather that we often find in the north of the country, seems to be a wonderful place for people to have the opportunity to study and look forward, and to do their very best indeed. Locality has influenced some of the buildings, in particular the turf house, which is a fantastic example of the benefits of considering the environmental aspects of a building and its architecture. It is probably invidious of me to mention only some of the buildings, but I genuinely think that every single one of them is worthy of being shortlisted. I will mention the ghost of Water Row, although it was in my home part of the city rather than in my constituency. My constituency of Maryhill shares with Govan the fact that it became part of Glasgow at a later date than some other localities, so I have a great deal of sympathy with that celebration and commemoration. This evening’s event will be a truly wonderful ceremony, and I am truly sorry that I am not able to be there. I have been at other such events in the past and have enjoyed them hugely, but I have another engagement that I must attend. I acknowledge the extraordinary generosity of the Doolan family over the years in commemorating someone who really did help to lead the way in the field of architecture. I also acknowledge the support from successive Governments. There is one small thing that I had not planned to say but now feel that I must. I am sorry that Mike MacKenzie has not seen social housing that has inspired him to want to live in it. Having lived in social housing for more than half of my life, I have to say that some of our social housing in Scotland is tremendous. Looking at the winners of architectural prizes across the board, it is clear that housing associations are consistently ranked at the top and are often the winners of those prizes. We can be very proud of some of the good social housing in Scotland. Mike MacKenzie rose— I realise that the housing that Mr Mackenzie saw was probably an exemplar, but we should be very proud of our social housing as well as all the fantastic buildings for other purposes that are shortlisted for the award that will be presented tonight.

Will the member give way?

I am sure that Mr Brodie will reflect on that speech and the tone in which it was delivered, and that he will consider whether it was the right speech to make. I am grateful for the opportunity to speak in this important debate. I have said it before in the chamber and I will say it again—the decision to cancel the Glasgow airport rail link was wrong. It was a project that had the potential to stimulate the economy, create jobs and boost tourism. It would also have provided a public transport link to Glasgow airport that would have got cars off the road and made the journey easier. It was an infrastructure project not just for Glasgow and the west of Scotland but for the entire country. I remind Parliament that the delivery of an airport rail link was a commitment that was made in our bid for the Commonwealth games. However, the Scottish Government decided to cancel the project without any real review or appraisal and without discussion with the other stakeholders. Much has been made about the escalation in costs in the transfer from SPT to Transport Scotland, but I also remind Parliament that when that official transfer took place, Transport Scotland carried out three months of due-diligence inquiries. What did it conclude? It concluded that no significant cost increases or overspends had been identified. In fact, a scant three months before the decision was made to cancel, the then Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change said that the project was on time and on target. How quickly they forget. As we know, as the then Opposition, SNP members including the Deputy First Minister, Mr Swinney, Mr Stevenson and Sandra White, made strong arguments in favour of GARL. Ms White in particular bemoaned “the lack of a direct rail link to Glasgow Airport”—[Official Report, 15 November 2000; c 62.] and suggested that “The benefits of the link are overwhelming”.—[Official Report, 29 November 2006; c 29844.] However, once the cabinet secretary had decided to axe GARL, SNP members fell silent and their views about the necessity of the project were swiftly forgotten. Not one of its Glasgow members had the courage to speak out and say that it was the wrong decision. Today, the audacity of the SNP has been revealed by no less a figure than the minister himself. In the amendment, he refers to GARL as “ill-conceived”. I confess that I was genuinely taken aback when I saw those words in the Business Bulletin because I can recollect no occasion in the past when an SNP minister has described GARL in that way. Indeed, John Swinney described the project as “desirable” when speaking about its cancellation, and the Scottish Government seemed at the time to be suggesting that it regretted having to make the decision to cancel GARL but had been forced into it by economic circumstances. Parliament deserves an explanation from the minister as to the Scottish Government’s real opinion of GARL. Is it against the project in principle, as the minister seemed to suggest, and if so, why has it not said so before now? I remind the minister that, if a private GARL were to go ahead, it would still need rails to run on and those rails would have to cross land between Glasgow and its airport. What land does the minister think could now be used for a revised GARL project? Perhaps we will have a monorail, at the kind of cost that that would involve. In coming to a close, Presiding Officer—I am conscious that your generosity goes only so far—I will mention another Glasgow rail line that has been the subject of much discussion. I speak, of course, of the Anniesland to Queen Street line in my constituency. I sincerely welcome the Scottish Government’s recent commitment that that line will be electrified, but an idea of the timescale and a discussion of the implications for passengers would be welcome. The line is a vital link for people in my constituency, and they deserve to know what the Scottish Government’s plans are. I sincerely hope that the commitment to electrification of the Anniesland to Queen Street line lasts longer than the commitment to GARL.

The cabinet secretary is at pains to tell us all the things that will not now be needed. Does he really expect the people in my constituency in Possilpark, which is adjacent to the Baird Street and Maryhill police stations, to think that the cut to their stations’ opening hours is good enough? In the case of Possilpark, does he think that a Monday-to-Friday, nine-to-five service is really what that area deserves?

Will the member give way?

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

I add my condolences to those expressed by colleagues to the families who lost loved ones on 23 August, and I recognise the work of the rescue services. I also congratulate my colleague Richard Baker on securing this important debate. Richard’s interest in the conditions faced by workers in the North Sea is extensive and it is fitting that he should lead the debate today. The motion refers to the draft member’s bill that I have issued for consultation. I would like to outline today why I believe such a bill is necessary and how it is relevant to this tragedy. I have spoken to people who have lost a loved one in a workplace, or other incident and three things have become clear to me: first, the time it takes to hold a fatal accident inquiry is often far too long; secondly, those families do not feel that they have the level of involvement that they would like to have in the process of deciding whether a fatal accident inquiry is held; thirdly, when an FAI takes place, the sheriff who conducts it cannot make binding recommendations and the lessons that could be learned from the inquiry are not always applied. Unfortunately, this case demonstrates those points only too well because, as the motion says, this is not the first time a Super Puma helicopter has crashed into the sea, and the families of the 16 people who died in 2009 are still waiting to hear whether there will be an FAI. Could lessons have been learned from the crash in 2009? I do not know, and none of us can know. What I do know is that, in 1989, a fatal train crash took place at Bellgrove in Glasgow, when two trains collided at a point where two lines converged into one. The cause of that accident was found to be that one of the drivers did not react to a signal warning him of that line convergence. That is a recognised phenomenon in the railway industry and is known as SPAD—signal passed at danger. In that case, the sheriff recommended the simple change of introducing what would in effect be a double signal, on the basis that a driver is less likely to miss two danger signals. However, the recommendation was not implemented. In 1991, the Newton rail disaster occurred, in which four people died and 21 were injured. The principal cause of that tragedy was, again, a signal passed at danger. The Scottish Government has said on several occasions that it will legislate but, unfortunately, its legislative programme so far has been silent on the issue. That is why I am going ahead with my bill proposal. I ask the minister to consider the bill—he may take the bill, if he will, although he will not necessarily agree with everything in it—and let us have the debate. Let us hear from the families, the trade unions and the industry on what they have to say. The industry understands that delays are detrimental because, for the companies involved, the liability for an incident remains on their books until such time as its cause has been established. The industry also knows the costs, both in terms of personal involvement and in terms of money, that arise from people having to go over again an incident that was a tragedy at the time and remains a tragedy years later. I realise that ministers have many other priorities, but I say to the minister that I am consulting not just on an idea but on a bill proposal that has already been drafted. I would happily work with the minister, the cabinet secretary and other parties—I welcome Alex Johnstone’s comments in particular—because, at the end of the day, this is not about party politics but about people’s lives.

No one should lose their life just because they go to work. We here have the power to make a difference. Let us use it.

I think that this is the first time that a Parliament debate on golf will not be graced by the knowledge and passion of our late colleague David McLetchie. David’s enthusiasm for golf and skill in playing were well known—especially to those who sometimes competed against him. I was, unfortunately, not able to be present when Parliament paid tribute to him, so today I express my regret at his passing and offer my condolences to his family and his many friends, particularly those on the Conservative benches. This time next year, Scotland will be in a state of high excitement as we watch the enthralling competition that is the Ryder cup. I watched with interest this week the events that took place to recognise and publicise the competition, with one year to go. I am sure that the minister found those to be an interesting experience. Who says that being the sports minister is not the best job in Government? Colleagues will recall the thrilling finale to the 2012 Ryder cup, when Europe defeated the United States by 14 and a half points to 13 and a half points—an outcome that has set the stage beautifully for 2014. As the motion points out, Scotland is “the home of golf”, and it is fitting that the tournament will return to this country next year, having not been played in Scotland since 1973. That competition was, of course, played at Muirfield and was won by the USA with a score of 19 points to 13. Until 1973, the teams that took part were the USA and Great Britain. Although Northern Irish players had taken part since 1947 and Republic of Ireland players since 1953, it was only in 1973 that the team name was changed to Great Britain and Northern Ireland. The Presiding Officer and colleagues may notice that I had anticipated that I might have longer to speak than I originally thought I would have. For those with an interest in golf, being able to attend the Ryder cup on home soil will be a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity. However, for all those with a love of sport it will be the culmination of a very special year that will be full of excitement and opportunity, and—if it is anything like Medinah—high drama, too. As we have heard, clubgolf was established as part of the legacy of the Ryder cup and as a major component of the bid. It is a real opportunity for young people to have the chance to experience golf and, one hopes, to develop a love of the game that they will take with them into their later lives. All 32 local authorities are—to their credit—now involved, and some 73 per cent of primary schools are involved, which is excellent news. If I have one criticism, it is that I would be interested to hear what we can do to encourage the other 27 per cent of schools that do not seem to be involved to become involved and to take that opportunity for their school community. It is particularly good to hear about the number of girls who are becoming involved in golf. We all know—we have debated it in the chamber before—the difficulty that exists in encouraging young women and girls to remain involved in sport. At a time when we are recognising that challenge, and when the women’s game is becoming so professional and so strong, it seems to be appropriate for us to reflect on the fact that girls are becoming more involved in golf than was perhaps the case previously. I was interested to note that Ted Bishop, the president of the Professional Golfers’ Association in America, has indicated that he is envious of clubgolf. I think that he was right when he said: “in 10, 15, 20 years from now, Scotland will have a Ryder Cup player that was part of this” —“this”, of course, being clubgolf. I was pleased to hear of the opportunities to attend Ryder cup practice days and the junior Ryder cup, as well as the other events in which many clubgolf players are taking part. I was also pleased that the Ryder cup organisers have been very supportive of the project. I recalled visiting the open championship a few years ago and hearing some of the players talking about clubgolf in extremely glowing terms. It was absolutely correct for the First Minister to attend the Ryder cup last year; I would have expected him to be there to support the European team and to encourage people to come to Scotland in 2014. However, the part that I really cannot accept is that it cost £460,000 for him to do so. That is, after all, only a little less than clubgolf costs for one year. In my view, paring down the costs of that trip and spending a little more money on clubgolf would have struck a better balance, but I will leave that where it stands. According to experience and research, the more sports a person tries out when he or she is young, the more likely he or she is to continue playing at least one of them into adulthood, so clubgolf also makes an important contribution to our healthy living agenda. Of course, clubgolf does not simply happen; it requires volunteers—parents and teachers—to encourage young people to become involved, and the active schools network is vital to making clubgolf a success and making links with local golf clubs possible. In the recent past, golf enthusiasts would often tell of the length of time they had wait to join their local club and often measured their club’s prestige in terms of the years they had to wait to join. However, long waiting times do not seem to be such a feature of today’s golf club scene; indeed, evidence suggests that golf club membership has declined in recent years; my colleague Neil Findlay will say more about that in his speech. That is why Scottish Labour’s amendment suggests that the Ryder cup should be a catalyst to encourage players of all ages to take up the game and join a club, so I hope that the minister will be able to tell us a bit more about how the Scottish Government and its agencies plan to harness the great deal of enthusiasm that I hope will be generated next year to achieve that aim. In my constituency, local people led by John McVicar organised and campaigned to bring a former municipal golf course back into use, and a couple of years ago successfully opened up the nine-hole Ruchill golf course. Such projects are very important to the local communities, but they need support and encouragement, which is where they tend to struggle. Funding to start such projects can be found quite readily, but finding the money that will enable them to keep going is a harder ask. Although we on this side of the chamber welcome the Scottish Government’s sentiments about the Ryder cup’s potential legacy, we also have a number of concerns. Progress towards the 50 per cent tourism target has to date been a little disappointing, and although the Ryder cup and the Commonwealth games will undoubtedly increase the 2014 figures, there is no real guarantee that the 50 per cent target will be hit or that next year’s growth will be maintained in subsequent years. I know that earlier this month the Minister for Energy, Enterprise and Tourism launched a new golf tourism strategy that aims to capitalise on next year’s events and the open championships in 2015 and 2016, but as far as tourism planning is concerned it seems to have come a little too late. After all, tour operators from the countries that we want to encourage to bring sportsmen and sportswomen here plan quite far ahead.

I am sure that Graeme Dey is aware that a debate about VAT and taxation on tourism has been going on for a number of years in Scotland, but regardless of that element of tourism costs, the fact is that tourism in Scotland is an expensive and labour-intensive business with a lot of on-costs. As I understand it, the aim of tourism in Scotland has not been to get to the bottom but to drive up quality. That is the direction of travel that we should go in, and I know that it is the direction in which VisitScotland and others want to take us. However, there is an interesting debate to be had on the subject, not least in terms of the fact that a number of countries charge tourists but not residents for goods and services. That approach seems to be very popular in other countries and I have certainly heard it suggested for our own. We could spend an entire day debating that. I am still a bit concerned that a charge is to be levied on each volunteer, because it not only limits the number of people who can apply but is somewhat of a contradiction in terms. We have been told that the charge will root out “time wasters”, which I thought was an unfortunate choice of expression, and I note that such a move was not necessary for the Commonwealth games, for which there were 50,000 applicants for volunteering places. That said, I very much welcome the minister’s announcement, which I think will go some way to ensuring that young people have the opportunity to take part in the Ryder cup.

I understand that the charge was introduced after the Welsh event, but I will stand corrected if I am wrong about that. I will say that kit is being provided for those who volunteer at the Commonwealth games, and there is not going to be a charge for that. We need to be quite careful about that element. However, as I said, I genuinely welcome the minister’s announcement today. Scottish Labour sees sport as having the potential to change lives and to inspire and motivate us all. We also believe that sport brings nations together, and we want to amend the Government’s motion so that it says that. Human beings can function well on their own, but for many people being part of a team is a fulfilling and rewarding experience. Our home-grown golfers certainly seem to have thrived in recent years and they have been part of a European team at the Ryder cup—proud Scots, working with others and pooling their talent to achieve a victory that we all want. I have no doubt that Scotland is well prepared to host next year’s Ryder cup, and I believe that it will be an epic spectacle that will help to cement Scotland’s place as a sporting nation. However, it is an expensive event to host, and we must ensure that all the goals in the Scottish Government motion and our amendment are achieved, if it is to be more than just a great spectacle. I move amendment S4M-07808.1, to leave out from second “notes” to end, and insert, “believes that the Ryder Cup should be used as a catalyst for increasing participation in the sport by all age groups; notes the initiative from the Scottish Government and previous Scottish administrations for the successful bid and the investment in Clubgolf and golf tournaments; believes that such cross-party and cross-administration support firmly sets Scotland as the home of golf, and considers that the Ryder Cup is an excellent example of the way in which sport brings nations together.”

The debate has been interesting and wide ranging—not just geographically, but historically. There have also been personal revelations, although we could have done without one or two of them. It is interesting to note the amount of therapy that we have provided by giving many members the opportunity to declare their lack of involvement in golf—so far. Perhaps we can do something about that. I was interested to hear about the logistical issues from Liz Smith and Annabelle Ewing, who have local connections with Gleneagles. I was going to call them logistical “problems”, but many of the potential problems have been ironed out. I am sure that that was not done easily and that it took a great deal of planning over many years. I very much hope that all that hard work will pay off in the end. Liz Smith was absolutely right to say that, although all of us would accept that the event will be excellent for Scotland, it may not be such an attractive proposition for those who will have it absolutely on their doorstep; it may disrupt their lives in ways that they will not appreciate. It is important that the views of such people are reflected in the plans that are being made. Colleagues have been keen to mention that we should capitalise on the increased visitor numbers; of course we must do that. I hope that people who come here for the Ryder cup do not just come and watch the tournament, but will range throughout Scotland. Even if they are here only to play golf—which is an important thing to do—and to watch it, I hope that they will do that around the country on the many excellent courses here, some of which we have heard about. I was going to say that Dennis Robertson made the best pun of the day, but he just had the first pun of the day. It occurred to me that perhaps VisitScotland has somewhat missed a trick in not having capitalised on his absolute enthusiasm for his region, and in not having somehow condensed it into a little advert that could be used to portray how excited people like him are about what the Ryder cup can bring to their area. I was struck—I say this with my tongue slightly in my cheek—when Dennis Robertson regaled us with all the things that are happening in 2014. I mentioned that 2014 would be an exciting year; I am pleased that the Labour-led Executive had the foresight to provide most of the events in that year. The current Government has added an extra one in there as well, of course. Dennis Robertson’s contribution and those of other members in response to it say to us that we must remember that there are for some people additional barriers to playing or participating in any sport. Cost is often a barrier and we must always bear it in mind that costs are much higher for disabled people. A bike for a 10-year-old who wants to take part in sport or who just wants to play on a bike will be a couple of hundred pounds maximum, but if a disabled child wants a specially adapted bike, it will be £1,000 minimum for them to be able to have the same experience as their non-disabled colleagues. I was struck by Graeme Pearson’s contribution. He must be one of the few former police officers whom I have met who does not play golf. I suppose that even non-believers might be inspired next year. We just have to cross that extra hurdle to get Graeme Pearson over the line. He made a valid point about the experience of organising major events such as the Ryder cup and being involved in them. The effect of that, and of the experience at such events, on the emergency services’ awareness of logistical problems in their area can be taken forward to less helpful situations. Graeme Pearson was right to raise that point. I was also struck that Graeme Pearson, Annabelle Ewing and Richard Lyle admitted to not being golfers. I wonder whether we need to have an induction event for members in the run-up to the Ryder cup. That may be a bit too much of an ask for the minister, so perhaps the cross-party group on golf can do something about it. Tavish Scott was right to identify the tickets issue. I have been delighted with the way in which the Commonwealth games tickets have been dealt with. I tried to get tickets for the Olympic games and eventually managed, but I had a number of complaints about that process, which I fed in to the organisers of the Commonwealth games, because I thought that those complaints needed to be fed in. The experience of bidding for tickets for the games in Glasgow was much easier than it was for the London Olympics. There was a lesson well learned. In fact, it was so well learned that I might be a bit unhappy when I see my bank balance, if I am successful and get all the tickets that I have asked for. There is a contrast, however, and we cannot really liken that event to the Ryder cup. They are very different events, but it would be interesting to see how many Scots manage to get tickets through the bidding process, and whether the number is as large as we would like it to be. Tavish Scott’s enthusiasm for Tom Watson has slightly depressed me about our prospects next year. I will spend the remainder of the year trying very hard not to take that seriously, because I think that we can overcome even Tom Watson’s greatness. I was struck by a comment that Tavish Scott made about golf courses around the country. I remember very clearly conversations a number of years ago, when we had direct flights from Stockholm to Prestwick. Unfortunately, those flights no longer exist. I think that I am right in saying that North Ayrshire Council was worried about the effect that they would have on use of its municipal greens at weekends, because Swedish golfers came to Ayrshire to play at points in the year when it was too cold to play at home, but could still play in Scotland. The council was thinking at that point about whether it might need to provide more municipal courses for those incoming golfers to play on. Sadly, that is no longer the case, but it is important that when we have such connections we maximise the benefit. Liz Smith complimented Graeme Dey on his speech and I will do likewise. It was interesting and well laid out. As a keen observer of sport over many years, he had a lot to tell us, and we can learn a lot from his comments. He was absolutely right to identify the importance of golfers as role models. Sometimes young people are too inclined to see footballers as their role models. I have been very struck by the bad press that Andy Murray gets for his demeanour, which I think is unjustified. Anyone who watched the documentary about Andy Murray that was shown before and after Wimbledon will know about his sheer drive and determination and about the sacrifices that sportspeople like him make so that they can reach the peak of perfection in their game. That is the kind of example that we want young people to learn from, and I think that many golfers are similar role models. I was getting a bit worried during Chic Brodie’s speech. I was wondering how far he would take his analogy, if I may be brutally honest. However, none of us can be in any doubt about his passion for golf, which is to be welcomed. Aileen McLeod talked about activity in her region. A few years ago I witnessed at first hand some of the active schools work that was going on in Dumfries and Galloway, so it is wonderful to hear that the programme is still growing. I do not know whether Aileen McLeod was hinting that a subscription to Golf Monthly would be a good Christmas present; maybe not, but at least she has put a marker down. Neil Findlay was right to mention the SGU’s strategy. If clubs are having a problem, it is important that we work out how to get the young people who are involved in clubgolf into clubs in an affordable and sustainable way. Mark McDonald will excuse me when I say that I rarely agree with him. Today, however, I agreed with almost every word that he said—I stress “almost”, which gives us both a bit of a way out. He was right to say that the Ryder cup generates special excitement, even among people who are not normally golf fans. He was also right to talk about the commitment of Paul Lawrie, who has been a longstanding supporter of clubgolf and was involved in it right from the beginning. No one should have any doubts about that kind of commitment, which is very welcome.

I am happy to do so. Finally, I want to draw the minister’s attention to the good motion that George Adam has lodged on fair trade products and the food and drink charter at the Commonwealth games. She might like to say whether there is a similar commitment in relation to the Ryder cup. Like other members, I look forward to an excellent event next year. I am delighted that so many charities will benefit from the event. We must maximise the economic, social and sporting opportunities. I wish everyone who will be following the tournament, whether they are watching it at Gleneagles or on television, all the joy that such an event can bring. Whoever is chosen for the European team, I wish them every success—and maybe I wish the USA team slightly less success.

I do not think that anyone could object to the objectives of the bill because for all of us, regardless of our views on separation, the provision of a “fair, open and truly democratic process which is conducted and regulated to the highest international standards” must be our aim, and Scotland deserves no less. The committee, with some exceptions on individual points, was broadly content to recommend the bill at stage 1. We also flagged up a number of areas where we thought that clarification was needed or a change to the current proposals was required. In the Deputy First Minister’s 8 September letter to the committee, she accepted that she needs to lodge a number of amendments at stage 2—that is to be welcomed. In the time that is allowed, I will not be able to cover all the issues that concern me, so I will limit myself to just a few. During debate on both the Scottish Independence Referendum Bill and the Scottish Independence Referendum (Franchise) Bill, the issue of whether the 16 and 17-year-old children of armed forces personnel based overseas would be able to vote was raised. I understand that that is likely to be an issue for a relatively small number of young people, but it is important that we make every effort to ensure that they can. I welcome the fact that Ms Sturgeon is now having discussions with the Electoral Commission and the electoral registration officers on the issue. It is an issue that I will continue to watch with interest. On the issue of the deadline for proxy voting, if we are as serious as we say we are about ensuring that as many people as possible can exercise their franchise, the Deputy First Minister must think again about the deadline for proxy votes. As the bill stands, the deadline for postal and proxy votes will be the same: 5 pm on the 11th working day before the poll, not—as is usual—5 pm on the sixth day before the election. The committee was not clear why that change was being made, but we very much hope that the Deputy First Minister will change it when she lodges amendments at stage 2. In the committee’s reading of the draft stage 1 report, we identified that the dates when the Parliament will be in recess and those when purdah applies were, as we have heard, not exactly synchronised, with a two-day period when the Parliament can in theory sit, but when purdah rules would be in force. As purdah applies to the Parliament as well as to the Government, that seems to be problematic.

I was going to go on to say that the committee took that matter very seriously. The Deputy First Minister advised the committee that, were Parliament to sit during purdah, it “would undoubtedly mean that we would sit with enormous constraints on what the Parliament and the Government could do ... it would be difficult to imagine how a normal First Minister’s question time, for example, would proceed in a way that is consistent with the law.”—[Official Report, Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee, 13 June 2013; c 556.] If the Government takes the issue of purdah and the Parliament being in session that seriously, that surely raises the question of how the error occurred. Given that the Government’s business manager sits on the Parliamentary Bureau and is therefore the only person with an overlapping responsibility, should he not have noticed that particular problem? Putting that aside, the more important point is how that will be fixed and whether it will be fixed? Whether it is the Government or the Parliament that wants to alter the dates does not really matter. Regardless of views on whether or not the Parliament should sit, if we are to have what is proposed—and the Parliament has voted for it—the two dates must coincide. It is crazy not to make them do so. On the issue of purdah more generally, I have been intrigued by the comments that SNP members have made throughout the discussion. The whole matter arises because the Scottish Government signed what has been called a gentlemen’s agreement—the historic Edinburgh agreement—with colleagues at Westminster. By doing so, the Scottish Government accepted the UK Government’s assertion that it would abide by the purdah principles. When she came to committee, the Deputy First Minister reiterated that that was her view. However, the Scottish Government has decided to legislate to ensure that it has to abide by those principles. That is a matter for the Scottish Government: if it wishes to do that, that is entirely up to it. It is a bit strange, however, that SNP members cannot accept the good will and good faith that the Deputy First Minister seems to have accepted by signing that agreement and by her words in committee.

Not at this moment. In the course of our discussions, I have been reassured that every effort will be made to ensure that disabled, blind and partially sighted voters will be able to participate. There had been some fears that partially sighted people might have some difficulty. Although they can be provided with a large-print version of the ballot paper for explanation purposes, they would be required to cast their vote on a ballot paper that did not have large print. I am grateful to the Deputy First Minister for agreeing to consider further whether any clarification is needed as to how the rules relating to disabled people would apply. As one of the members who has recently left the Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee, I thank SPICe and the committee clerks for their efficiency and support over the past year. They have had to work to a very tight timescale for this bill and its predecessor. I also record my thanks to all the witnesses and advisers, who provided us with some very interesting viewpoints and whose contributions were so important to the committee’s consideration of both bills. I genuinely wish all my colleagues on the committee well as they take the work forward. I congratulate Bruce Crawford, the convener, on keeping us to schedule and on his good humour throughout. To reassure Ms Fabiani, I will make one final point. There is one party operating in the Westminster Parliament that has demonstrated that it can put the priorities of Scotland ahead of those of anywhere else, and that is Scottish Labour and the Labour Party in the UK. [Interruption.]

In case Ms Fabiani has any doubts about that—[Interruption.]

I draw Ms Fabiani’s attention to the fact that we prioritised a referendum and the delivery of a Scottish Parliament in 1997, having inherited myriad problems—

—from 19 years of Tory rule. That was a demonstration of good faith, and one that I hope Ms Fabiani will accept.

Mrs Sillars might be happy to know this. [Laughter.] I say to Margo MacDonald on that point that if she had ever met Mrs Butler, she would know that there was only one Mrs Butler. [Laughter.] God rest her. The point that was made to us in evidence is that, when the Icelandic volcano erupted, people were unexpectedly prevented from coming home from holiday, for example. For them to have had a proxy vote, it was necessary for the time frame for that to be as close as possible to the date of the election. What is proposed is that the date would be further from the election, so the opportunity for people to have a proxy vote would be diminished. That is why I think the issue is important.

In opening the debate for Labour, I endorse the cabinet secretary’s sentiments concerning John Bellany. He will be sadly missed, but he has left a significant legacy of work that we can all share and be proud of for many years to come. We on the Labour side of the chamber welcome the opportunity to discuss the important but sometimes overlooked subject of our historic environment. The importance of our environment to our sense of place cannot be denied. It shapes how we live, work and play, and it helps to give us our cultural identity. Our historic environment provides us with evidence of the creativity of our ancestors and gives us important clues as to how they lived. Reusing historic buildings is, if it is done sensibly and appropriately, an excellent way of recycling, as historic buildings are invested with a great deal of energy and materials. I welcome my colleague Sarah Boyack’s intervention in that regard. The historic environment is an important asset that makes Scotland a place that people want to visit and which we can share with our visitors, and it provides skilled employment for many. The recently published Scottish household survey indicated that people in the most deprived areas of our country are the least likely to visit a cultural venue, and our historic environment is particularly useful in that respect. I am sure that many of my constituents do not think about culture or even heritage when they visit Maryhill Burgh Halls, the winter gardens in Springburn park—which are now sadly in decay but, it is hoped, not for much longer—or Lambhill Stables. Those places are particularly important in giving people a cultural grounding as well as a sense of place and identity. Scottish Labour broadly welcomes the intent of the strategy that we are discussing today, and we will make some comments—both critical and supportive—in today’s debate. On one issue—the merger of Historic Scotland and the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland—we profoundly disagree with the Scottish Government’s proposals, but I will come to that later. I welcome the idea of mainstreaming the historic environment into the public decision-making process, but before we begin such an exercise we must have robust benchmarking data and an agreed way of measuring progress. Without that, it will be impossible to tell whether the new way of working is successful. The Scottish Government proposes that a new definition of the historic environment should be established, and it has invited organisations working in the sector to contribute to developing it. However, the broad nature of the new definition seems to include collections that are held by galleries and museums, and I hope that the cabinet secretary will, in her closing remarks, expand on the way in which that will work. There seems to be some, perhaps understandable, unease in the museums and galleries sector about how the strategy will affect it. It would be helpful to have some reassurance on that on the record. I now come to the area that gives me most concern: the proposed merger of Historic Scotland and RCAHMS. I put on record my appreciation of the work that each of those organisations does and has done for many years. In particular, RCAHMS has an international reputation that might be in danger of being lost or, at the very least, diluted by the proposed merger. In the past few years, Historic Scotland has had a slightly troubled time and has lost some very experienced staff. The time is therefore not right to merge the two organisations. The National Trust for Scotland has pointed out that, although an options appraisal exercise has been undertaken in respect of RCAHMS, no such similar exercise has been done for the functions of Historic Scotland, leaving the sector trying to work out the implications of that. In their responses to the consultation, many organisations have highlighted the potential problems of establishing the new organisation as what seems to be a state charity, perhaps with less access to public funding but with an increased emphasis on the need to commercialise its activity and to access charitable giving. That might seriously undermine the fundraising efforts and work of the many charitable organisations that are already working in the area. There is also something fundamentally wrong with the idea of a state charity being the regulatory body and competing with voluntary organisations for funds.

I am sure that that is true. Having read some of the commentary, I have understood what the organisations have said, but there is still a kernel of doubt lingering under the surface. As parliamentarians, part of our job is to winkle out the ideas and thinking that have helped to underpin decisions. As the cabinet secretary rightly says, there will be time to explore those issues in more detail in the future and I look forward to engaging with that debate, but with the information that we have at the moment it is important for us to flag up issues about which we have concerns. There is also some concern about the properties in care, which it is proposed will transfer to the new body. The outline business case for the proposed new organisation suggests: “In 10 years, the organisation will be Scotland’s leading heritage tourism provider.” That statement seems to reinforce the particular concerns of some bodies that have an interest in the area, which believe that they will be asked to compete with the larger, state-backed organisation, if I can put it that way. As we know, Historic Scotland is responsible for delivering the regulation of the historic environment in Scotland. It will be important to ensure that that role is not compromised. Clarity is key to the success of any regulatory regime, and I would like to hear more from the minister—not necessarily today; I appreciate that time is limited—about how possible conflicts of interest will be avoided in future. It will also be important to ensure that the relationship between the proposed new body and local planning authorities is clear, and that the decisions about who does what and in what circumstances are understood by all who might be involved. Local planning authorities will also have to be properly resourced so that their decisions can be well informed. Work is already being done in that particular area, and I very much welcome it. There is also a fear in the sector that a lot of expertise has been lost in recent years, so I welcome COSLA’s engagement with the strategy because it is important that that diminution, if it has occurred, is reversed as we go forward. As colleagues will be aware, in England a similar merger has already taken place that seems to have led to the loss of a considerable amount of expertise. I know that the cabinet secretary has pledged to learn lessons from the English experience, and I welcome that. However, let me point out an additional fact to the cabinet secretary. In speaking to two former culture secretaries recently, it became clear to me that the merger of the two organisations had been suggested to them by civil servants. I had the same experience and, as it turned out, all three of us rejected the idea as we did not believe that it was in the best interests of the historic environment to proceed in that way. Therefore, I was genuinely surprised to hear that the current cabinet secretary had decided to adopt what I believe to be a mistaken notion. I hope that the cabinet secretary can allay my fears about the merger as we go forward, but I want to register the viewpoint at this stage. I had hoped to hear some considerable reassurances from the cabinet secretary explaining in detail why she has opted to go down the merger route, particularly as no option appraisal has been undertaken in respect of Historic Scotland. I would also like to have heard more about the functions of the new body—in particular, confirmation as to the future of the regulatory role, which as I have mentioned is currently performed by Historic Scotland. In giving those reassurances, the cabinet secretary could have taken the opportunity to spell out what she considers to be the benefits of a merger. Being mindful that we are on the eve of the draft budget statement, I do not expect the cabinet secretary to have lots of money to put into this particular pot. I am sure that, even if she did, she would not want to usurp Mr Swinney’s right to make such announcements. However, I had hoped to hear confirmation of a commitment to ensure that the historic environment strategy would be adequately resourced in the future—the point that the Scottish Labour amendment seeks to make.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I appreciate that point and I accept that the historic environment is a very expensive sector in which to work and operate. However, a quick look at the Historic Scotland website shows that there are still properties that are not open to the public because work requires to be done. I am very conscious, too, that the longer that work is left undone, the more expensive it becomes. It is necessary therefore that we have some benchmarking in that particular area. The historic environment faces challenges from the effects of climate change, from budget cuts and even from the advances that technology might offer. We have no objection to the motion or to the Conservative amendment, but I genuinely seek reassurance from the cabinet secretary on the points that I have made, in particular in relation to the merger of Historic Scotland and RCAHMS. I thank all the organisations that helpfully provided us with their views on this particular issue—one that I consider to be of great importance. I move amendment S4M-07622.1, to insert at end: “but believes that such work must also be properly resourced”.

I do not want to use up the chamber’s time unnecessarily by going over the arguments that the committee had but will simply say that we, too, welcome this change. We think that it provides necessary safeguards and additional information for young people who might otherwise be left vulnerable and unable to access a voting facility.

As Parliament knows, this bill has been subject to an expedited process, so that the electoral registration canvass can begin in the autumn. It has been possible for the committee to meet that exacting timetable only because of the co-operation of witnesses and the excellent work of the committee clerks and their colleagues in the Scottish Parliament information centre, who have supported the committee every step of the way. The committee advisers have also been extremely helpful, as has been all the evidence that we have received over the past few months during our deliberations. The bill, like all legislation, has improved as it has passed through Parliament. The bill that we will vote on this afternoon has been strengthened by changes that have been made as a result of contributions to the consultation and, I hope, proper scrutiny by the committee. As legislators, we would all do well to remember that admitting that something can be done better or that there is still room to improve legislation is not a sign of weakness in Government. Indeed, the strongest Governments are those that can openly discuss issues and realise that they do not always get it right first time. There will be times when political points have to be made on issues, but on matters such as the protection of young people, for example, we have a common agenda. I am pleased that the Deputy First Minister has recognised that this afternoon. Scottish Labour strongly supports the principle of giving 16 and 17-year-olds the vote and believes that that right should be extended to all elections. If anyone had any doubt about the ability of young people to listen to the debate, engage in the arguments and come to sensible conclusions, they had only to listen to the excellent contributions of the young people who gave evidence to the committee to be reassured on that point. There are, nevertheless, challenges inherent in extending the vote to 16 and 17-year-olds, particularly those who are vulnerable for whatever reason, and much of the committee’s focus was on ensuring that the bill offers them the necessary safeguards and protections. I believe that it now does that. I welcome the advice that has been offered by stakeholders and the testing that has been carried out to ensure the clarity of the canvass forms. The committee was reassured that service personnel will have the same opportunity to exercise their franchise as they have in elections to the Scottish Parliament. There remains the issue, however, of the children of service personnel who cannot make a service declaration but who will, on this occasion, be old enough to vote. I realise that that is likely to be a small group of people, but I think that it is right that the effort is made to ensure that they can vote. It is a matter of principle and should be pursued. I hope that the necessary provisions can be made during the passage of the Scottish Independence Referendum Bill, to which this bill is closely allied. I also look forward to hearing from the Electoral Commission, electoral registration officers and the Ministry of Defence about how they will work together to ensure that service personnel are encouraged to participate. I am pleased that the Scottish Government lodged an amendment at stage 2 that picked up the points that were made in evidence by members of the Scottish Youth Parliament about cut-off dates being incorporated into the young voters registration form. I had proposed a slightly different way of achieving that end, but I happily accept the cabinet secretary’s version. Awareness raising was a key element of our deliberations, because it is in everyone’s interest, regardless of their views on separation, to ensure that voters are informed and prepared when they go to vote. We should also aim to ensure that their experience of the process is a positive one. The committee noted that the Electoral Commission has a budget of £1.8 million for advertising and that it was satisfied that it could work with that arrangement. I am grateful to the Electoral Commission for providing yesterday a note of its current plans. I particularly welcome the fact that it has recognised that September 2014 will be a time of transition for many young people who will be leaving home to take up places at university and that it will be important for them to be aware of the provisions concerning proxy votes, because they are likely to be registered at their home address but perhaps living at a new address connected to their university at the time of the referendum. I also welcome the Electoral Commission’s commitment to keep Parliament informed of progress on its plans. The only issue on which there was a clear political difference in the committee was the issue of prisoner voting. The arguments have largely been rehearsed here today in the debate on amendments. I want to be clear about this: Scottish Labour thinks that the issue should be subject to debate, but we believe that the debate must take place in the correct context. We cannot consider voting without looking at the purpose of prison and whether prison is solely a punishment or should, as we believe, have a strong and meaningful role in rehabilitating prisoners. As we know, there is currently a blanket ban on prisoner voting, and we have heard today arguments in favour of lifting the ban for this referendum only and in certain cases. Those arguments centred on the idea that prisoners serving shorter sentences should be allowed to vote, with prospective cut-off points of six months and four years being suggested. However, in 2011-12, 11 murderers and eight people found guilty of rape were given sentences of up to four years. In the same year, 73 per cent of those imprisoned for common assault, which includes domestic violence, were given sentences of less than six months. I believe that the debate must also be informed by a critical consideration of sentencing policy. In the curtailed scrutiny process that we were involved in, there was insufficient time to have the kind of debate that would be needed before such a change could be considered, but I look forward to the day when that debate takes place. To those of us on the Labour benches, it is disappointing that the cabinet secretary was unwilling to share any legal advice that she might have on the issue. We have raised this point before, but I make no apologies for raising it again. Ms Sturgeon has been content to quote the committee’s legal advice, which suggests that the position on prisoner voting is compliant with the European convention on human rights, but she presumably has her own legal advice, as she had made up her mind before the committee had even asked for evidence. I know that the cabinet secretary will maintain that ministers do not discuss legal advice, but they can do so when it is in the public interest. I believe that this is one case in which the public interest would be best served by hearing the advice that shaped the Government’s assertion that ECHR compliance is not a threat to the bill.

We may take a different view from the Government on what would be a desired outcome from next year’s referendum, but we agree that young people should be able to take part in that referendum, not least because, as they said to us in committee, they will have to live with its consequences for the longest time.

Will Nicola Sturgeon take an intervention?

I do not want to break the consensus either, but I make the point to the Deputy First Minister that the reason why we are so keen to find out a bit more about legal advice that may have been obtained on the issue is that we know that there are cases that are waiting to go to court, and we want to ensure that the Government is on the right track. We are sure that the ECHR covers the issue, but we want to know that the Government has done the homework that goes along with that. That is all.

10. To ask the Scottish Government what progress there has been in respect of further education college mergers in Glasgow. (S4O-02301)

I am grateful to the cabinet secretary for his response and for his forbearance in repeating it. What are the costs to date of facilitating the merger of Stow, John Wheatley, and North Glasgow colleges, and what savings does the cabinet secretary expect will accrue from the merger when is complete?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with VisitScotland regarding the organisation’s website. (S4T-00402)

The minister may be aware that, at last week’s meeting of the Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee, Nicola Sturgeon said: “They are public authorities—at any time, there are restrictions on how they behave. At any time, on any day of the week and in any week of the year, I as a minister cannot use the resources of the civil service to do certain things that are party political. Public authorities do not operate in a political way, and they will not do so during the regulated period any more than they do now.”—[Official Report, Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee, 13 June 2013; c 564.] That statement provides little reassurance, given the evidence of the VisitScotland website. Will the minister tell Parliament what is being done to ensure that public authorities steer clear of party politics both in the regulated period and at all other times?

I am astounded by the minister’s assertions. An organisation whose website ignores the 1939 to 1945 war, which devastated Scotland and every other part of the UK, as well as most of Europe, but records the election—for three months only—of the first Scottish National Party MP must surely have to think again. I ask the minister to reflect, in his calmer moments, on the content of the VisitScotland website and consider whether the evidence is that those issues are ones that would attract people to visit Scotland—which is, after all, what it purports to do. I also ask the Scottish Government to provide, as a matter of urgency, guidance to public bodies to ensure that this partisan promotion—it can be nothing else—does not occur elsewhere in public bodies that promote Scotland.

I will take lessons from no one about support for VisitScotland. I draw members’ attention to my long record of supporting it in the chamber and anywhere else where I have had the opportunity to do so, in spite of opposition at times from people who should have known better. I simply point out to the minister, if any other evidence is needed, the fact that, within moments of hearing of my concerns, VisitScotland amended its website to take on board just a few of the ideas and dates that I managed to come up with in a two-minute discussion with others. That shows that VisitScotland recognised that its website had got it badly wrong. When will the minister understand that VisitScotland was wrong on this occasion? What will he do to ensure that no other public body gets it as wrong as VisitScotland, unfortunately, did on this one, isolated—I very much hope that it will be isolated—occasion?

With just 407 days to go until the start of the 20th Commonwealth games in Glasgow, it is fitting that we take stock to consider whether we will achieve the legacy, particularly for our young people, that is so much part of our ambition for the games. As someone who was closely involved at the very beginning of the planning for Glasgow 2014, I can tell members that, even before the decision to bid was made, we knew that there would have to be a lasting and measurable legacy from the games if we were to make the investment of time and money worth while. There were people then who said that a legacy of anything more than a few additional venues could not be achieved, but I believed then that they were wrong and I maintain that position to this day. However, we recognised that we would achieve a legacy of improved health and physical fitness only if planning began the minute we made the decision to bid. In other words, the legacy would need to be delivered even if the bid was unsuccessful. I am pleased that the current Scottish Government has indicated that it also takes that approach, and I give it credit for that. When I read the motion for today’s debate, I was a little bit disappointed by its content—if the minister will forgive me—because it seems to suggest that the Commonwealth games will motivate young people to get involved in sport. I am sure that the games will do that, but every year during Wimbledon the streets and parks are full of young people carrying tennis rackets, which are quickly consigned to a cupboard after the men’s final. The Government’s motion does not explain how it plans to harness that motivation to make sporting activity the norm rather than the exception. That said, the minister’s speech has gone a considerable way towards reassuring me, and I welcome what she said. The opportunity to contribute to the youth sport strategy, which will be published in September, will be helpful and will no doubt be taken up by interested members. It is vital that we get this right, because the games provide an opportunity to influence a generation—and beyond—of young people to live healthy and fulfilled lives through sport; that opportunity must not be squandered. The investment of money, time and reputation will be repaid not just by Scottish success on the track or in the arena, but by a step change in physical activity levels in this country from now on. We know the difference that an active life makes to our health, but we must not discount the effect that it has on the quality of life or on the opportunities that it can open up to individuals and communities. So how do we do that? Well, I probably agree entirely—just about—with the minister. In my view, we should begin in nursery schools. As the minister said, it is important that children learn to be physically literate: to run, to jump, to throw and to catch. To that short list, I would add “to swim”, which we should encourage at the earliest opportunity. Any skill that is learned early becomes second nature and is more likely to be carried into future life, so I am pleased to hear the minister say that we are to have a play strategy, too. Often, play is discounted as something that is just about fun, without its inherent benefits being considered. Some really good progress is being made in that area. Speaking of education, I welcome the progress that has been made on achieving the physical education targets, but I must say that the targets are supposed to provide a minimum requirement. PE must be supplemented by other activity, if it is to have the desired effect. We should also ensure that the minimum standard applies to school pupils who have a disability. Although some activities may need to be adjusted to take account of their requirements, disabled young people also need to be physically active. Research that has been carried out by Scottish Disability Sport suggests that disabled youngsters do not currently attain the recommended levels. That is just not good enough. I hope that the youth sport strategy that the minister is due to publish will address disability sport. Recently, I had the opportunity to visit Scotstoun leisure centre to see some of the young people who take part in sports that are specifically designed for young people with disabilities. I have mentioned this in the chamber before in an entirely different context, but let me mention it again. We all know that participating in sport can be expensive, but the cost of a walking cycle for a disabled 10-year-old is more than £1,000, whereas a regular bike for a 10-year-old costs less than £200. That makes it clear just how expensive it is to encourage the involvement in sport and activity of disabled young people, who already experience other barriers in their daily lives. The minister was quite right to identify that more work needs to be done to encourage the involvement of girls in sport. We know that the level at which girls participate in sport and activity drops off at around the age of 12, so it is welcome if additional effort is being put into encouraging girls to be active, at least, if not to be involved in sport. If we ever doubted the importance of sport in relation to health, a quick look at the helpful briefing from the Scottish Sports Association would put us back on track. It includes some interesting statistics from the chief medical officers of the United Kingdom, who tell us that there is a strong correlation between regular physical activity and reductions in the risk of many health conditions, including a 20 to 35 per cent lower risk of cardiovascular disease, coronary heart disease and stroke; a 30 to 40 per cent lower risk of metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes; and a 20 per cent lower risk of breast cancer. Those are diseases with which Scotland is all too familiar. If the generation that follows us can, by remaining active, reduce the incidence of just those three conditions, it does not take much thought to appreciate the benefit to their lives that that could bring and the money that could be saved in the long term from the health budget. To my mind, investment in sport and physical activity is investment in preventative medicine. The basic skills that I said should be learned by all in childhood must continue to be encouraged throughout a child's education and beyond. As a keen walker, I would be the first to say that it is not always necessary to have world-class facilities to stay active, but there are many sports for which facilities are necessary. That is particularly the case as people progress through the ranks, and there is no doubt that a well-trained, experienced and committed coach makes a real difference to a sporting career. Therefore, we must invest in facilities in schools and in communities. In that respect, I heartily agree with the amendment of my Liberal Democrat colleagues. Indeed, I would go further and say that sportscotland should be involved in planning new schools because, over the years, the organisation has built up a wealth of experience on how facilities can be organised and run, and that expertise could usefully be harnessed. I have lost count of the number of people who have told me that they took up coaching not because of their own interest in sport, but because their son or daughter wanted to take part in a sport that was not on offer in their area. The coaches who dedicate themselves to supporting young people in their communities must in turn be supported in their efforts. Becoming qualified and putting in the time can be an expensive business, so the idea of employers giving volunteers paid time off bears further consideration. As the minister mentioned, school sport awards have an important role to play. I think that that idea will prove to be extremely popular in our communities. I sincerely hope, too, that the youth sport strategy will provide pathways for our young people and will join up the efforts of all the organisations that can help them along that path. Some years ago, the idea of an entitlement to culture for every young person was developed but, unfortunately, it did not make it through the change in Government. I think that there is merit in suggesting that there should be an entitlement to sport and activity for our young people—something tangible to which they know they are entitled that is a legacy that they can take from the Commonwealth games. Through clubgolf, we already offer all primary school children the opportunity to experience golf. Perhaps a similar system could be put in place for sport more generally that would give young people an entitlement that offers them the chance to have a broad but meaningful experience of sport and allows them to follow their own pathway to whatever level it happens to take them. I welcome the minister’s announcement about pitches and cashback for communities, but I have argued previously in Parliament that money that is raised from the cashback for communities scheme should be distributed such that the communities that are most affected by crime receive the greatest proportion of the money that is recouped from criminals. Those areas are also the areas where young people are least likely to have the opportunity to participate in sport, so it seems to me that we could better target the proceeds of crime at those communities, to ensure that all children have good experiences as they grow up.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. The 2011 Commonwealth youth games had a legacy plan, which was good to see. That will carry through to 2014, and I am delighted to hear about the good work that is being done by the legacy ambassadors and by others. However, it is important to remember that that work also links to the Glasgow 2018 youth Olympics bid and, as the minister said, it is now less than a month until we hear the announcement on that. This is an exciting time for young people in Scotland to have an interest in sport and to be involved in sport, and I hope that our enthusiasm will help to motivate them to make a lifelong commitment to it. I move amendment S4M-06921.2, to insert after second “youth sport”: “and recognises that access to quality sporting facilities and trained coaches help to motivate and encourage continued participation in sport”.

Does the member agree that it is significant that a number of the gold medals that were won by Scottish athletes were won as part of a team GB team in a particular sporting event or category? [Interruption.]

7. To ask the Scottish Government what its priorities are for international development spending in Malawi. (S4O-02221)

I thank the minister for that answer, but is he aware of concern among international development charities and aid organisations about the fact that there will be no further applications to the Malawi fund until next autumn—that is, autumn 2014? I understand that some money has been released this year, but that that money is a carry-forward from an underspend last year. In effect, that means that no new money will be spent on Malawi until 2015.

I thank my colleague Paul Martin for bringing this important debate to Parliament. I know of his long and strong commitment to the community housing association movement, and it is fitting that he leads our debate. I offer a warm welcome to all the members of housing association management committees and staff who have come to listen to our debate. Housing association and housing co-operative members are volunteers who work hard to make improvements in their communities with support from staff members. For that, they deserve our sincere thanks. The Glasgow Maryhill and Springburn constituency is blessed with a large number of excellent housing associations. Some are big and some are small, but they all make a substantial contribution to the life of our communities. I may not be able to mention them all in my speech, but I will provide some examples of the important work that they do that typify the contribution that they all make. Housing associations are struggling to cope with the effect of the changes to the benefits system on their tenants. They are trying to mitigate the worst effects of those atrocious and ill-advised reforms by providing good advice to their tenants and taking practical steps, such as linking up with credit unions to help those who do not have a bank account. At the same time, they must try to ensure that their own income levels are not depleted as a consequence so that they can continue to provide the high level of service that is the hallmark of the housing association movement. Over the years, I have witnessed some excellent innovation from the housing associations in my constituency, such as the self-build project operated by Maryhill Housing Association, in which local people built their own homes from scratch and worked hard to help their neighbours to build theirs too. Other examples include the commitment to excellent design that has been the signature of Queens Cross Housing Association’s developments over the years and the efforts that NG Homes has made to incorporate community facilities and retail units into its new-build properties, helping to build communities, not just homes. I also highlight the confidence that led Blochairn Housing Association to invest in its biggest-ever development on a difficult site in a community where new houses of mixed tenure were needed. The way in which housing associations in my constituency have renovated older properties, bringing them up to standard and saving important landmark buildings in the process, is also welcome. However, in recent years, the picture has begun to change. No longer do we see new-build housing springing up all over the constituency from Spire View Housing Association, Copperworks Housing Co-operative Ltd and West of Scotland Housing Association. Housing associations are no longer building new homes, because HAG funding cuts make it practically impossible for them to do the job that they were created to do. Yesterday, one housing association told me that it has identified a funding gap of £26,000 per unit, based on HAG levels and its existing rent levels. Without a proper level of development grant, it will have to expose itself to extremely high risk on the financial markets or make the decision not to build. Frankly, that is the decision that most of the housing associations that I know have already made. Unless they are given specific one-off grants for reprovisioning, they will no longer build new houses. It is no wonder that headlines this week tell us that fewer houses are being built in Scotland now than was the case during the great depression. Compared with last year, there were 40 per cent fewer new starts in the first three months of this year. The irony is that the need for more houses to stimulate the economy and to provide local jobs has rarely been greater. The changes that have been brought about by the introduction of the bedroom tax mean that there is a pressing need for more smaller properties. I hope that the minister will think again and restore the HAG to a level that allows our housing associations to grow and to thrive, and to build warm, affordable houses and good and stable communities.

Will the minister take an intervention on that point?

6. To ask the Scottish Government what assistance it provides to the independent television production sector in Scotland. (S4O-02190)

The minister will be aware that I have raised that question on a number of occasions with the Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs. I am still of the opinion, through conversations with people in the independent television sector, that there is not enough support for the sector. That is certainly the view that the sector has put to me, and its representatives have also raised issues about their ability to access information on funding through Creative Scotland. I note the commencement of the new £4 million film and television production fund, but I would be interested to know what proportion of that fund will be available specifically to the television sector.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what recent action it has taken to support the Scottish film and television industry. (S4O-02157)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that update. She is aware of my interest in the area and my concern that Scottish producers may not be able to capitalise on the high-end tax credit that came into place on 1 April. Many regions in England, Northern Ireland and Wales now have studio complexes that allow their producers to capitalise on that tax credit. When will Scotland be able to take advantage of that provision? When can we expect to see a film studio complex, and is it likely to be in Glasgow?

I congratulate my friend and colleague Anne McTaggart on securing the debate, and I congratulate my friend and former colleague Maria Fyfe on the initiative that she is pursuing, with her usual determination and drive, which I am sure will result in a statue to Mary Barbour being erected, I hope in good time for the centenary of the rent strike for which Mary is perhaps best known. Mary Barbour, together with her contemporaries Agnes Dollan, Jessie Stevens and Helen Crawfurd, made an impact on my city and our country that can be felt to this day. Without them, municipal housing—or social housing, as we now call it—might never have come to pass. Indeed, one of their key demands was that there should be a system of municipal housing to prevent the exploitation of working people in the housing market, so generations have them to thank for the housing that resulted from their campaigning. Those women would, quite frankly, turn in their graves if echoes of the bedroom tax were ever to reach them. Before the first world war, rents in Glasgow were low, but with the arrival of war and the need to staff the munitions factories on the Clyde, unscrupulous landlords thought that they could raise rents with impunity. However, they had not reckoned on Mrs Barbour and the women of Govan. In a short period, strikes and protests had spread throughout the city, with estimates of the number of households that took action of anything up to 30,000. In the end, as we have heard, they forced the Government to rush through the rent restriction act. Mary Barbour’s legacy can be seen in legislation and social change and, as we have heard, in the many causes that she championed as the first woman councillor in Glasgow. However, that is not all that she and her generation achieved. When I first joined the Labour Party, I was enthralled by stories told by two of the older members of our local branch: Margaret Young and Jenny Auld, who were children when Mrs Barbour was active. Margaret Young could remember the rent strikes in Partick, where she grew up, and she spoke vividly of her mother’s involvement in them. She also remembered being sent up closes to deliver Independent Labour Party literature at election time, as it was not unknown for ILP activists who ventured into certain streets in Partick to be physically attacked, whereas children were regarded as safe. Jenny Auld grew up in Lanarkshire and was in service as a young woman. She defied her employer by leaving the big house to go out to use her first vote in an election for the Labour candidate. When she returned to her place of work, knowing that she had lost her job, she found that, in addition, all her belongings had been thrown from a window into the muddy street. That generation of women were inspired by Mary Barbour and grew up as the inheritors of her socialist principles, her steel and her resolve. As has been noted, there are only three statues of women in Glasgow, and although I would be the first to say that the wit and wisdom of the late Bud Neil deserve to be commemorated, is it not ironic that we got a statue of Lobby Dosser, a fictional cartoon character, 30 years before we are likely to have one of Mary Barbour? There is an episode of that excellent political drama, “The West Wing”, in which President Bartlett is surprised that the First Lady went all the way to Pennsylvania to dedicate a statue to Nellie Bly, the real-life pioneering investigative journalist. However, after Mrs Bartlett has upbraided the President, the episode ends with him dedicating his Saturday morning radio address to the recognition of influential women by their country. He tells his listeners that it is not good enough that there are only 50 statues in America that are dedicated to influential women and that he will try to do something about it. “The West Wing” scriptwriters were right when they had President Bartlett say that women such as Nettie Bly “open a door to the world for all our daughters”. Mary Barbour opened that door to so many of the women who came after her and improved the lot of her fellow Glaswegians in doing so. She deserves to be remembered.

I am delighted that the Government and its ministers are so firmly behind Mary Barbour as an inspirational figure. Would they therefore be willing to make a contribution towards the commemoration of Mary Barbour?

As we discussed in our debate in March, the case for reform of the NTS is overwhelming. That fact was underlined by the “Fit for Purpose” report, which was published by the review team that was led by Sir George Reid. It was a comprehensive report that is full of interesting and important facts and figures, all of which helped the review team to make the case for reform of the NTS governance structures. For me, one of the most telling sections of the report is headed “What You Said”. In that section, comments by staff, council members and funders were gathered together, which helped to illuminate the depth and scale of the problem and gave a hint as to what the future might be for the NTS if it did not reform. I will share just three of those comments with members, because they are worthy of repeating. A council member said: “The governance is dysfunctional. There is a pervasive mindset among staff and those on the Board and Council that personal and sectional interests are more important than the interests of NTS as a whole.” A member of staff suggested: “Too much of our time goes on serving governance structures and not enough on doing our job.” Equally worryingly, a major funder said: “Why should I put money into NTS if they are all chasing each others’ tails? I want to, but I can’t until they are clear where they are going, and why.” The review by Sir George and his team was thorough and, as the committee convener said, it reached out to the membership, with more than 9,000 members responding to a questionnaire and another 2,000 attending 32 meetings throughout the country. In light of the evidence that was received, the review team concluded that the trust was not sustainable in its present form and that it was in poor shape financially, with legacies being used as ready income to be spent, projects delayed until money was found and, sadly, assets sold to balance the books. Perhaps the most damning indictment of the structure was that there was no single database or inventory of its assets. It is clear that what worked 80 years ago needs to be updated if the NTS is to thrive and meet its core task, as specified in the National Trust for Scotland Order Confirmation Act 1935, which was to promote “the permanent preservation for the benefit of the nation of lands and buildings in Scotland of historic or national interest or natural beauty”. The National Trust preserves the past for the future. Let us hope that the problems that were identified are now in the past. The NTS has begun to move on and has embarked on a programme of work to prepare for the provisions of the bill and rearrange its governance procedures. The local assemblies to which the committee convener referred will give strength to the new governance and provide a real role for the membership at large. Sir George and his team have been widely praised for their work and the report that they have delivered. They did a comprehensive job and they deserve our thanks for helping to preserve the national treasure that is the National Trust. I was struck by James Dornan’s comments for two reasons. First, I was sorry to hear that the committee did not go on one or two visits to better understand the day-to-day work of the NTS. I recommend that he visits St Kilda, to which the cabinet secretary referred, if ever he gets the opportunity. That is not just because it is in the most remote part of Scotland—I hope that Mr Dornan does not take that the wrong way—but because it is a genuinely amazing place with the most wonderful scenery and an atmosphere that I have never experienced anywhere else. I am grateful to the National Trust for facilitating my visit there a number of years ago. As someone who has regularly visited Pollok house and its environs over many years, I say to Mr Dornan that he is absolutely right to sing its praises. I am sure that the minister would very much enjoy a visit to Pollok house and would find it the most interesting of places. Its setting, among other things, helps make it a particularly special part of Glasgow’s heritage and what Glasgow has to offer the tourist and the home visitor. Scottish Labour very much supports the bill. I congratulate the members of the committee, the clerks and SPICe for the work that they have done in scrutinising the bill and I offer my good wishes to the staff and members of the NTS as they look forward to the new era that the bill heralds.

I thank Joan McAlpine for securing this debate on what is an interesting proposal. I must also apologise to her and the chamber, as other business requires me to leave after I have made my speech. I, too, recognise the hard work and commitment of my constituent Alex Hamilton who, with the help of many of the organisations mentioned already, has championed the issue through the processes of the Public Petitions Committee and whose determination will, I hope, bear fruit. Sadly, Mr Hamilton cannot be with us today because, ironically, he is on one of the few places in Scotland without any trees at all: the island of St Kilda. I have to say to Joan McAlpine that we on this side of the chamber are perhaps not as surprised as she is to find that a decision on the national tree of Scotland must await the referendum’s outcome. Doesn’t everything these days? In any case, given that Scotland has a national flower, why should it not have a national tree? Seventy other countries have already adopted a national tree, and some have even emblazoned it on their national flag. We are a country proud of and famed for our natural heritage, and our scenery helps to promote Scotland as a tourism destination. Indeed, it is always one of the first things that people from overseas remark on when we say that we come from Scotland. As our fame as an outdoor sports destination grows, that picture of Scotland grows in the memories and minds of those who have visited. It would be fitting if there were to be a tangible legacy from the year of natural Scotland in the form of a national tree. I sincerely hope that the Scottish Government will agree to formally recognise such an iconic image for our country. While doing some research for the debate, I noted Wikipedia’s bold assertion that the Scots pine is the “national tree of Scotland”. We know that that is not quite true, but it is interesting that such an assumption has been made. Frankly, I think that it is understandable. If any tree can symbolise the vision of Scotland’s wild places that most people have, it must be the Scots pine. The fact that, as Joan McAlpine recognised, it comes in many sizes, shapes and colours perhaps chimes with our vision of a diverse Scotland in the modern world. The pine would definitely be my choice for Scotland’s national tree. However, as Joan McAlpine again has made clear, it is also the choice of those who took part in the Woodland Trust’s online poll. Indeed, 66 per cent of those who participated opted for the Scots pine, with only 20 per cent choosing the next most popular—the rowan. It seems that the Scots pine is certainly the favourite for that iconic role, although I agree with the motion that public consultation should take place before any decision is made to award the accolade to a particular tree. Deforestation over the years means that the Scots pine is not as common as it once was. Over the past 300 years in particular, swathes of the trees have been cleared to make way for crops. The tree was in great demand as a source of pit props for the mining industry and for other industrial purposes. It is a hardy tree that can be found in many countries in northern Europe, although it ventures as far south as Portugal. It has a lifespan of between 150 and 300 years, although I understand that there are specimens in Sweden that are believed to be 700 years old. The Scots pine can be grown commercially, but it is also an important part of our ecosystem. Many plants, birds, animals and insects depend on it. Indeed, I am indebted to Mr Hamilton, who provided very interesting information in his petition about the Scottish crossbill, which is a bird that lives only in pine forests and feeds on the scales of the pine cone. Whether or not the Scots pine is recognised as our national tree, I would argue that it is already an iconic symbol of our country. I hope that the Scottish Government recognises that and will give it the recognition that it deserves.

In spite of the Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee having had to work to quite a tight timescale for its consideration of this important bill, I believe that the committee has taken extensive evidence on the matters that are covered by the bill and has given serious consideration to the issues that were raised. Of course, that has been possible only because of the assiduous way in which the clerks and their colleagues from SPICe have gone about their work and because of the co-operation of witnesses and our advisers. The purpose of the Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee is to consider the Scottish Independence Referendum (Franchise) Bill—which is before us today—and the referendum bill itself, both of which were made possible by the section 30 order that was approved by Parliament on 5 December 2012. As its title suggests, the Scottish Independence Referendum (Franchise) Bill mainly deals with the issue of who can and—just as important—who cannot vote in the referendum and how the decisions that are made in that regard can be implemented with a degree of certainty. In the case of the decision to give 16 and 17-year-olds the opportunity to vote in the referendum, there were also issues about how we treat data relating to young people to ensure that it is both securely held and sensitively used. In summary, the franchise will be the same as that for local government and Scottish Parliament elections, with the addition of 16 and 17-year-olds. Scottish Labour agrees that 16 and 17-year-olds should have the vote and I was struck by the point that was made by Robin Parker of NUS Scotland, who said: “Young people will have to deal with the consequences of the referendum, whichever way it goes, for the longest time,” and therefore, Mr Parker suggested, young people “have the biggest stake in the decision.”—[Official Report, Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee, 14 March 2013; c 226.] That point is well made. Bruce Crawford, our convener, mentioned the evidence that was given by Andrew Deans and Emily Shaw—members of the Scottish Youth Parliament. It is fair to say that if anyone had any doubt about the wisdom of allowing 16 and 17-year-olds to vote, it was put to bed when we heard the mature and considered evidence that they gave. The committee noted that the bill specifically prohibits convicted prisoners held in penal establishments at the time of the referendum from voting. Scottish Labour concurs with that position. This Parliament is, of course, bound by the need to comply with the ECHR, but we were reassured by the advice from the committee adviser and from the Law Society of Scotland that the relevant provisions of the ECHR—those that deal with the issue of prisoner voting—refer to elections involving a choice of legislature and that previous cases reinforced the fact that referenda were not covered by that protocol.

Patrick Harvie makes a point that is worthy of further discussion, which I hope we will have in the context of how we deal with prisoners and what the role of sentencing is. However, I must say that I cannot agree with the amendment that I understand some members will lodge at a later stage, because I think that the threshold in that will probably be too high. If we are talking not about the kind of prisoner who has committed a low-level offence but about someone who has committed a fairly serious offence, I would object in principle to such prisoners having the vote in any situation.

I am sorry; I cannot take any more interventions on that issue, as I want to move on. For the avoidance of doubt, given that we know that those provisions are likely to be the subject of legal challenge, albeit that Professor Tierney indicated to us that he thought that the balance of probability lay with any such appeal being unsuccessful, we believe that we should be able to see the legal advice that the Scottish Government has taken on the issue. We hope that the Deputy First Minister will make that advice available to Parliament as soon as possible. In that context, it is important to note that remand prisoners and some civil prisoners, together with people who have been imprisoned for fine defaulting, will retain the right to vote. Like the committee, we seek the Scottish Government’s assurance that those categories of people will have every opportunity to exercise an informed choice in the referendum. Whether service personnel will be able to vote in the referendum is an important issue that has been the subject of some media speculation. I note that service personnel will have the same opportunity to vote in the referendum as they have in other elections. They will be able to vote either as an ordinary voter, if they are able to register at an address in Scotland, or as a service voter or as an overseas voter. In evidence, the Electoral Commission pointed out that that range of options “is not available to all service personnel all of the time.”——[Official Report, Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee, 21 March 2013; c 277.] As service personnel’s ability to register depends on their particular circumstances, electoral returning officers will need to make a determination based on the information with which they are provided. We note that the Electoral Commission is co-operating with the MOD to provide information about registration for service personnel, so I hope that it will be possible to ensure the widest possible franchise among service personnel. Ken Macdonald, of the Information Commissioner’s Office, drew attention to a small but important group of people who are likely to be disenfranchised—that is, the children of service personnel. The Government argues that the situation in the referendum will be no different from what happens in other elections, but, arguably, it is a direct consequence of the fact that the bill will extend the franchise to young people aged 16 and 17 who, because of their age, could reasonably be expected to be still living with their service personnel parents. I accept that the numbers involved are likely to be relatively small, but I most earnestly hope that the Scottish Government will work with the UK Government to find a solution to the problem. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s comments on that today, but it is important that, if we say that all 16 and 17-year-olds will have the vote, we mean that all 16 and 17-year-olds will have the vote. We now know that the UK Government has indicated that it will postpone moves towards individual voter registration in Scotland until after the referendum. That is welcome, but we hope that wide variations in the start date for the annual canvass can also be avoided. Returning officers should be able to begin their canvass as soon as possible after 1 October to allow as much time as possible for registration. The policy memorandum for the franchise bill anticipates that registration will mirror the existing processes rather than introduce a new procedure. For that reason, the bill aims to ensure that young people will register through an extra form that will be provided to households alongside the usual return form that we are familiar with. I note that there is also provision for rolling registration up until 11 days before the referendum. In evidence to the committee, Andrew Deans, one of the MSYPs to whom I referred earlier, was anxious that parents might not understand that they can add their teenage children to the list and suggested that there should be more emphasis on the rolling register. Another important point that the MSYPs made about the registration form was that it would be better to indicate who is eligible to vote by reference to actual dates rather than to the qualifying age. That is a valid point, so I hope that the cabinet secretary will give it serious consideration. As I mentioned, the committee was rightly concerned about ensuring that the data that is collected on young people is handled and managed sensitively. I was pleased that the witnesses who commented on that felt that the bill had benefited greatly from suggestions that were made during the consultation process, and that, in its current format, it will protect young people in a robust way, with access to the register of young voters being strictly limited. That is a crucial point, as teenagers as young as 14 might be included in the register. The measures in the bill in that regard are welcome and will protect and safeguard data appropriately. Regardless of where members stand on the issue of separation, we can all agree that it will be important that people are aware of the ways in which they can register and vote in the referendum. The committee noted that there is a crossover between the franchise bill and the Scottish Independence Referendum Bill in that regard, and we noted a number of issues in relation to awareness raising that we will want to consider further during our scrutiny of that bill. Like the committee, Scottish Labour believes that it is vital that all those who are eligible to vote understand how to go about registering and that they should be able to access impartial and accurate advice. That will be particularly important as we try to encourage as many young voters as possible to participate.

I am in my last minute, Mr Robertson—sorry about that. The committee was right to conclude, in paragraph 136 of its report, that awareness raising needs to be co-ordinated, clear and impartial. The committee took very seriously the evidence that was presented by the National Deaf Children’s Society that it is vital to ensure that those who face barriers in their everyday lives can be informed participants. Scottish Labour hopes that information will be available in a variety of languages and formats. Another issue on which the cabinet secretary could usefully provide clarification relates to the delegated powers that the bill bestows on ministers in section 11. Those powers are wide ranging, given that they include the power to modify any enactment, including the bill itself. Although the provisions of the bill are narrow, that is an unusual power for Government to seek, so I would be grateful if the cabinet secretary could comment further on the possible uses of the power when she closes the debate. In summary, we seek assurances from the cabinet secretary on the legal advice that she has received in connection with prisoner voting and that the Scottish Government will take seriously the matter of having wording on the registration form that makes it clear which young people can vote. We hope that the Scottish Government will work with the UK Government to ensure that the children of service personnel are on the list. Scottish Labour will support the general principles of the bill at stage 1.

Will the member take an intervention?

I would be slightly worried were members to speak only about young people in schools, because not all young people are in education. Some are in apprenticeships and some are out in the world of work, and it is important that they, too, have access to good and impartial information.

With a consistently high rate of unemployment in my constituency, it will come as no surprise to colleagues to hear that I take the issue particularly seriously. The situation facing young people is critical. If we do not prepare our young people, there will be no one to take up the jobs that will come along when the economy eventually revives. That is why training places at our colleges remain so important, and why the Scottish Government should be investing more money, not less, in Scotland’s colleges. We must also look at other ways of getting young people into employment. We must be creative and adventurous, reward those projects that succeed and recognise good practice and learn from it. For most projects, funding is key and many struggle to maintain the momentum of schemes even when they have a proven track record. A project that has worked and which has been recognised for its success is Royston at work. Last year, the Rosemount Development Trust, which is based in the Royston area of my constituency, told me about an idea whose aim was to encourage young people into employment. The trust had never undertaken such a project before, but its enthusiasm, its record in the community and the research that it had undertaken led me to believe that the project had the potential to be successful and was one that I was delighted to support. The project, which became known as Royston at work, involved partners such as North Glasgow College. It took a group of 12 young people through a six-month-long intensive programme that gave them the skills, confidence and discipline to enable them to apply for further training, jobs and apprenticeships. The programme was not an easy option for the young people, many of whom had been unemployed since leaving school and who would be considered to be in the cohort described as being furthest from work. It was also a challenge for those most closely involved in delivering the project, such as Maureen Flynn of the Rosemount Development Trust and her board, who took the initiative because they recognised a distinct need in the community. Nicola Connolly, the imaginative and dedicated project co-ordinator who guided the project through to its completion, also deserves to be mentioned. What has the project achieved and what has happened to the trainees? Of the 12 original participants, 11 have successfully completed the course. That high number of graduates was the result of the project co-ordinator never giving up on the trainees, even in situations where other less resourceful leaders might have lost heart. The 11 trainees completed the national progression award in construction and 10 achieved the PASMA—Prefabricated Access Suppliers and Manufacturers Association—tower scaffolding qualification. Four trainees have entered full-time employment, another four have secured apprenticeships and one has a full-time training place. Another trainee is hoping to be offered an apprenticeship soon, and the eleventh is in a full-time volunteering post. Two trainees have completed their Duke of Edinburgh bronze award; eight others have only one small element left to complete. All that was achieved in spite of there being little or no support from the Department for Work and Pensions. All but one of the trainees lost their rights to benefits and to travel and subsistence costs simply because they took up a place on the project. For year 2, there are further funding problems, as neither Jobs & Business Glasgow nor Skills Development Scotland has, as yet, confirmed funding for the year. I very much regret that the DWP takes such a narrow view that such young people, who should be given every possible help and support, are deprived of their benefits even when they are actively taking part in such a project. Organisations such as Skills Development Scotland and Jobs & Business Glasgow should be falling over themselves to help such projects and not putting bureaucratic obstacles in their way. A number of the young people on the project were, shall we say, known to the police. However, as members might expect, they have—in the words of the police—“fallen off the radar” and are now people with a future whose families are proud of them and who are making a positive contribution to their communities. I know that I am, to a large extent, preaching to the converted today, as the young people whom I am speaking about were recognised by the minister when she participated in their awards ceremony a few months ago. I ask her today to use her influence to encourage Skills Development Scotland and Jobs & Business Glasgow to work with the Royston at work project and explain to them that it is well worth investing in. I would also be grateful if the minister would agree to meet me as the constituency MSP, together with the project co-ordinators, to see what other support might be available. The next year of the programme is now open to applicants, and I want another 12 people to be given a chance to succeed. Twelve more young people who are able to realise a productive future for themselves and their families may not sound like a lot, but for a community the size of Royston it is a significant number, which can grow year on year if we allow it to. I look forward to a positive response from the minister this afternoon.

After nine months of investigation and evidence taking, Lord Leveson produced a report that made compelling reading. That the system of self-regulation of the press by the press could not continue in its current form became apparent at an early stage as, day in and day out, witnesses appeared at Lord Leveson’s inquiry to give evidence about their treatment by the press and their concerns about its impact on their lives and those of their families. Lord Leveson’s recommendations seem to most commentators to be sensible. My party and the Liberal Democrats accepted the recommendations, but of course they were not universally popular across the coalition Government. We have therefore had some months of negotiation at Westminster that has resulted in an all-party agreement, namely an independent regulator underpinned by royal charter. The royal charter will, in effect, provide for a new system of independent self-regulation that seeks to incentivise rather than compel. It will be totally independent and will operate on the guiding principle of the freedom of the press. The regulator will have the power to order newspapers to publish apologies when they get information wrong. Crucially, those apologies will be given more prominence than has hitherto been the case and the regulator will be able to consider third-party complaints. Additionally, the regulator will have the power to impose exemplary damages on newspapers that fail to join the body as a way of encouraging compliance, and it will also set up a whistleblowers hotline, while protecting the confidentiality of journalistic sources. Importantly, in my view, the regulator will not be able to veto publications. I think that we can all agree with that. Publications that sign up to the scheme will have protection from awards of exemplary damages and the opportunity to use an arbitration service. It has become clear that amendments to protect smaller blogs are now to be tabled as the royal charter is considered at Westminster. Smaller blogs will be outside the scheme, as they will not be classed as “relevant publishers”. Again, I think that that is wise. What is not yet part of the royal charter discussion are the amendments to deal with the particular provisions of Scots law, which of course is what the main focus of our debate today must be. The meetings held with Scottish party leaders have been helpful to the debate in Scotland, with all leaders agreeing in principle to support a UK-wide regulatory system. Indeed, in her letter of 19 April the cabinet secretary indicated that the “draft Royal Charter is capable of extension to Scotland with a relatively small number of technical amendments.” Many of the amendments suggested by the Scottish Government seek adjustments to reflect the roles of the Auditor General for Scotland and this Parliament. They also recognise the Public Appointments Commissioner for Scotland and the role that he or she will play. The issue of costs or expenses requires amendment, too. In cases of publications that do not sign up with the regulator and therefore do not have access to the arbitration process, they will be liable for their own costs, even after successfully defending a complaint or in cases in which the complainant is deemed to be unreasonable or vexatious. Sheriff Principal Taylor is conducting a review into the funding of civil litigation, but I am advised that, as matters stand, the general rule in Scotland is that expenses follow success. That would allow a publication to recover at least some expenses in a case brought against it if it is successful. The charter suggests that aggravated damages should be available in cases of mental distress. Currently, aggravated damages are not available in Scotland. More significantly, neither are exemplary damages, insulation from which is the key tool to encourage participation. I hope that the cabinet secretary might say something about that in her winding-up speech. I wish to say a few words about the local and regional press, where we know there are real concerns about the entire process. First, I recognise the important part that local newspapers play in our communities and in our democracy. They have nothing to fear from good standards and a resilient complaints system. The new system is designed to be a less expensive way to settle complaints, and it will allow complaints to be dismissed on “legitimate grounds”, which is a wider definition than that used by Lord Leveson, who talked about frivolous and vexatious claims. We are debating this subject today because of the actions of a few newspapers that indulged in deeply reprehensible behaviour. Many witnesses attested to that at Lord Leveson’s inquiry. Many celebrities brought their cases before him, and they were right to do so, but I will single out one ordinary woman. Actually, she is an extraordinary woman. As we have heard, she is a constituent of my colleague Paul Martin, who has raised her case and her concerns in the chamber on many occasions. I will not rehearse again the horror that Margaret Watson and her family have suffered, but I will say that Mrs Watson has campaigned on the issue for many years. Indeed, Mrs Watson used her experience to highlight many of the issues that were eventually considered by Leveson long before Governments began to take an interest. We would all wish to ensure that the recently deceased are treated with respect, and that sensitivity and courtesy should be shown to the bereaved in circumstances where the only interest that the press might have in the deceased lies in the manner and circumstances of their death. I genuinely welcome the attempts to amend the code to give effect to that sentiment, while at the same time regretting the fact that we live in a society in which is necessary to do so. Mrs Watson would wish us to go further. She correctly identifies the fact that similar provisions already exist in the editors’ code of practice, yet there are still incidents such as the one that occurred, not once but more than once, in her family. In my constituency, too, I experienced cases involving constituents in similar, if not so severe, situations at the time of the Stockline disaster in 2004.

Indeed. The cabinet secretary is absolutely right about that—and that is why I mentioned the cases of which I am aware from my constituency. Mrs Watson wants us, on her behalf and on behalf of the people whom we are talking about, to consider the issue of defamation and to explore whether there is a possibility of having provisions in law that would protect people in her position and in other situations. The cabinet secretary referred in her speech to Lord Hunt. Lord Hunt, in correspondence with Mrs Watson, has made it clear that the UK Government has already attempted to enshrine such a provision in law, holding on to the principle that a deceased person cannot be defamed because reputation is a personal matter that ends with the death of the individual. I ask the cabinet secretary whether she might discuss with her cabinet colleagues the possibility of finding a way in which we can help people like the Watsons in the future. We are holding a necessary debate today on the technicalities of the system, but we must remember that that system has been put in place as a result of the belief of some newspapers—not all, by any means—that they could act with impunity and that the normal considerations of fairness and justice did not apply to them. Those newspapers saw people such as the Dowlers, the McCanns and the Watsons as a headline, and not as suffering families enduring the worst experiences that any family can ever know. Those newspapers pilloried innocent people such as Chris Jefferies and hacked the phones of some of the survivors of the 7/7 bombings just for a headline. I believe that the royal charter will allow us to draw a line under those practices, which are indulged in by a minority of newspapers and cannot be allowed to continue. The charter is a carefully balanced piece of work that deserves our support and which will, when it is amended, provide the nationwide system that we all want. Scottish Labour will continue to work with the Scottish Government to give effect to the royal charter in Scotland, and we will support the motion.

I understand Mr Brodie’s need to put some kind of ring of steel around the Scottish press, but I remind him that the newspaper that caused the original hurt to the Watson family was a Scottish title that is based in Scotland. We cannot pretend that we are somehow removed from the problem. Such cases may not have happened here as often or the problem may not be as bad here, but one of the worst cases that I have ever seen was that of the Watsons, which started here in Scotland and then went south.

I congratulate John Pentland on securing this debate on such an important issue and on his comprehensive explanation of the issues and campaign. That workers are safe at work should of course be a fundamental right. Workers and their families should expect no less. Colleagues will know—and I make no apology for speaking about it again—about the dreadful tragedy that took place at the Stockline factory in my then constituency almost nine years ago but which for the families connected to it has repercussions to this day. At Stockline, the simple act of flicking a switch to turn on a light created a spark that ignited combustible gases leaking from a pipe that was buried underground and was therefore incapable of being inspected. It was an entirely unavoidable accident. I am able to summarise quickly for the chamber the cause of the disaster at Stockline, but it took several years before the families bereaved by the disaster knew the truth of the story. In fact, it took more than three years for the criminal prosecution to begin—a criminal prosecution that resulted in what in my view was a paltry fine of £200,000. It was a further year before the public inquiry began. Of course we know that the Stockline situation is not unique and that other families have also been bereaved because of workplace accidents. As Stuart McMillan said, they often wait a long time before inquiries can help them begin to understand what happened to their family members. What Stockline told me is that health and safety legislation can help to prevent accidents and must be our priority. If devolving it to the Scottish Parliament, as John Pentland suggested, is a way of making sure that our disproportionately bad record in health and safety can be ameliorated, I support it. We also know that, when accidents happen, we have to find a way to make sure that the families affected are dealt with in a courteous and sensitive way and that their concerns are addressed at a much earlier stage. That is why I am proposing a member’s bill on fatal accident inquiries, which will give families the right to be heard when decisions are made on whether a fatal accident inquiry is to take place. It also suggests that, where possible, the inquiry can run concurrently with a criminal case and that the sheriff can make recommendations that are binding. Those measures would help to demonstrate that we remember and honour the dead but that we also fight for the living. I very much hope that colleagues will support the bill when I bring it forward in the very near future.

The canal network was, of course, originally built to support the economy in our country. It is very satisfactory to note that, in constituencies such as mine, the creative industries, sporting activities and regeneration are being sparked off by the catalyst that is the Forth and Clyde canal. The minister indicated in his statement that Scottish Canals would continue to receive a Government grant, but that it would be encouraged to develop earned income streams. Would the minister like to say a bit more about what those earned income streams might be? Does the Scottish Government have a view on the balance between grant funding from the Scottish Government and money that is generated from such income streams?

Those of us who value the National Trust for Scotland’s work were saddened by the events in 2008 that saw its finances dwindle and the organisation having to sell off some of its properties. In some ways, what was even more disturbing was how the organisation found itself in the media spotlight for all the wrong reasons. Whether a battlefield, a castle or a camping pod at Brodick, we entrust Scotland’s heritage to the National Trust. The organisation makes an important contribution to the cultural and environmental life of the country—a job that it continued to do, despite the problems that it faced. The contribution of the review undertaken by our friend and colleague, Sir George Reid, has been an important one. Although his recommendations could be largely implemented without legislation, it is right that an organisation of such significance as the National Trust is underpinned by legislation. Therefore, I applaud it for introducing the bill that is before us and the National Trust for Scotland (Governance etc) Bill Committee for its diligence in providing scrutiny of its provisions. As we know, the trust governance structures have been described as “byzantine” and criticised for resulting in “duplication, delay, uncertainty and friction.”—[Official Report, National Trust for Scotland (Governance etc) Bill Committee, 12 March 2013; c15.] When one reflects on the fact that the organisation had a system of dual governance, with a combined total board membership of 87, it is perhaps surprising that the system has lasted as long as it has. I fully support the bill’s provisions, which underpin the more streamlined structure that the committee is looking at. On some of the specific proposed changes, it is right that the role of representative members is abolished. The rationale for that system, which existed in the 1930s, no longer applies. When the organisation was founded, it would have wanted to harness the skills and expertise of other organisations to ensure that it could build its capacity. The Reid review’s findings that there are better ways of securing and co-ordinating that advice seem to be sound. James Dornan eloquently outlined the new provisions that will apply to the roles of the president and vice-president, which will free them from their status as charity trustees, ensure proper scrutiny and, importantly, give them an ambassadorial role, which might be important when developing the new structure. That the work of the trust should be aligned to a five-year plan seems to me to be a good, if fairly obvious idea, as does an audit of assets. It also seems sensible to call the trust in law what it is called in life and in its every day working, which is dealt with in section 4. I was struck by a point made by one of the committee witnesses that the confusion over the name can sometimes results in bequests from individuals who have passed away going to the wrong organisation. That is not something that any of us want to see. The fact that the Reid review was welcomed overwhelmingly by the members of the National Trust should give us great faith in the bill’s provisions. Scottish Labour supports the bill, looks forward to further discussion in Parliament and wishes the National Trust for Scotland and its staff all the very best as they progress the bill.

8. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with Creative Scotland concerning film and television production. (S4O-01972)

I am grateful to the cabinet secretary for that update. It seems to be progress. However, will she explain to the Parliament how co-operation with Scottish Enterprise is being taken forward and what action is being taken to ensure that, whenever a chief executive of Creative Scotland is appointed, film and television production are considerably better looked after than perhaps the industry thought they were in the past?

I, too, congratulate James Kelly. It is appropriate that the debate has been led by the member whose constituency Blantyre is in. Over the past two weeks, we have witnessed the celebration of Dr David Livingstone’s bicentenary in Scotland. President Joyce Banda addressed members of the Scottish Parliament and told us about the improvements that she is trying to put in place in her country. She explained the difficult economic situation that her country faces and her determination to improve the lives of the citizens of Malawi, and she talked about the partnership agreement between our two countries, and the benefits that it had brought to Malawi. She also spoke of our shared legacy from David Livingstone and the esteem in which his memory is held in Malawi. Testament to that legacy is that an estimated 85,000 Scots have some involvement in a project that is connected to Malawi. This is the second time that we have debated David Livingstone in two weeks, but a bicentenary is surely worthy of two debates. My contribution in the previous debate focused on the man and his motivation and, although I do not plan to reprise that speech this evening, I want to return to its central theme. David Livingstone most likely died of a cocktail of tropical diseases: malaria, bilharzia and dysentery, to name but a few of those that he is thought to have endured. His wife, Mary, died of malaria and many of the European missionaries and traders who followed in Livingstone’s footsteps also died, often at a very young age, of the same diseases. That was a tragedy, and a visitor to Malawi will inevitably be taken to graveyards in which names of entire families are inscribed on the gravestones. I can testify that that experience is very moving, but the real tragedy, which should motivate all of us, is that many of those diseases still exist and still kill in Africa to this day. To that list we must now add HIV/AIDS. Of course, HIV/AIDS is not confined to Africa, but parts of that continent have been ravaged by the virus. In recent years, some of the work of non-governmental organisations funded by the Scottish Government has been directed at tackling HIV/AIDS, as has some of the work of our CPA branch’s special envoy, Annie Lennox. As we will hear later at the reception that will follow the debate, the work of Annie Lennox and her aptly named sing campaign has been undertaken with her unique blend of determination and sensitivity. The sing campaign has identified a number of important aims, including raising awareness of HIV/AIDS, the treatment and care of children with the virus, and empowering women to make decisions about their lives and communities. David Livingstone was a man of many parts: missionary, explorer, cartographer, doctor and, of course, a fierce campaigner against slavery, which he described as a “sore upon the world”. His determination was legendary, even in his lifetime, and I believe that his pioneering work on identifying the sources of disease and finding cures is one of his most important legacies. He would have been proud of the work done by all those who work in Africa and Malawi but would perhaps have been shocked that, 140 years after his death, we still have so many of the diseases with which he was familiar and that HIV/AIDS had reaped such havoc in Africa. For me, the most inspiring message from Annie Lennox’s sing campaign is that it works towards a global commitment to an AIDS-free generation—a message that David Livingstone would surely have endorsed.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. As MSPs, all of us have an obligation to conduct ourselves with integrity, and one of our stated priorities in the Parliament is the promotion of jobs and the economy of Scotland. Any loss of jobs is deeply worrying, not just to those who are directly affected, but to their family members and colleagues, who may face uncertainty in their own jobs. It is therefore remarkable that a former Scottish National Party minister today appears to gloat that 30 jobs have been lost at the Scotsman group. It is remarkable that the former minister Stewart Stevenson made a direct link between The Scotsman not being a supporter of the SNP’s plans to break up Britain and those job losses. [Interruption.]

To play politics with the jobs of hard-working Scots brings the Parliament into disrepute. Mr Stevenson recognised his error of judgment and deleted the offending tweet, but he has not apologised for linking job losses to his constitutional views. Why would an MSP link job losses to the referendum? Is that now the SNP’s position? The views that Mr Stevenson expressed are shocking and are not compatible with the values of our Parliament. The SNP Government must disassociate itself from those remarks. I would welcome your guidance, Presiding Officer, on what steps can be taken against Stewart Stevenson for bringing our Parliament into disrepute in that way.

I congratulate Bob Doris on securing a debate on such an important subject. I very much echo the sentiments expressed in the motion, which “welcomes the role that Kurds and other migrants play in making Scotland a vibrant and multicultural nation”. Indeed, that has always been the position of the Scottish Labour Party and the approach of the Parliament since its inception. Modern Scotland views ethnic diversity as a strength; it is a multicultural society that sees new citizens in a positive light. Such variety enriches our communities and our democracy. Tragically, in Iraq, the Kurdish people have over many decades faced significant and violent opposition to their desire to progress towards an acceptable degree of Kurdish autonomy. As far back as 1960, Kurds led by Mustafa Barzani were engaged in heavy fighting against successive Iraqi regimes. In 1970, Iraq announced a peace plan providing for Kurdish autonomy but, of course, that did not last, and by 1974 the Iraqi Government had begun a new offensive against the Kurds. During the Iran-Iraq war in the 1980s, the regime implemented anti-Kurdish policies and a de facto civil war broke out. It is shameful that although the Iraqi regime was widely and rightly condemned by the international community, it was never punished for its actions—not for the deportation of thousands of Kurds to central and southern Iraq, not for the complete destruction of villages, and not even for the mass murder of thousands of Kurdish civilians. The motion rightly focuses our attention on the notorious attack on Halabja, in northern Iraq, on 16 March 1988. The atrocity was perhaps the most infamous episode in the genocidal campaign that was waged against the Kurdish people between 1986 and 1988 by the Iraqi regime—it does not deserve the name “Government”, so I do not intend to use it. The campaign included ground offensives, aerial bombing, systematic destruction of settlements, firing squads and the horror of the largest chemical weapons attack in history to be directed at an area populated by civilians. We should never forget the attack, which killed up to 5,000 people and injured up to 10,000 more—predominantly civilians. Thousands more died of complications, disease and birth defects in the years after the attack. It is right that the motion reminds us that the attack on Halabja was part of the larger Anfal campaign, which was led by the bloody tyrant Saddam Hussein. It is also right that the Parliament welcomes the 2005 decision in The Hague that formally recognised the 1988 attack as genocide, just as the UK, Swedish and Norwegian Parliaments have done. I hope that such an approach will help to generate awareness of what the Kurdish people have endured in their struggle for democracy. Last year I had the pleasure of meeting representatives of the Kurdistan Regional Government, courtesy of my colleague Hanzala Malik. I also had the privilege of being able to take part in an interview with Kurdistan Television. I think that that helps to demonstrate how things have begun to change since the fall of Saddam Hussein. Conditions for people in Iraqi Kurdistan have changed. Literacy has increased significantly, infant mortality has fallen, there are seven universities where there used to be one, and there is of course a regional devolved Government. That is not to say that the invasion was correct or indeed the only option, or that all is now well for the Kurdish community. However, the changes illustrate that matters of war and peace are more complex and their consequences less easy to predict than is suggested in the one-dimensional analysis that is sometimes evident. It is an honour to have representatives of the Kurdish community living in my home city of Glasgow. It is also an honour to have representatives of the community in the Parliament today. I very much look forward to meeting them later and I am grateful to Bob Doris for lodging the motion.

The work that successive Scottish Governments have carried out in partnership with the Malawian Government, Scottish non-government organisations and others has indeed been something of which we can all be proud. Of course, this week we have been celebrating David Livingstone, who was a medical missionary and a pioneer in treating and identifying tropical disease. In his bicentennial year, it seems that the most fitting tribute that we could offer him would be to redouble our efforts to help combat the diseases that killed David and Mary Livingstone and which tragically continue to devastate the continent to this day. Does the First Minister agree?

I would normally begin by thanking the First Minister for prior sight of his statement but, on this occasion, the First Minister provided a statement that deliberately excluded the date of the referendum, which is the part of his announcement that he has been heralding for many months. [Interruption.]

However, I noticed that the first page of the statement talks about the “standards of fairness and transparency” to which the First Minister aspires and that the third page mentions “fair, open and truly democratic” processes. However, the First Minister’s need for a fanfare has already trumped those principles today.

I am coming to it, Presiding Officer. John Swinney’s leaked paper admitted that an independent Scotland would have a marginally larger net deficit than the United Kingdom. The Office of Budget Responsibility has already discredited the oil boom that was claimed by the First Minister.

Given the importance of this debate, when will we have the undoctored facts about Scotland’s economy, so that we can ensure that this Parliament and country can be proud of the “fair ... and democratic” processes that we all want, regardless of which side of the argument we happen to be on?

5. To ask the Scottish Government when it last met the board of Creative Scotland and what issues were discussed. (S4O-01919)

In her future conversations with Creative Scotland, will the cabinet secretary ask Creative Scotland to think again about how it supports our film and television industry? I have received several reports that indicate to me that support for those who wish to produce new work is sadly lacking, that the process that is used to decide which project is funded is convoluted and that potential producers have found it difficult to engage in the conversation. The cabinet secretary’s intervention in the issue would be most gratefully received.

The First Minister will be aware that it emerged this week that some 50 patients at Gartnavel general hospital had their surgery postponed because surgical instruments from the central decontamination unit, which is based at Cowlairs in my constituency, were not safe for use. We are advised by press reports that consultants have been complaining for years about the standard of the service that they receive from the decontamination unit. Although press reports identified a particular problem at Gartnavel, the decontamination unit serves all 120 of NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde’s operating theatres. Can the First Minister advise members when the Scottish Government was first made aware of the problem, what action it has taken to resolve it and what checks have been undertaken across the health board area to ensure that the problem is not more widespread?

I, too, thank Bob Doris for securing the debate. That we are debating the bicentenary of the birth of Dr David Livingstone is a mark of the man’s significance and of the endurance of his legacy here in the United Kingdom and in Africa. Our partnership with Malawi is a result of his relationship with that country. Although many other former colonies and protectorates have turned their backs on their colonial heritage, Malawi is still proud of its links to Livingstone and, through him, to Blantyre and Scotland. The strength of that relationship was brought home to me in 2006 when I had the privilege of visiting the David Livingstone centre in Blantyre—the Scottish Blantyre—with two visiting Malawian Government ministers. I was genuinely taken aback by how honoured they felt to visit the home of the legendary figure. Alex Fergusson described a similar experience. It was extremely moving to see how moved they were to see for themselves the humble origins of one who is so important to the history of their nation and whom they regard as a very great man indeed. One of those Malawian ministers will return to Blantyre on Sunday, as part of the celebrations of the bicentenary of Livingstone’s birth, but this time she will visit as the President of Malawi. I look forward to hearing President Banda’s address to Parliament next week and to welcoming her back to Scotland. That Livingstone found himself in Africa at all was a historical accident. He had wanted to be a missionary in China, but the opium wars put paid to that. A geographical accident brought him to Malawi as he led an expedition to open up the Zambezi River. In fact, he spent very little time in Malawi, but he inspired many European missionaries to follow in his wake. Many of those missionaries were ill-equipped for what they would encounter and many died not long after arriving, often of malaria and other tropical diseases. Often, whole families were wiped out, and the devastation that was wreaked can be seen to this day in the missionary graveyards. Livingstone was a determined man; he was described on one occasion by his friend and companion, John Kirk, as being possibly mad. His reputation suffered ups and downs even during his lifetime—but then again, most great men find that their reputations wane and wax from day to day. However, his stand against slavery must surely commend him to us. He described slavery as the “open sore of the world” and he used his travels and fame as a platform from which he could declare his opposition to it. Livingstone carried on his work when pain and disease would have dictated to a less dedicated or determined man that he should stop. He finally died, probably from the effects of a cocktail of tropical diseases, in 1873. We rightly celebrate and praise Livingstone for his achievements and his legacy, but let us not—as Maureen Watt said—forget his wife, Mary. Mary was the daughter of Robert Moffat, who was a highly regarded missionary. She was born in Africa and met Livingstone when he returned to her father’s home at Kuruman, which is in modern-day South Africa. Livingstone had been attacked by a lion, and Mary nursed him as he recovered from major injuries to his arm. They married a year later and set up home together. Following the death of their baby daughter, Mary returned to the UK to bring up their family. The Livingstones were married for 18 years, but they spent half that time apart. Mary died at the age of 41, only three months after returning to Africa to be with Livingstone. She was buried in Mozambique. It is ironic that although Livingstone pioneered the use of quinine—as we have heard—as a remedy against malaria, Mary was too sick to benefit from it. Livingstone was a missionary, an explorer, a cartographer and a doctor. He worked hard to understand the diseases that he encountered in Africa. Sadly, some of those diseases, such as malaria, are still all too common. The diseases that killed Livingstone, his wife Mary, and many of the missionaries whom he inspired kill thousands of people in Africa to this day. In an excellent article, Michael Barrett, a professor of biochemical parasitology at the University of Glasgow, suggests that it would be a fitting tribute to David Livingstone if, in 2013, we finally saw the tide turning against tropical disease. That would be the most fitting tribute that we could give in this bicentenary year and would be something of which I think Livingstone would approve.

I congratulate my colleague Sarah Boyack on securing the debate—a debate that is particularly welcome during Fairtrade fortnight. I also congratulate the towns, cities, schools, colleges, universities and church groups and all the other people and organisations that have contributed so much towards Scotland’s achievement of fair-trade nation status. It is some time since the intention to aim for that status was first announced, but I do not say that as a criticism. For me, it was always about how many people and organisations we could persuade to join us on the journey and not about getting to the destination quickly or first. That people go to bed hungry today should be the greatest scandal of our age but the greater scandal is that they go to bed hungry in a world that has enough food for everyone. Save the Children tells us that 2 million children die every year or have their development damaged irreparably because they do not have enough food. It also tells us that malnutrition is the underlying cause of death for some 2.3 million children every year. We know that if someone is not well, and is hungry in the first place, their resistance to everyday diseases will be much more we weakened. We also know that families in the developing world often have to choose between, say, paying for education and buying food, particularly, it has to be said, when there are girl children in the family. Families should not have to make those choices in this day and age. Oxfam, Save the Children, SCIAF and the other 147 organisations that support them are right to identify this as a topic to be considered as we approach the next G8 summit. Those organisations are to be congratulated on their imaginative approach to campaigning against this outrage by drawing our attention not just to the problem but to its root causes, and demanding that action is taken to tackle it. They are right to say that the G8 needs to take action to enhance food security and transparency, accountability and governance throughout the food system. I was going to contrast the ideal of that demand with the horsemeat crisis that we have experienced in recent weeks, but Alison Johnstone has more than adequately addressed that, so I will not bother going back over it. It is welcome that the UK Government plans to use the G8 to focus attention on this issue, but it must go further. It must also look at its commitment to development, and deliver on behalf of us all. I mentioned fair trade at the beginning of my speech. Of course, one of fair trade’s aims is to provide better working conditions for farmers. Many of those working on the land in developing countries are finding rivers diverted, land contaminated and, in some cases, land grabbed from them by wealthy conglomerates. Add to that the fact that climate change disproportionately affects the most vulnerable people in the world and we have a perfect storm of crisis throughout large parts of the world. The if campaign has identified the problems and the solutions. It is up to us all to make 2013 the year in which we begin to tackle global hunger.

On 26 October 2012, I wrote to the Lord Advocate on the issue of legal advice concerning the position of an independent Scotland and its possible membership of the European Union. To date—126 days later—in spite of reminder letters and calls having been sent and made by my office, I have not yet had the courtesy of a reply. What remedies are available to a member of Parliament when a member of the Scottish Government cannot or will not answer a letter?

In the five minutes allotted to me, it may not be possible to do justice to the comprehensive report that the Parliament’s European and External Relations Committee has drawn together to reflect both its own priorities and those identified by other parliamentary committees following their reflections on the European Commission’s work plan. It was certainly not my intention to go into the whole sorry saga of Scotland’s involvement in the European Union post independence—if that sorry day ever comes along—as I did not think that that point was identified either in the committee report or in the motion before us. Therefore, I will continue with my speech, but perhaps I will come back to that point in closing if I feel it necessary to do so. Clearly, the European Commission’s work plan will have more resonance with some of our committees than with others. Before considering the substance of the report, it is worth noting that the system of rapporteurs, which was introduced towards the end of the previous parliamentary session, seems to be working well and has perhaps contributed to a greater involvement of committees in consideration of the European Commission’s agenda than was previously the case. That must be a good thing. That the founding fathers—and mothers—of this Parliament considered the European Union important, and that we continue to consider it to be important, can be seen in the fact that the European and External Relations Committee is a mandatory committee of this Parliament. That shows that we wish these issues to have a certain seriousness of consideration. As Ms McKelvie rightly pointed out, the list of priorities identified by the European Commission can sometimes seem quite daunting, but the committees have identified the areas that are most relevant to their agendas going forward. The Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee has identified eight key areas in the Commission’s work programme that are of relevance to its work. One issue that particularly interested me is what the committee refers to as proposal 6, which aims “to address the shortcomings ... and out-dated requirements of the existing EU industrial products legislation, in order to further strengthen and simplify the regulatory framework.” That kind of post-legislative scrutiny is always welcome, so it is good to see that the European Commission is prepared to undertake such work, particularly in an area in which it is often unfairly criticised. The Equal Opportunities Committee also identified some synchronicity between its own work programme and that of the European Commission. The integration of the Roma is a European Commission priority area, which will complement the work being undertaken by the Equal Opportunities Committee in its inquiry into where Gypsy Travellers live. In the discussions that I have had in Brussels over the years, European officials have always been at pains to stress the importance of Parliaments engaging with the EU and that their input to its work is welcomed. The Equal Opportunities Committee has indicated that it will do exactly that by submitting the report of its inquiry to the Commission’s advancing Roma integration unit. The Health and Sport Committee identified a number of interesting and potentially wide-ranging priority areas in the Commission’s work programme. Those include the activities on e-health and on active and healthy ageing, which must be of particular interest to Scotland given our demographics and our ability to make use of e-health initiatives, particularly in rural areas. For the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, the scrutiny of the Scottish Government’s Water Resources (Scotland) Bill is an area of on-going work that obviously contains some read-across to the Commission’s safeguarding Europe’s water resources blueprint. Similarly, that committee will have responsibility for scrutinising the Scottish Government’s public procurement bill, and the committee plans to consider the directives on public procurement in that context. Some read-across of action can also be seen in the priorities of the Justice Committee. The Scottish Government’s forthcoming criminal justice bill is likely to contain some features that are matters of interest for the EU. I understand that the Justice Committee has written to the Scottish Government to ask what effect the creation of a European public prosecutor’s office might have on the Scottish criminal justice system. It will be important to hear what the Cabinet Secretary for Justice’s thoughts are on that matter and what engagement he has had on that issue with colleagues in Europe. The Justice Committee is also correct to identify that any decision by the UK Government to either opt into or out of provisions concerning police and criminal justice matters, as per protocol 36 to the Lisbon treaty, will also have implications for Scotland. I said at the beginning that I did not think that I would have time to do the report justice. My time is now up, so I apologise to the committees that I have not mentioned so far—I will come to them in my closing speech.

I will follow Jamie McGrigor’s example and thank very much the clerks to the European and External Relations Committee, who have provided a comprehensive document for us and whose work throughout the year provides us with the interesting “Brussels Bulletin”, which anyone who has an interest in Europe must make a point of reading and considering. Alex Fergusson comprehensively covered the work that the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee is undertaking as a result of its having identified its European priorities. An interesting point that that committee made is perhaps a frustration for all of us—the fact that progress can be slow. Like other committees, that committee wishes to carry forward from last year work that it considers to be still relevant, while keeping its eye on the ball of new work that is coming forward. That is absolutely right. The Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee’s work to monitor progress—if I can call it that—on reform of the common agricultural policy and the common fisheries policy is important to Scotland, as are the issues that relate to our climate change commitments. Alex Fergusson identified the long list of issues that that committee must consider. He was right to say that Europe is relevant to the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, because much of its work—and our work in general—emanates from the European Commission. I was interested in issues that the European and External Relations Committee identified. We entrust it to bring together the work of all the rapporteurs and subject committees, but it is important to remember that that committee has its own agenda, too. I was especially interested in its work on the horizon 2020 agenda, particularly in relation to research and innovation. That is interesting for Scotland, given the proliferation of SMEs and research and development based companies here. I was intrigued by the project that could be part of the fight against poverty-related diseases in sub-Saharan Africa. Such an agenda fits well with Parliament’s wider work and with the Government. We owe the European and External Relations Committee a debt of gratitude for highlighting that subject in this round of discussions. I very much agreed with just about everything that Aileen McLeod said; her exposition of the work that the Health and Sport Committee will undertake was spot on. She happened to identify issues that I have previously identified, but that was not the only reason why I was interested in her speech. I was interested because such issues are important to Scotland. She will forgive me if I say that she spoiled her speech at the end, but I would say that, wouldn’t I? Dave Stewart was right to focus on issues in the Highlands and Islands, which he represents, given the scale of the issues that the region faces. He was right to comment on the effect of the region’s size and the sparsity of its population. The fact that those two aspects come together means that we must focus on the Highlands and Islands, as well as other areas of our islands.

Mary Fee’s speech about the Equal Opportunities Committee’s work, in connection with the Roma people, was interesting. That subject has challenged us all for many years and we have never yet quite got it right. I very much hope that that committee’s work will help us. In closing, I point out quickly to Stuart McMillan that one reason why structural funding might be an issue is that the mechanism that the Commission has set is not particularly sympathetic to Scotland.

Thank you, Presiding Officer.

This has been an interesting and worthwhile debate to which there have been some interesting contributions from around the chamber. It is, of course, fitting that we should debate the topic today, immediately before Parliament is asked to recommend Professor Alan Miller for reappointment as chair of the Scottish Human Rights Commission. I am sure that we all welcome that reappoinment and congratulate Professor Miller on it. I might be jumping the gun a little but I am sure that colleagues will not mind that too much. As my colleague David Stewart did earlier, I thank Professor Miller and his colleagues for their contribution to the issue. Today’s wide-ranging debate has been informed by the many briefings that members have received from organisations that are active in the promotion and protection of human rights. It has been helpful to hear about the issues that they wish to prioritise and the concerns that they have articulated. We might not have been able to cover all those issues, but reading about them will remind us to reflect on the points that those organisations have made. As my colleague Jenny Marra said in her opening speech, Scottish Labour decided to prioritise the issue of human trafficking in our amendment. I will say a little more about that later because we take that issue very seriously indeed. We are pleased that we seem to enjoy the support of our colleagues across the chamber in that today. As colleagues have said, the ECHR is of course enshrined in this Parliament’s legislation. Those who were involved in establishing the Parliament did not feel that we had to be independent to strive for the highest standards. Unlike the First Minister’s vision, which Ms Cunningham portrayed today, many of us are ambitious for Scotland to play its part regardless of the constitutional settlement. I enjoyed Ms Cunningham’s opening speech—she chose a relevant quotation that exemplifies that human rights is not just a matter for Governments, although, of course, what Governments do matters because of the example that they set. As I said, we have heard some interesting contributions from around the chamber. I will reflect on one or two of them. My colleague Graeme Pearson was absolutely right to highlight the fact that victims need to be supported through the struggles that they will undoubtedly face. He was also right to highlight the right to work and the attack on human rights that is being perpetrated in the name of welfare reform. Stewart Stevenson was correct to mention climate justice. He alluded to the fact that the poor are the worst affected and suffer because of our actions, selfishness and greed. All members should welcome the action taken by Scottish Governments of whatever complexion in using international development policies to promote climate justice and environmental mitigation measures. I was very interested in Alison McInnes’s speech, particularly her comments about the exclusion of young people from school. We have all seen young people who, because they cannot go to school, are on the streets. I highlight a school in my constituency, John Paul academy, which has reduced its previously very high exclusion rate to practically zero. Nothing has changed, except that there is the will, the leadership and the recognition that young people need support. Some need support more than others, and where it is needed it is given. I encourage Ms McInnes to visit that school if she finds herself in Glasgow some day. John Finnie was absolutely right to highlight the plight of Gypsy Travellers. Although the chamber and our various committees have been examining the issue for a long time now, we have not been able to tackle it in a way that recognises and respect people’s rights. I hope that the work of our Equal Opportunities Committee colleagues will ensure that that happens. I cannot disagree with a word of my colleague Iain Gray’s excellent contribution to the debate. He helped us to focus on the fact that a written constitution comes with its own difficulties and suggested that instead of adopting that model in a rush we give further consideration to what we want. Of course, we also have to think about our international obligations in that regard and our international place in the world.

I think that, as with everything to do with the constitution, we have to wait and hear what the people decide. I want to do that—I want to engage in that debate. As I said, Scottish Labour wants to highlight the issue of human trafficking in today’s debate. After all, with the Commonwealth games only a year away, it is extremely important that we get this right. We think that greater clarity in the law and the adoption of the Palermo definition would help to foster better detection and prosecution and greater protection of victims’ rights. Only last week, the Committee of the Regions unanimously agreed an opinion on the European Union strategy towards the eradication of trafficking—

One of the strategy’s key elements was a recognition of the key role played by local authorities—be they police authorities, local councils or health services—in detecting such things at a local level and responding to victims’ needs. That is certainly something that we in this chamber want. I thank the Government for supporting our amendment.

2. To ask the Scottish Government whether it will accept in full the recommendations of the Electoral Commission regarding the conduct of a referendum on Scotland separating from the rest of the United Kingdom. (S4T-00231)

I thank the Deputy First Minister for that answer, but I am disappointed to note that even now, with the publication of the Electoral Commission’s advice imminent and with a growing clamour of voices—including that of Blair Jenkins, the head of her own campaign organisation—calling on the Scottish Government to commit to accepting the advice and recommendations that will be made, she cannot bring herself to reassure the chamber that her belief in independence extends to independent scrutiny. I ask her again whether, to ensure that the referendum is carried out in a fair and proper manner, she will accept all the Electoral Commission recommendations.

The Deputy First Minister is right: I never fail to be disappointed in the Scottish National Party over this issue. Does she not understand that, for the referendum to be carried out in a fair and proper manner and—just as important—for it to be seen to be carried out in a fair and proper manner, the Electoral Commission recommendations must be the guiding principles for its conduct, both in terms of the question to be put and with regard to the spending limits to be applied?

9. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had about widening access to culture for people in north Glasgow. (S4O-01737)

I am delighted to hear of the progress that is being made, particularly in connection with 2014. However, the cabinet secretary might be aware that there is a mood within north Glasgow that suggests that a Sistema Scotland project would be welcome in the area, and there have been some preliminary talks and discussions with the organisation about how that might be facilitated. Would the Scottish Government support that and, if it would, in what way?

I congratulate Bob Doris on securing the debate. The services and support that we provide to the most vulnerable in our society should always be the very best that they can be, and we should always be prepared to review and, if need be, change that provision to ensure that it is robust and fit for purpose. We must also be prepared to reflect changing methods of care and brave enough to make hard decisions when they are justified. That is why we, in this part of the chamber, backed the Scottish Government’s policy on self-directed care and the legislation that will enshrine it in law. We believe that people should be able to make decisions about their own care and that of their family members. We also believe that they must be adequately resourced to do so and that they should be able to choose from a menu of services, drawn up in consultation with them, that meets their needs and over which they have real control. That is the standard by which I judge the proposed reforms in Glasgow, under which day centres, including that in Summerston in my constituency, would close. I welcome the representatives from Summerston day care centre who are here today, and others from other centres throughout the city. I am not content that the process thus far has been entirely appropriate. The timescale for the consultation has been too short—although I note that the leader of the SNP group welcomed the timescale when it was announced. However, I welcome the extension to the timescale that has been agreed and I hope that it will give users and carers much more opportunity to participate. I also believe that the amount of information available to users and carers has not been adequate, and I have to say that the actions of the chair of the learning disabilities day services sub-committee, in abandoning one meeting and unilaterally cancelling another, have not been helpful.

I am happy to give way.

That may have been the situation with the first meeting, but it does not explain why a meeting two months later was also cancelled. I am glad that those meetings are back on track and are taking place, because people need to have the information. Users and carers have raised with me a number of legitimate concerns. I do not, in a four-minute speech, have time to do them justice, so I will highlight those that concern me most. First, it would be better to put in place the proposed alternatives first so that users could see what they were and have time to consider how the new system would operate before the existing centres were closed. I suspect that James Dornan and I would agree about that. Secondly, an additional burden might be placed on carers who fear that they will be left to organise activities for their family members as well as cope with the caring responsibilities that they already have—responsibilities that I take very seriously indeed. Thirdly, the cost of travel and the time that users spend travelling are cited as arguments for change. There is a legitimate point there, but by reducing the number of day centres the distances that people will have to travel and the cost of travel will increase. As it is proposed that, in future, only those with the greatest physical need will have a place in a day centre, that seems to be an argument against change rather than for it. I understand that Glasgow City Council has to comply with Government legislation, but I suggest that a six-month moratorium, during which the council would work with carers and users to come up with a workable solution—one that is planned with the needs and views of the users and carers to the fore—would be welcome. I know that that would be an expensive option, because it would mean running day centres and individual budget processes at the same time. I know, too, that Glasgow has had its budget radically cut by the Scottish Government. Indeed, if Glasgow had the same share of the local government budget as it had in 2008 it would have an additional £153 million pounds to spend over the next two years. Sandra White, I am afraid, cannot gainsay that.

I ask the minister—as constructively as possible in such a sensitive debate—whether the Scottish Government would consider establishing a transition fund that might allow Glasgow to continue to run its day centres while it carries out a proper and meaningful discussion with users and carers about the services that they need and want and the way in which those can best be provided.

That is probably just as well, Presiding Officer, as the minister is not listening. Glasgow is doing its very best to protect its social work budget from the effects of Scottish Government cuts, but there is a limit to how well it can do that. It is fair to say that the current transition fund is not enough to allow my proposal on what should happen over the next six months to take place.

We all have a responsibility to make sure that these services are as robust and appropriate as possible for these vulnerable people, but we have to take that responsibility seriously.

I hope that the Government will consider some assistance.

I am grateful to the minister for his comments and note what he says about those who wish to sit an SQA or other qualification in music. Will he make that aspect of the group’s work a priority? At the same time, will he consider whether there are enough instructors in Scotland to ensure that our young people have the access to musical tuition that we would all want?

10. To ask the Scottish Government how it encourages young people from poorer backgrounds to participate in further and higher education. (S4O-01688)

Will the cabinet secretary outline how he plans to ensure that young people from the worst data zones in Scotland benefit from measures and how measures can be targeted towards them? Will the cut of up to £1,000 per year in student bursaries help or hinder young people in constituencies such as mine who wish to go on to study at college or university?

5. To ask the Scottish Government what the most recent discussions are that it has had with the UK Government to discuss the future of Remploy in Scotland. (S4O-01642)

As the cabinet secretary may be aware, workers at the Remploy factory in Springburn in my constituency face the closure of their factory at the end of January. Unfortunately, the DWP and Remploy will not have allocated those workers their caseworkers until 7 January, although that is exactly the kind of help that the workers need at this vital time for them. Have the Scottish Government and the DWP discussed the possibility of the national health service in Scotland taking over responsibility for the Springburn Remploy factory, where wheelchairs for the NHS are the only product?

I very much welcome the Government’s announcement of £1 million for music tuition, but how will it safeguard those who are affected by that? Many local authorities currently make very good provision for students, and we would not—of course—wish those students or, indeed, those local authorities to be penalised in any way because others have not been so helpful in the past.

I welcome the minister’s comment that the ideal solution would be to have Remploy workers remain in their positions. Has the minister had the opportunity to discuss with his health colleagues the possibility of the Springburn Remploy factory continuing to make wheelchairs for the national health service so that workers there can remain in employment after the end of January 2013?

It is almost exactly one year since we last had a major debate on the Commonwealth games, and we could not have predicted then that 2012 would be such a sporting success. This year will go down in history as the most successful on record so far for elite sport in the United Kingdom, and of course Scottish athletes played an important role in that success. Europe’s win in the Ryder cup saw players from these islands, such as Paul Lawrie, play important roles in the victory. In tennis, Andy Murray contributed to our overall Olympic medal haul and had his most successful year yet on the international circuit. The Olympic games are often described as the biggest sporting event in the world. Much was expected of the London Olympics and Paralympics, but few could have predicted that the outcome would be the outstanding events that we witnessed with millions of others throughout the world. From the opening ceremony to the final event, we were treated to performances and achievements that were truly world class. Watching Katherine Grainger win her well-deserved gold medal was a moving experience. Sir Chris Hoy rising to the occasion again and beating the record gold medal haul of Sir Steve Redgrave was a moment to remember, as was his sportsmanship and humility. Glasgow’s Michael Jamieson giving everything that he had to win his medal was inspiring. Mo Farah and Jessica Ennis were a joy to watch. Bradley Wiggins, adding to his Tour de France victory, demonstrated the breadth and depth of British sport. On Sunday evening, we saw some of our sporting heroes recognised for their hard work and effort at the BBC’s sports personality of the year awards. Any one of the 12 finalists—and many more who were not shortlisted—would have been worthy winners in any year, but the summer of 2012 was special. Our national sports bodies and the Commonwealth games organising committee have taken every opportunity to learn from the success of the Olympics and from the small number of things that went wrong. The minister made some significant announcements. Although I would like to spend all my time talking about sport and legacy, it is appropriate to consider what the minister said about security. I thank her for her frankness, which was helpful. It is worth pointing out that it has always been recognised that the budget for security would probably have to increase to reflect the best security advice as close as possible to the time. Now that London 2012 has happened, the organisers have had the opportunity to consider and assess the requirements in the light of that experience. I understand that the UK Government recommended to Glasgow 2014 that there should be “stronger mechanisms for overseeing security contract delivery”. The minister referred to the comments in that regard from Audit Scotland and the co-ordination commission. No one wants to spend any more money on security than is absolutely necessary, but we must be prepared. The safety and security of the athletes, visitors, volunteers and spectators must be paramount. I am therefore pleased that the Scottish Government and its partners are facing up to that responsibility and are working to what might be considered to be a precautionary principle. The approach of dividing up the security contracts will, I hope, allow us to avoid a repeat of the near disaster that was G4S, which must be welcome. I fully accept that it is no longer appropriate to ask volunteers to oversee the security searches that must take place and that that must be done by those who have the appropriate experience. I do not for one minute underestimate the additional responsibility that that places on the police and security staff. I accept entirely that we must secure not only the games venues but other venues such as hotels. The minister described the involvement of the chief constable, which seems sensible. I look forward to reading more about that in the letter that has been placed in SPICe. I am sure that the minister shares my perhaps optimistic hope that the budget for security will not all have to be drawn down. In that regard, I have two questions. First, has the Commonwealth Games Federation commented on the new arrangements that have been put in place with the involvement of the Scottish Government and the chief constable? Secondly, given the scale of the moneys that are involved, will there be enhanced parliamentary scrutiny of the budget and, if so, how will that be organised? I hope that Mr Yousaf, in summing up, will respond to those questions. Although we understand the reasons for the increased budget, as parliamentarians, we have a duty to scrutinise the budget and to continue to do so right up to and beyond 2014. Thousands of Glaswegians have already visited the Emirates arena and the Sir Chris Hoy velodrome. Anyone I have spoken to about the facilities has been impressed. The fact that the facilities are already up and running and being used successfully gives me confidence that they will be a strong element of the legacy that we want from the Glasgow games. Talking of facilities, I note that Alison Johnstone lodged an amendment welcoming the commitment to a car-free games. Although that amendment was not accepted for debate, we in the Labour Party certainly agree with the Green Party on that. We look forward to seeing the transport plans that will make that policy aspiration a reality. I am delighted that the co-ordination commission has considered the games preparations and rated them highly. However, one area that the commission does not consider is the preparedness of the athletes. I accept that we are still 582 days away from the opening ceremony—I am grateful to the Glasgow 2014 website for telling me that—but it would be good to hear from the ministers about the preparation that is taking place to ensure that our athletes are as successful as possible on home soil. In the past few weeks, we have had the announcement of £4 million of funding for community-based events that will contribute to the games cultural programme. That, too, is welcome. I am pleased that the information sessions for those who may be interested in applying to the programme are being held around the country, helping to demonstrate that the games are for the whole country to enjoy and participate in. The cultural component is important to the Commonwealth games, as is the Queen’s baton relay, which I hope will find its way into as many communities around Scotland as possible. There are of course many areas of the country where training camps for incoming teams could be based. I wonder whether the minister might say something about that in closing the debate. Teams do not necessarily all have the same requirements and often split off into their individual sports, so as many areas as possible should have an opportunity to take advantage of that and to act as hosts in the run-up to the games. In January, anyone with an interest will be able to register to be considered as a volunteer worker at the games. Some of us in the chamber have already expressed an interest in volunteering, along with some 40,000 others. We will of course be subject to the same rigorous appraisal process as any other applicant. However, in my view, the opportunity is not one to be missed. Members might not know it but, just in case the Commonwealth games recruitment team are listening, I am usually very friendly and welcoming, although that might not always be obvious in the chamber. It would be remiss of me not to mention in closing that Glasgow’s aspiration does not end with the Commonwealth games in 2014. Hosting major events and sporting events in particular is something that Glasgow does well, and it is fast becoming an important part of our economy and culture. I am therefore pleased that we are now seeking to host the 2018 youth Olympic games. I wish everyone involved in the event the best of luck in their endeavour. I should perhaps declare an interest in that my constituency will be the location of the proposed athletes village for 2018, so it is a prospect that interests me very much. However, the needs and aspirations of the host community in Sighthill must also be considered as plans are drawn up. This year has been a marvellous year for sport and, as it draws to a close, we have a lot to look forward to. I move amendment S4M-05225.3, to leave out from “endorses” to end and insert: “, particularly in relation to planning and budgeting for security; notes the progress being made with the cultural programme to accompany the Games; endorses the ambition of the Games partners to deliver a safe, secure and spectacularly successful event; recognises that a solid foundation is now in place to maximise the legacy impacts for all of Scotland and commends the benefits that have already been secured, and recognises that 2012 has been a remarkable year for sport and that this can be used as a springboard for Glasgow 2014.”

Will the member give way?

I listened carefully to Graeme Dey’s point and he is absolutely right. I was conscious of the fact that the people who ran past me at 6 o’clock one Saturday morning in Maryhill did not come from Maryhill. When I checked, one of the reasons for that seemed to be that the process of completing the application form was relatively complex and, for a number of people, that would have been off-putting and not easy. Is that something that could be raised with Glasgow 2014, so that we avoid that difficulty?

I thank the Deputy First Minister for advance sight of her statement. In December 2007, at the European and External Relations Committee, in answer to a question from my colleague Irene Oldfather, the Deputy First Minister stated that “it is the clear view of the Scottish National Party and the Government that Scotland would automatically be a member of the European Union upon independence.” Ms Oldfather went on to ask: “Do not all member states require to negotiate?”—[Official Report, European and External Relations Committee, 11 December 2007; c 231, 232.] Ms Surgeon’s response to that was no. [Interruption.]

On 13 September 2012, during First Minister’s questions, the First Minister said: “There must be negotiations”.—[Official Report, 13 September 2012; c 11407.] By 10 December 2012, the yes campaign was issuing press releases stating that it was “common sense” that an independent Scotland would remain in the EU. However, during the Deputy First Minister’s statement, she simply talks about a vague “intention to remain within the EU” First, it was automatic, then we needed negotiation, then it was “common sense” and now it is an “intention”. Of course, all that—

Much of Ms Sturgeon’s statement is mere assertion.

During the five years—it is nearly six years—for which the Deputy First Minister’s Government has been in power, with which of the 27 EU member states has she discussed Scotland remaining in the European Union, given that all would have a say on that matter? What discussions to date has her Government conducted with any official of the European Union about the matters that she now feels are so urgent that they must be brought to the attention of President Barroso?

I very much agree with the cabinet secretary that the response of the board of Creative Scotland on Friday was helpful in setting a good course for the body to take. However, given the interventions that she made in June and October, I wonder why Creative Scotland could not have come to a similar conclusion sooner and why it took the resignation of the chief executive to bring about the changes. I would be grateful for her assurance that, over the period that we are about to face, when the organisation will be without a chief executive to lead it, there will be stability and continuity for those artists and arts organisations that depend on Creative Scotland.

Imagine, if you will, the experience of Dominic and his parents. Dominic was born three and a half months prematurely, weighing just 2 pounds and 11 ounces. He struggled to survive for the next 12 weeks and was diagnosed as suffering from cerebral palsy at the age of nine months. Dominic cannot walk or talk, and for five years his parents did not know whether he understood them when they spoke or was able to make sense of the world he lived in. It was at the end of an intensive block of therapy for Dominic, while his parents were discussing with the therapists what had been achieved, that the breakthrough came. As his mum and dad answered questions and made points, the therapists noticed that when his parents answered “yes”, Dominic blinked. The session was interrupted so that Dominic could be asked whether he was saying “yes”, too. He blinked again and, after some further exploration of this newly recognised trait, his parents knew that a whole new range of possibilities had opened up for Dominic. Dominic is now 19 years old and, like most other teenagers, he enjoys a full life. He is now a student at college and for six years he attended St Ninian’s high school in Eastwood, where he loved the daily buzz of a large mainstream secondary school. He enjoys nights out at the pub and attending gigs with his personal assistants, and—like many other teenagers—he plays his music far too loudly. He also visited Parliament for the first time two weeks ago. Without the help of the Bobath therapists, however, Dominic’s world would be much more limited. Bobath came to Scotland in 1995 because Dominic’s parents wanted to avoid the long and wearisome journey to London for Dominic and other Scottish children who would benefit from Bobath’s expertise. Dominic’s dedicated parents and others who shared their vision set it up and the charity now has excellent premises at Port Dundas in my constituency. Many members will have met some of the staff of Bobath when they visited Parliament two weeks ago, and I am sure that they will have been impressed by their passion and commitment. The staff at Bobath think that all cerebral palsy sufferers in Scotland should have access to the kind of therapy that they can deliver, and I agree with them. Bobath is an holistic therapy that looks at ways of making more natural movements that can be used in everyday life. It recognises that everyone has their own needs and develops therapies that are tailored to the individual. It combines the disciplines of physiotherapy, occupational therapy and speech and language therapy to give people with cerebral palsy the skills to explore the world, communicate their needs and participate as much as possible in all aspects of their lives. It also allows the family to continue to work with and support their child. People with cerebral palsy also need emotional support and help to reduce the pain that the constriction of muscles and joints can bring. The staff would be keen to point out that Bobath may be based in Glasgow but is available to children around Scotland. However, that is the nub of the problem. Bobath therapy is available, but its take-up is patchy because it is not always funded by local national health service boards. Sessions are intensive and families usually come to Glasgow to experience Bobath, but if the therapy is not paid for by the NHS, the family is left to cope with the cost themselves. I met several families at the Bobath reception in Parliament who told me of the difficulty that they had in finding the money to pay. Some used savings; others were able to rely on a good employer. One parent made the point that having a child with a disability is expensive: if the parent of an able-bodied nine-year-old plans to buy a bike for their Christmas, they can expect to pay about £100, but the cost of a running bike for a nine-year-old is £1,400. Having to pay for vital therapy for your child is another cost. Last year, 24 per cent of Bobath’s funding came from NHS boards, whereas the proportion the previous year was 29 per cent. It is projected that in 2012-13 only 17 per cent of funds will have come from the NHS. In addition, the Scottish Government contributes £6,500 from the unified voluntary sector fund, but even that is not guaranteed to continue in the future. That means that access to Bobath therapy can depend on where someone lives. Many health boards will rightly argue that they employ Bobath-trained therapists, but the opportunities that those therapists have to use their skills in the way that Bobath teaches are often curtailed by the size of their case load and the volume of work that they have. That is why Bobath has launched its precious lives appeal, which seeks to ensure that no child is denied such therapy because of their family’s inability to pay. I know that the minister has visited the Bobath Centre and has observed for himself the work that is done there. I sincerely hope that, in his closing remarks, he indicates that he will look at the funding arrangements for what is a tried and tested range of therapies with a view to helping Bobath to provide a service that is accessible to everyone who needs it, regardless of where they happen to live.

No one would disagree with the minister’s comments on upscaling and increasing the availability of Bobath in other parts of Scotland, but at the end of the day what makes the difference for a child and their family is the sheer intensity of the experience of a range of therapies over an extended period of time. With the best will in the world, health boards may train up their therapists, but those therapists do not have the time to spend with the young people in question.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I politely point out to my colleagues that I am the spokesperson for Labour on this issue. I happen not to be sitting in the front row because I was in this seat for the two previous debates and did not think it polite to remove those who were sitting in the front row earlier than was necessary. I will be speaking for Labour from where I am sitting.

On behalf of Scottish Labour, I sincerely thank the convener of the Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee for—not once, but twice—giving the full title of the section 30 order. As a result, I feel that I have no obligation to do so and will therefore refer to it simply as it is known by us all, as the section 30 order. I thank Mr Crawford for that. I also add my thanks to the committee’s excellent clerking team, who have served the committee well and kept us on track with a time-critical process. I look forward to working with them and with colleagues over the coming months, when I suspect that the challenges may be even greater. I also register my thanks to the witnesses from whom we heard, some of whom made the effort to assist the committee at very short notice indeed. As we know, the committee’s first task was to scrutinise the section 30 order agreed by the UK and Scottish Governments, which provides the legal framework for the referendum bill and for the paving bill concerning voter registration, both of which the committee expects to receive early in 2013. In the Edinburgh agreement, the two Governments agree “to work together to ensure that a referendum on Scottish independence can take place.” They agree that the referendum should “have a clear legal base; be legislated for by the Scottish Parliament; be conducted so as to command the confidence of parliaments, governments and people; and deliver ... a result that everyone will respect”. That is to be welcomed and clearly lays out how both Governments expect the process to be taken forward. The main purpose of the draft order is to extend this Parliament’s legislative competence to enable it to pass the legislation that is needed to enable a referendum to be held. The order attaches three conditions: first, that the referendum cannot be held on the same day as any other referendum that is legislated for by the Scottish Parliament; secondly, that it must be held “no later than 31st December 2014” and thirdly, that it must involve a single ballot paper that offers “the voter a choice between only two responses”. The committee listened carefully and with great interest to the views of witnesses as to the legal standing of what has come to be known as the Edinburgh agreement. Although there are important points of law surrounding the issue, it is perhaps the evidence of the Deputy First Minister and the secretary of state, who both indicated that the two Governments were committed to the argument—sorry, committed to the agreement—that is the most important point. Perhaps they were committed to argument on another day, but on this occasion they were committed to agreement, which is to be welcomed. As the committee’s report makes clear, witnesses emphasised the importance of the role that the Electoral Commission will play in ensuring the fairness of the process and in considering the question. Alan Trench stated: “If we got to the point where Parliament did not follow the advice, that would raise serious problems for the referendum’s conduct and for respect for the outcome.”—[Official Report, Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee, 8 November 2012; c 30.] The committee also noted that article 4 of the order replicates a power to allow campaign broadcasts by designated campaign organisations in respect of the referendum. That was considered an important provision. I very much agree with that. It is perhaps worth noting for future discussion that the Scottish Council of Jewish Communities pointed out in written evidence that holding the referendum on a Saturday would disadvantage Jewish voters and people of other faiths for whom Saturday is the day of rest. I hope that, when we consider the date on which the referendum will be held, we will take those views very seriously. Similarly, the Scottish Council on Deafness reminded Parliament that the needs of deaf and hard-of-hearing voters will have to be considered when material and literature are being produced. I am sure that there will be other matters that we will wish to consider at the time. On behalf of Scottish Labour, I welcome the order as an important mechanism to provide a clear legal route for the referendum that is to come.

I thank Willie Rennie for his kind remarks about our colleague and friend, John Park, who will be leaving Parliament. Willie Rennie is absolutely right to say that he will be a loss to the Parliament; he will certainly be a loss to the Labour group but fortunately not to the wider Labour movement. We wish him well. This has been an interesting, if brief, debate, as was the committee’s consideration of the section 30 order. However, it has allowed a proper discussion of section 30 order issues and, of course, the related memorandum of understanding between the UK and Scottish Governments. The section 30 order is the first step in the parliamentary scrutiny of the process that will lead to a referendum being held in less than two years from now. Although there has been much discussion at large about what a separate Scotland may look like, there has not been an opportunity for Parliament and the people to consider the ideas that the Scottish Government has. I genuinely look forward to the Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee having the opportunity to consider, scrutinise and report to Parliament on the process. I hope that Parliament will give full consideration to the white paper and the draft legislation that is to follow the section 30 order. We know that there are strong opinions for and against independence—we have witnessed those many times in the chamber. The phase of the discussion that we now begin is different. Both sides of the argument must realise that the decision that the people are being asked to make is of the utmost importance. Whatever the result, it is clear that this is the most important decision that any of us—or Scotland—will be asked to make in more than 300 years. We owe it to the people of Scotland to make the case passionately but in a sensible and reasonable fashion. We must be clear and honest about our intentions and our views. We must engage in a debate about our ideas on the economy, society and culture in its broadest sense. Our debates here and elsewhere should respect the contrary point of view because the people of Scotland need to hear the arguments and must not have them drowned out by the most strident voice. As colleagues have said, the constructive work by the UK and Scottish Governments on the section 30 order is laudable; it shows what can be achieved. I want to add my thanks to all the ministers here and in Westminster for working together constructively to get us to where we are today. On Monday, Nicola Sturgeon invited the parties of this Parliament that do not agree with the policy of independence to join with the SNP after a yes vote to work with it to shape the new Scotland. From the Labour benches I say that we would, of course, work with the SNP in the best interests of the Scottish people if that were to be the result but, as I do not believe that the campaign for independence will succeed, I say to Nicola Sturgeon that we hope that she will work with us to craft the new Scotland that we want to emerge when Scotland rejects independence. Over the next two years we will have disagreements and arguments about the kind of Scotland that we want to see. That is absolutely right, but the people of Scotland are relying on all of us to provide them with a clear and coherent choice to allow them to make an informed decision when they go to vote in 2014.

This has been a serious debate on an issue that is likely to be the subject of continuing national debate across the UK. We have heard some powerful contributions, and colleagues across the chamber have made considered points. It is of paramount importance that a system is put in place that is independent, proportionate, transparent and fair, and that, crucially, has the confidence of victims in applying to all newspapers and titles. I believe that Lord Leveson’s proposals set us on the right track. It took Lord Leveson over a year of investigation and consideration to come up with the extensive report that was published last week. His inquiry was established with cross-party support at Westminster. It is a pity that his proposals do not enjoy similar backing.

That is one of the matters that has to be discussed more with the regulatory body, but Mr Stevenson makes a valid point. That discussion must be had with the smaller titles because, as my colleague Kezia Dugdale pointed out, it is very difficult for them to operate in the current economic situation without taking that further step. I accept the point that Mr Stevenson makes. We have heard the Conservatives express the same concerns that have been expressed at Westminster, but I truly believe that they should think again. The Conservatives seem to argue that the stumbling block for them is the underpinning by statute of the new regulatory body, but surely Lord Leveson has exercised a particularly light touch there, as the system’s independence would be enshrined in statute, and the regulatory body would ensure that the self-regulator remained independent. Scottish Labour does not support state control of the press. We do not think that politicians should meddle with the content of newspapers. We are clear that a free, probing and irreverent press is essential to democracy and should be able to hold the powerful to account. However, the press must not abuse its own power; nor must it victimise the defenceless and the vulnerable. Leveson’s proposals allow a system of regulation that is independent of politicians as well as the press. Lord Leveson has also helpfully suggested some carrots to try to help to maintain the proportionality of his proposals and to encourage acceptance by the media—that is to the good. The First Minister wants us to commit to having a separate system in Scotland. We do not believe that the case has been made for a separate system and we genuinely hope that the First Minister will not close his mind to the arguments that have been put to him. Many of the titles that would be covered by a Scottish regulator operate in the rest of the UK too, so how does it help to have a system in Scotland that is separate from the system in the rest of the UK?

Not at the moment, Mr McDonald. We have heard mention of the cost but, more importantly, how does having a separate system help the victims who may then have to approach two regulators? The First Minister wondered why we could not adapt the Irish model to our needs. I ask the First Minister why we cannot adapt Leveson to our needs. I have looked at the Irish system reasonably carefully and it allows serving editors to be on its regulatory body. Also, it has on at least one occasion, as Kenneth Roy points out today in the Scottish Review, criticised the style of prose that was employed by a journalist. I would not expect any system that we would want to be involved with to do either of those two things. In addition, the Irish system allows only the individual who has a grievance to take forward that grievance to the press council; no one else can do it on their behalf.

I take Mr Harvie’s point. I agree with him about the points that he makes. However, the criticism went on to talk about the style of the prose as well as the content. I have no problem with the points that Mr Harvie made, I would just say that I do not want a regulator that looks at the type of prose that any journalist is using and considers it a matter for criticism. Mr Harvie is right to make the distinction between the two points—I was about to do the same myself so I am grateful to him for that. Stewart Stevenson made an interesting speech and he laboured the point about activity that was within the law. However, he will have heard Paul Martin’s powerful speech about a situation in which journalists did not break the law but still caused great offence, great anxiety and great harm to a family. Indeed, Dennis Robertson made similar points in his speech. That is why we need to have a strong regulator in this country. Graeme Pearson was right to highlight the actions of some elements of the media and the way in which those in power in the police, in politics and in the media gravitated together in an invidious alliance that had the best interests of no one but themselves at heart. Christine Grahame is right to treasure the independence of the press and I concur entirely with her comments in that regard. Hugh Henry was also correct to identify the cross-border nature of the debate and the concern that redress is available to all and does not just fall within the purview of those who can afford to access it. Patrick Harvie, too, was right to say that the Leveson report is a compromise. However, I happen to think that it is a fairly clever and sensible compromise, which is why I think that it should be supported. He is also right to point out that there has been, in some newspapers, a complete disregard of equalities issues. The examples that he cites are absolutely damning. Scottish Labour would wish to be part of a constructive dialogue with the First Minister. We hope that he will keep an open mind about the nature of the process and, indeed, about his own involvement in such a process. At the end of the day, we believe that the actions of all must be guided by the needs and the requirements of the victims.

Does the cabinet secretary accept that the UK political parties have, in fact, accepted the criticism that Lord Leveson has levelled at politics at Westminster generally? Perhaps we need to take a leaf from that particular book.

2. To ask the Scottish Government what guidance it provides to Scottish Water regarding any problems with the capacity of the sewer network. (S4O-01547)

The minister may be aware of the severe flooding that has been experienced by my constituents in Elmvale Row in Springburn over many years, and my constituents have experienced a similar situation a short distance away on Hawthorn Street. I am also supporting constituents who have experienced flooding in Scaraway Street in Milton. All those incidents have occurred because of incapacity in the sewer system and, although not all result in internal damage to properties, many of those properties are being damaged externally, as are outbuildings and cars, for example. Is the guidance on the prioritisation of internal flooding appropriate? Are sufficient resources being provided to address the problem?

The First Minister is aware of the situation that is faced by workers at the Remploy factory in Springburn in my constituency, who have been told this week that they will be made redundant. He may also be aware of the flawed process that has been pursued by Remploy and overseen by the Department for Work and Pensions, and which we will no doubt discuss and debate this afternoon. I ask the First Minister whether, even at this late date, his Government might consider adopting a support scheme for workers, similar to that which is available in Wales, or might, indeed, consider taking in-house to the NHS that manufacturer of NHS wheelchairs at a time when the waiting times for NHS wheelchairs are still far too long.

I pay tribute to the staff of Remploy factories in Scotland—unfortunately, I can no longer say “around Scotland”—for their hard work and commitment to the company over many years and for their determination to fight to preserve their jobs. They have demonstrated an admirable degree of patience throughout a process that has been completely lacking in transparency and sensitivity. The entire process has been both flawed and cynical. It was cynical to commission a report on supported workplaces from someone who was on the record as being an opponent of supported workplaces. It was cynical to deprive the workforce and their trade unions of even the most basic information about the bidders and the process. It was also cynical to make workers wait—for eight months in the case of Springburn—to learn their fate. For months, the workers have struggled to make sense of the process, as we all have. In fact, nothing about the process has been either open or transparent. In any other business situation, it would be regarded as a scandal. I speak today for Scottish Labour, but colleagues will understand if I concentrate on the situation faced by the workers at the Springburn Remploy factory in my constituency. As I say, we have struggled to make sense of the process, so I will tell members what we know. There were originally at least two potential bidders. One pulled out at an early stage in rather strange circumstances and the workers were then promised that they would be told what the final outcome for their factory would be—first in July and then again in September. In October, it was announced that the two factories involved in making healthcare products, in Springburn and Chesterfield, were being purchased by a company called R Link—or R Healthcare. On 16 October, the new owner duly appeared at the Chesterfield factory to lay out his plans: a cut in hours, cuts in jobs, de-recognition of the trade unions and no recognition of the Transfer of Undertakings (Protection of Employment) Regulations 1981. He was billed to appear at the Springburn factory on 17 October but did not appear, and no information was forthcoming to the Springburn workers in spite of letters and emails to the company. On 22 October, when I asked Esther McVey, at this Parliament, what was happening with Springburn, she was unable or unwilling to tell me. A further month of radio silence followed until, on Monday this week, the Springburn workers were finally told: “As you may be aware, the bidder, R Link, put in bids for Chesterfield and Springburn. However, they have now decided that, to make their proposed business successful, their bid will only be able to include a proposal to operate the site at Chesterfield.” Yesterday’s Daily Record contained a story that suggested that the deal had been done before the process had begun—something that the workers and those of us who support them have long believed to be the case. Even if we are wrong about that, how can a Government agency allow a company to go through—as Remploy has been at pains to point out—a long process of due diligence, only to find that that bidder, after thinking about it for a few more months, has decided that he will take only one part of the bid forward? In a letter that I received from Remploy yesterday, it sought to provide assurances about the process and suggested that, contrary to the story in yesterday’s Daily Record, the deal had not been done before the formal process began. I must say that it did not do its case any good whatsoever by enclosing a statement from the winning bidder, R Link—the company that bid to make wheelchairs in Springburn, but then changed its mind because it could not make a success of it—that tells us: “R-healthcare will continue to offer Remploy customers the same range of mobility products available and, indeed, has plans to extend this offering in the near future.” The statement goes on to imply that redundant Remploy workers will be able to apply for a small number of jobs with R Healthcare’s new European distributor. I mentioned earlier that what has happened would be considered a scandal in any other business situation. I am afraid that I can think of no better word to describe the situation—it is a scandal. In a nutshell, R Healthcare seems to think that Springburn Remploy will close and that it will carry on the work previously done in Springburn, but without the inconvenience of employing workers or maintaining buildings. I am not an accountant, but that sounds suspiciously like asset stripping. What is worse—I say this very seriously—is that the DWP and Remploy management are colluding in the process. Not only that, but Remploy management has refused to consider mutualisation, co-operative models or any of the other suggestions that have been put to it. Fergus Ewing is right to call for a moratorium on the second phase of the Remploy factories review. We support him in that; indeed, we have been saying for quite some time that that should happen. In my view, the Minister for Disabled People at Westminster should end the process now and carry out an investigation into the bid process conducted by Remploy and overseen by the DWP. If she decides against that course of action, I will ask for the process to be referred to the National Audit Office because the matter is of such magnitude that only that will have any credibility. Scottish Labour has consistently called on the Scottish Government to play its part in assisting the Remploy workers. I am sincerely grateful to Mr Ewing for the time that he has taken to meet with members and the workers. I am also grateful to him for his announcement today. I hope that a grant such as the one he outlines—we will hear the detail later—will be similar to that adopted by the Welsh Assembly Government, which has been responsible for assisting into employment almost all the disabled workers who have so far found a job. We ask that he consider setting up a permanent supported workplaces task force so that a proper strategy can be put in place for all Scotland’s remaining workplaces. As a member of the previous Scottish National Party Administration, Jim Mather promised that all Scottish Government departments would be required to let at least one procurement bid under article 19 principles. I am glad that the minister has undertaken today to deliver on that promise without waiting for the Scottish Government’s new procurement legislation to be put in place. My colleague Jenny Marra gave an example when she ably outlined the possibility that exists for local factory to be considered for the contract for new uniforms for the new single police and fire services.

I am always delighted to talk about RSBI, and I am grateful to Mr Mason for giving me the opportunity to do so. That is not only a successful model in my constituency but, ironically—as I have mentioned before in the chamber—it is on the same industrial estate as Remploy. The difference is that RSBI’s management goes out and actively looks for work—it does not sit and wait for work to come to it. Presiding Officer, I am conscious of the time. As I have said before, Remploy Springburn makes wheelchairs and there is a backlog of people waiting for wheelchairs to be provided by the national health service in Scotland. Will the Scottish Government give serious consideration to the idea of bringing the two together? At a parliamentary reception last week, I discussed with a young disabled man who suffers from cerebral palsy a new sport that he has taken up that involves him using a walking frame as a running aid. Among the disabled community, that has become a popular sport and is one at which Scots seem to excel. It seems to me that that is exactly the kind of product that a factory such as Remploy Springburn could easily manufacture, given its expertise with wheelchairs. For me, the killer point is that, whereas a normal nine or 10-year-old would perhaps ask for a bike for Christmas for which mum or dad might have to find £150 or £200 maximum, the parents of disabled youngsters currently have to pay £1,400 for a bike. Producing such bikes is the kind of work that Remploy Springburn could easily and profitably do. I now turn to the Conservatives, whose amendment I am afraid we cannot and will not support. I understand the position that the Conservatives are in today, although I fundamentally disagree with it. However, even if the Conservatives want to stick by the content of their amendment, as no doubt they will, they must surely share our concerns about the process. I ask them to speak to their Westminster colleagues and to explain to them our concerns. I ask them to put pressure on Esther McVey to consider the seriousness with which this Parliament views the issue. The point is that, if nothing changes in the next few weeks, 45 more workers will join the unemployment register. Those 45 workers are looking to us for help, and we cannot fail them. I move amendment S4M-05019.1, to insert at end: “; calls on the Scottish Government to consider further measures to assist those made redundant by the closure of Remploy factories, including the introduction of an employer support grant similar to the scheme operating in Wales; believes that every effort should be made to ensure a sustainable future for supported workplaces and calls on the Scottish Government to consider establishing a permanent supported workplaces taskforce, involving the First Minister’s Council of Economic Advisers, cooperatives, unions and private sector expertise to establish and deliver a strategy to secure the long-term future of supported workplaces in Scotland, and further calls on the Scottish Government to use its procurement powers to greater effect to secure contracts for supported workplaces and to consider ways of working with Remploy factories such as Springburn to find alternatives to closure.”

Will the member give way?

The member will be pleased to hear that Willie Bain has another debate on the issue on Tuesday. I point out that RSBI is in the same constituency and that no one has ever said that Remploy is the only answer for disabled workers. It is one of a range of options, and it should remain.

I agree with everything that Mr Doris has said. I tell him not to bother trying the freedom of information route. An FOI request from my colleague Willie Bain for details of the sale, of business trips that involved key individuals, of contacts and of interest from second bidders was refused just this week.

I congratulate Iain Gray on bringing the debate to the chamber, and on raising the profile of the issue as he has done for many months. Scotland on Sunday also deserves credit for its championing of the issue. Like many colleagues who are speaking in the debate, I have a deep and abiding love of music, and a great admiration for those who can play an instrument proficiently. I persevered at violin and guitar lessons for more years than I would like to admit to, before eventually deciding that I simply did not have a talent for it. I still have my violin, however, and if there is no one else at home and the house is quiet I have been known to bring it out of its cupboard and play a little. Every time I do that, I remember just how much I enjoy it—although I am not sure that anyone else does. I do not regret in any way the lessons that I took or the time that I spent in trying to master those instruments, because I have benefited so much from it. My world was expanded, and not just musically. Playing an instrument gave me an interest in a fairly eclectic mix of music. It taught me that music, like so many other things, is influenced by our environment, history and society. It helped me to become a more confident person, and playing in the school orchestra taught me the real value of teamwork and the importance of the individual’s contribution to the team. The Harvard research that Iain Gray mentioned bears that out, but so too should our intuition. My experience tells me that the opportunity to play a musical instrument should not be regarded as an extra. It should be recognised as an important—indeed vital—part of the curriculum, and should be available to all children. It cannot simply be the preserve of those who can pay for their child’s tuition, because talent does not recognise social class. We could be missing out on our next Nicola Benedetti if we limit the opportunities that our young people have. Like other colleagues, I was very concerned to read about the local authorities that have decided to charge for musical tuition. I know that budgets are tight, but for too long now the arts—and sometimes sport—have been seen as an easy hit when cuts have to be made. That is one reason why the youth music initiative was introduced in the first place. I gently point out to Stuart McMillan that the youth music initiative is an example of Government telling local authorities that this is a sensible thing to do but then leaving them democratically to decide how they go about delivering it in a way that reflects their own areas and interests. My concern was further piqued by hearing that some young people who are sitting standard grades and other qualifications in music are being asked to pay for their tuition. The idea of an aptitude test is, frankly, unacceptable because the tuition is about not just the student’s ability to play but the enjoyment, the experience and the life-expanding opportunities that come from contributing. The youth music initiative is an excellent first step on the ladder for many young people, but it was never intended to end there. Frankly, it is cruel to give children a taste of what might be possible but then to suggest that anyone who wants to pursue their talent or interest will have to pay. We can all be inspired by El Sistema and what the big noise orchestra has achieved in Raploch. Like my colleague Jenny Marra, I am working hard with partners in my constituency to try to bring El Sistema to my area. I know that El Sistema cannot be replicated in every community in Scotland, but I think that its success shows that, if enough young people have the opportunity to take up music, we can do great things. On a visit to Malawi, I was intrigued and moved to be greeted by the school band, whose instruments were made of oil cans and string but were capable of being tuned and producing music. They valued their music and their ability was recognised and valued by their communities. I very much hope that the Scottish Government will take the opportunity to consider how it might better support young people in Scotland who wish to be involved in music and music making. If we do not take action soon, we could end up losing an entire generation of music makers.

I welcome the opportunity to speak in today’s debate on the continuing relevance of St Andrew’s day to contemporary Scotland. I signal that Scottish Labour will support the Government’s motion; I doubt that a single member would have any difficulty with the sentiments expressed in it. I am pleased that the Government will support Labour’s addendum amendment, which will strengthen the Government’s motion—I am pleased that the cabinet secretary recognised that. We will also support the Conservative amendment, as we do not have the same difficulties with it as some others seem to. We Scots cannot claim exclusivity for our nation’s patron saint. Greece, Russia, Romania, Ukraine, Barbados and the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople all claim St Andrew as their patron saint. Germany and Poland have also long celebrated St Andrew’s day. We in Scotland have only recently begun to celebrate, at least in a co-ordinated and national way, St Andrew’s feast day as our national holiday, so we do not yet have the type of traditions attached to 30 November that can be found in many other countries. I was intrigued to read that many of those traditions seem to be associated with young women who are trying to find a husband or work out when they might be married, sometimes by following very complicated rituals that perhaps owe more to wishful thinking than to saintly intervention. I intend to say more about our celebrations later in my speech, but for now I note that the Scottish Labour amendment is partly intended to stress that we think that St Andrew’s Day is an integral part of the Parliament’s promotion of a fair, inclusive and diverse Scottish society. In relation to the passing of the St Andrew’s Day Bank Holiday (Scotland) Act 2007, the former Minister for Communities Malcolm Chisholm remarked: “Scotland is a place where we can all benefit from a diversity of cultures, religions and backgrounds. The contribution of everyone should be valued and the events taking place on St Andrew’s Day will remind us again of how rich our cultural influences are here in Scotland.” The cabinet secretary has outlined all—or at least many—of the events that are taking place, which demonstrates how right Malcolm Chisholm was then and how relevant his words are today. St Andrew’s day is not, and must never become, parochial; it must be about Scotland’s place in the world. It is a celebration of our diverse modern Scotland, which today welcomes people from many nations and different ethnic origins. We have as citizens people from a variety of cultures and faiths, as well as people of no faith. I welcome that, because I believe that it helps to make us all stronger. I place on record my congratulations—and, I am sure, those of every member—to the Scottish Trades Union Congress on its continued and long-standing support for and organisation of the annual St Andrew’s day march and rally against racism and fascism. There can be no place for bigotry in 21st century Scotland. As the cabinet secretary rightly said, one Scotland, many cultures has been a statement of Scottish Government policy over two political Administrations and must remain our approach. Parliament must encourage and support such events to ensure that all citizens of Scotland have ownership of the St Andrew’s day celebrations and feel that they truly belong and are as relevant as anyone. Just as Scots in the past went out into the world, our population is now growing partly because we are attracting more people to Scotland. A modern diverse Scotland welcomes people from across the world and embraces their enterprise, culture and ambition. On St Andrew’s day, we should celebrate not just shared Scottish traditions but our shared future. Just as a broad definition of culture leads to the celebration of diversity, its narrower artistic definition inevitably leads us to the same conclusion. Indeed, as Scottish Labour’s amendment reminds us, the winter festival that begins on St Andrew’s day culminates in Burns night. Burns was an internationally recognised genius whose art is outward looking and encompasses universal themes that should be celebrated throughout the year, not just on 25 January. How is Scotland celebrating its national day? I was pleased to find that Historic Scotland is giving free entry to many of its properties on the day. However, on looking again, I found that the offer this year seems to extend only to one day and not to the entire weekend as I recall happened last year. That may just be because of when St Andrew’s day happens to fall this year, but it would be helpful to have a weekend offer available for those who perhaps do not enjoy the holiday. As one would expect, St Andrews is having a celebration, and the Edinburgh Storytelling Centre will host a singalong. Many of Edinburgh’s other attractions such as the Edinburgh Dungeon, Our Dynamic Earth, Mary King’s Close and—my personal favourite—the Camera Obscura all have special pricing arrangements over the weekend, which is to be welcomed. The Scottish Book Trust has, as the cabinet secretary mentioned, put out a lovely book called “My Favourite Place”. I suspect that, as well as being available in local bookshops, it is probably available in an MSP’s office near you, thanks to the Book Trust, which provided copies to us for distribution. I am certainly grateful to the trust for that. I was intrigued to see that East Lothian is holding a saltire festival, while Glasgow is branding its events under the heading “Glasgow loves St Andrew’s day”. Apparently there will be a party in George Square on Friday night, with pipes, drums and Highland dancing, and other events will carry on until Sunday. I noted that the organisers are promising that there will be mayhem and are warning that a kilted caricaturist will be on the loose. I am not sure why a kilted caricaturist should be particularly feared, but I take the warning in the spirit of generosity in which it is clearly meant. I may be biased in saying this, but Glasgow has got the idea of the celebration better than some other areas—[Interruption.] I am sorry, but I missed what Mrs MacDonald said, although I am sure that it was pithy. [Interruption.] Ah—she thinks that I am biased. I own up to that; I am guilty as charged. Glasgow has put together a branded campaign and a coherent menu of new, themed activities over the weekend that are specific celebrations of St Andrew’s day, which ties into the point that Mrs MacDonald made during the cabinet secretary’s speech. I hope to carry on that theme. When EventScotland and VisitScotland come to review this year’s programme, I hope that they will think about what more they can do to badge and brand events around Scotland, so that those become a better known set of festivals and attract more visitors in the future. I wonder whether more could be done to encourage retailers to become involved. Given that St Andrew’s day happens to fall in the run-up to Christmas, it seems to me that special events organised by traders and stores around 30 November would perhaps encourage shoppers to patronise participating stores more than they normally would during that weekend. Such schemes may be under way already, but if so, they have passed me by—and, as an avid shopper, there is not much in that direction that passes me by.

I thank Mrs MacDonald for that helpful suggestion. Perhaps we could have a saltire and a union jack, although that may be pushing it too far. I can just see the competition that we could organise among schoolchildren to identify such an image. Perhaps that is something that we would want to do in future years. With floods and bad weather the order of the day, it is sometimes difficult to think about celebrating anything at all, but I genuinely look forward to hearing colleagues’ speeches and about the celebrations in their areas. I hope very much to make my own small—and probably modest—contribution to the mayhem in George Square at the weekend. I move amendment S4M-04970.2, to insert at end: “; believes that Scotland’s national day and flag belong to all of the people of Scotland regardless of origin, current residence and political beliefs; welcomes the decision of Historic Scotland to allow free entry to Edinburgh Castle and St Andrews Castle and Cathedral in celebration of St Andrew’s Day, and recognises that St Andrew’s Day also marks the start of Scotland’s winter festival season, which ends on Burns Night and includes the Christmas, Hogmanay and New Year celebrations.”

I am not sure from the cabinet secretary’s response whether that particular recommendation has been implemented. Does the cabinet secretary regard as seriously as I do the fact that, by its very nature, the burden of rehousing sex offenders falls disproportionately on registered social landlords, particularly in our cities and often in our most deprived areas? Does he think that the amendment following recommendation 10 is sufficient to offer protection to those communities?

This could be considered a timely debate, given the events of the past few weeks, but its importance owes more to its subject matter than it does to its relationship with the travails of the cabinet secretary, so I will devote most of my speech to the subject matter. However, first, I remind members that, in a members’ business debate in June, I talked about the effect of the Scottish Government’s cuts on my local college and on one of its departments in particular. In his response to the debate, the Minister for Learning, Science and Scotland’s Languages, Dr Allan, acknowledged the cuts to North Glasgow College and to the budgets of colleges across Scotland, and I give him credit for his honesty. The very next day, however, in his now-infamous answer to Mr Malik, the cabinet secretary denied that there were cuts. I am sure that, on reflection, Mr Russell regrets not listening to the point of order that Neil Bibby made on 28 June, because if he had listened to Mr Bibby pointing out the discrepancy between his utterances and those of Dr Allan he would surely have checked the figures and apologised to the Parliament there and then. History shows that the cabinet secretary took another course of action. For Mr Russell’s benefit, let me tell him about the consequence of his cuts to North Glasgow College. Last year, the college experienced a cut of £1 million. This year, it faces a further reduction of £823,000. The college sought to make voluntary severance arrangements with its staff and, as a result, lost 31 jobs in 2011-12 and a further 16 in the current year. As I said in June, the cutting of 31 jobs last year equates to the loss of some 500 years’ experience and a great deal of on-going anxiety for staff. The cut has also resulted in places being reduced on courses as diverse as communications and support for learning. This year, places have been lost in plumbing, tourism and music and sound production, among other subjects. I have witnessed at first hand my local college’s efforts to minimise the effect of these cuts on the young people it serves, the staff it employs and the range of courses and number of places available, but it cannot continue to absorb cuts of this magnitude. The situation is no better elsewhere. In 2011-12, Glasgow’s colleges lost 39,258 weighted student units of measurement—or the equivalent of a John Wheatley or Stow College being entirely lost to us. Of course, we also know that this loss in numbers has disproportionately affected women, with the number of women in Scotland's colleges dropping by 24 per cent since this Government came into office. By comparison, the drop in the number of men studying is 13 per cent. Of course, that is still too much but, as I have said, a disproportionate number of women have been affected. That has happened not by accident but because of the Government’s deliberate policy to favour full-time courses over part-time ones. It seems obvious to me that part-time courses will be more attractive to many women, particularly those with childcare or other caring responsibilities who need flexibility to be able to balance their working, educational and caring responsibilities. I find it hard to understand how the Scottish Government can be so blinkered in its approach, particularly when women’s employment opportunities have been hit so badly by the economic situation. For many women, the chance to upskill or train for employment can be considered only when part-time training is available. Last week, I heard references being made to “hobby” courses in what seemed a deliberate attempt to downgrade the loss of part-time courses. Surely the cabinet secretary understands that, just because a course is part time, that does not mean that it is not worth while and that even the courses that do not lead directly to a qualification are often the first step back into employment and training for many women, particularly those who are in, as the jargon has it, “hard-to-reach” categories but who I prefer to think of as the people who most need our help. This Government and this cabinet secretary have lost all credibility on the issue of further education. The cabinet secretary might have apologised to the Parliament for misrepresenting the figures, but he has yet to apologise to the thousands of students who have struggled to find a place, to those dedicated members of teaching staff who face an uncertain future and to the communities of this country who, day by day, see their local colleges being diminished by his policies and actions. It is clear that staff and students in Scotland’s colleges no longer have confidence in Mr Russell and that his existence in this post is damaging college education. I take no pleasure whatever in saying that I believe that he needs to consider his position and resign.

I am grateful to the minister for her helpful answer to Alex Fergusson on Shambellie house. Like Mr Fergusson, I look forward to this evening’s debate. I ask the minister to recognise that some collections lend themselves better than others to digitisation. The artefacts that are available in a costume museum might not be as well enhanced by that method as other collections might. Could National Museums Scotland be encouraged to think about what use could be made of Shambellie house in the winter season, when it is normally closed, and whether that might be an opportunity to devolve some of the other NMS collections to Dumfries and Galloway, as well to other parts of Scotland, in order to give the house more of a life throughout the year?

I, too, congratulate Claudia Beamish on securing the debate and recognise the MSPs who represent constituencies in the south of Scotland and the list members for the region who have worked so co-operatively in support of the national museum of costume. I also commend my friend and colleague Russell Brown MP for his hard work in that regard, as well as the local councillors for the area who care deeply about the issue. To me, Shambellie house, the national museum of flight and the national museum of rural life are as important to our understanding of our culture and history as the national museum buildings that are located here in Edinburgh. Indeed, one could argue that, to be truly national and to do justice to its name, our national museum requires to have collections distributed throughout the country. Museums and galleries can be as important to our tourism offering as scenery and weather. In fact, with weather as varied as ours, many tourists plan their holidays around the wet weather option that a museum or gallery can enjoyably be. Shambellie house therefore has great potential. The building itself is interesting, the gardens and grounds are an attraction and the cafe is a welcome oasis. Perhaps, as we heard, Shambellie house needs help to realise its full potential through better marketing. The collection, or at least the part of it that is available to view, is a must for anyone who has an interest in clothes and accessories or in the social history of our country. The staff have been creative and imaginative in organising the exhibits in a small space but, as we heard, the exhibition is fairly static. I realise that visitor numbers are relatively low, but “relative” is the operative word in a part of the country that is working hard to promote its appeal as a tourist destination. I do not blame NMS for the situation that Shambellie house faces. Perhaps it could have consulted better and taken its plans forward less precipitately. However, it is reacting to the funding situation that it faces. I simply suggest that a little more creativity and thought should be put into the plans. Could NMS think about using the winter season to host exhibitions of its other treasures? Could colleagues in the national collections work together to use Shambellie as a venue for ready-made exhibitions, which might previously have been on show in Edinburgh? Aileen McLeod was right to mention the Monet exhibition and the Glasgow girls and Glasgow boys exhibitions of previous years. The exhibitions had appeared in Glasgow and were taken off the shelf. Taking an exhibition off the shelf is not easy and involves much time, effort and money, but it can be done with great success, as we heard. Paxton house, the family home of our former colleague John Home Robertson, houses a magnificent collection of 18th century men’s costumes, which are thought to have been worn by Patrick Home at the court of Frederick the Great. Could Paxton and Shambellie work together to complement each other’s collections, linking east and west? The idea could be considered. A year’s stay of execution is a sensible suggestion from members and I very much hope that MNS—I mean NMS; I never get that right—can be assisted in finding a way to preserve Shambellie house, not just for Dumfries and Galloway, important though that is, but for the rest of the country.

I congratulate John Mason on securing the debate. It is always a pleasure to talk about sport in the Parliament, and it is a particular pleasure to talk about the Commonwealth games, an area on which there is cross-party consensus and co-operative working to make our 2014 games the success that I am sure they can and will be. I attended the reception in the Parliament to which Mr Mason referred and I, too, was intrigued that we have a mascot named Clyde who happens to be a thistle. As a Partick Thistle supporter, I am not 100 per cent sure that that was a good idea—all joking aside, we have a fantastic mascot and I congratulate the young citizen of Cumbernauld who made it possible. She and Clyde are terrific ambassadors for the games. John Mason is right to say that many venues were in existence before Glasgow made its bid to host the games. I was involved in the preparation of the bid and I am acutely aware that a strong deciding factor for the then Scottish Executive in taking the bid forward was that 80 per cent of the venues that would be needed were already available to us. Some venues might need refurbishment, but we had comparatively little to do to make venues suitable for 2014. It is fair to say that over the years, from the days when Glasgow aspired to be a bid city to its becoming the host city for 2014, the Commonwealth Games Federation’s assessment reports have been consistently good. We do not give that achievement sufficient recognition. It has not just happened; it has required a great deal of work on the part of the Government, Glasgow City Council and the people whom we tasked to take forward the bid and the preparations for the games. Commonwealth Games Scotland’s significance in the Commonwealth games family should not be underestimated, because its reputation helped us to get to where we are today. Commonwealth Games Scotland is known to be a strong supporter of the federation, and that has paid off for Glasgow and Scotland. I look forward to welcoming athletes and their families and supporters to Glasgow. I am confident that they will have the time of their lives and that they will enjoy everything that Glasgow and Scotland have to offer. Like John Mason, I would very much like to volunteer at the games, not just because I have always had an interest in the games and have been involved from an early stage but because I was a recipient of the hospitality that Melbourne offered in 2006 to those of us who were fortunate enough to be able to visit the city, and I would like to return the compliment. I, too, am signing up to be a volunteer in 2014. Perhaps we can get an all-party group of MSPs to do that; it might be interesting. I am told that only people who really want to work need apply. As I look around Glasgow, I am delighted to see the new velodrome and arena, which are wonderful facilities, but I am slightly concerned that the north of Glasgow, which I represent, will have no tangible legacy from the games. I hope that we find ways of making the games meaningful for people in the north of the city. Since the idea of using Firhill stadium, Partick Thistle’s ground, was dropped, there has been no proposal for the north of the city to replace it. We need to think seriously about that. There is currently an excellent proposal to make Pinkston Basin, in my constituency, the home of a paddlesports facility. Such a facility would be an excellent complement to the games but perhaps would not be part of the games themselves. I am sure that the Glasgow 2014 games will be a huge success and that their success will be a catalyst for what I hope will be a successful bid for the youth Olympics in 2018.

I would like to spare Sandra White’s blushes, so I thank her for taking my intervention. She would not, of course, want to draw attention herself to the fact that she features in the mural, so I thought that I would do that on her behalf. Very fetching it is too, and I recognised her from the artistic representation.

It is always a pleasure to debate our relationship with Malawi and to have an update from the Scottish Government on progress. In welcoming Mr Yousaf to his new role, I congratulate him on his wise choice of subject for the first of what I am sure will be many speeches as a minister. Like Mr Yousaf, I never cease to be amazed at just how many links and connections our country has with Malawi. There are schools and churches that are twinned with others in Malawi, and there are professional organisations and individuals for whom Malawi is a very special place. As we have heard, next year we have the opportunity to celebrate those links along with the anniversary of David Livingstone’s birth. Mr Yousaf mentioned a list of organisations that will be involved. I hope that he has not forgotten the National Library of Scotland, which has an extensive collection of David Livingstone’s papers. I am sure that they are just as interesting today as they were at the time. It is sensible to consider the range and depth of our links. Only today, my colleague Dr Richard Simpson told me of an initiative that is being undertaken by the Royal College of Psychiatrists, which is raising funds for and is actively working with the small number of members of its profession who practise in Malawi. Yesterday, school pupils from Caldercuilt primary school in my constituency visited Parliament and excitedly told me that an important visitor had been to their school just last week—a teacher from Malawi whose name is Tom. He had explained to the pupils what school is like for young Malawians and had obviously inspired them with his stories. Tom is in Scotland because of a project that Glasgow City Council’s education department is running. Called the Malawi leaders of learning project, it helps to upskill classroom teachers and promotes a sense of civic responsibility among young people from both countries. In addition to Tom, there are five other Malawian teachers in Glasgow at the moment. I understand that they will attend the reception in Parliament tonight, and I look forward to meeting them there. It is clear to me from reading the evaluation report for the first tranche of the programme that it is doing great work and has great potential. In its first year, it has enabled 15 education professionals—not all of whom are teachers; I was delighted that the party also included active schools co-ordinators—to work in Malawi for five weeks. It is clear from the evaluation report that there have been teething problems, which was to be expected. However, it is also clear that all the staff—Malawians and Scots—learned and benefited from the experience and plan to continue the initiative in the years to come. A spin-off from that project has been the Malawi young leaders of learning project, in which 15 young people from schools across Glasgow have been selected and matched with 15 young people at Blantyre secondary school in Malawi. The young Glaswegians will go out to Malawi in September 2013 and are currently working with their Malawian peers to shape the project. Such projects have the advantage of being true partnerships, in which Scots can learn just as much from their counterparts in Malawi as our Malawian colleagues can learn from us. I think that it is fair to say that anyone who has had the good fortune to have visited Malawi will never forget it and that the experience will stay with them and probably influence them in ways that they never imagined. However, it is not just the beauty of the landscape or the friendliness of the people that stay in the memory—although stay they do—it is the contrasts. It is the lack of a reliable electricity supply but the determination of parents to try to ensure that their children are educated; the sheer ingenuity and hard work of the people in spite of the lack of a clean and affordable supply of drinking water. All those elements contribute to making a visit to that amazing country so memorable. In recent years Malawi, with the help of its donors and friends, has made great strides towards resolving some of the issues that had plagued it in recent years. When I visited in 2006, I was struck by the number of small shops that were selling coffins. They were on every street corner and were a graphic demonstration of the ravages of HIV/AIDS. Now, with the help of donors, that situation is not quite as bad as it was in 2006, with antiretroviral drugs gradually becoming available and education and awareness-raising projects helping to prevent people from contracting the virus in the first place. Similarly, the maternal mortality rate has reduced from the frighteningly high numbers that I heard about. Unfortunately, however, one in 36 mothers still dies in pregnancy or childbirth—a number that is approximately 58 times greater than the figure in the United Kingdom. The minister is absolutely right to say that we should be outraged about that—I believe that we are. The maternal mortality rate is an issue that has been particularly close to the heart of President Banda and to many of us here in Parliament, and it has resonated with the Scottish public. The dedication of Scottish midwives and doctors in going to work in Malawi—often during their holidays or on sabbaticals—is a tribute to them as individuals and to their professions. Credit is also due to all the organisations—charities and non-governmental organisations—that do sterling work in Malawi, including Oxfam, the Scottish Catholic International Aid Fund, our own Scottish Fair Trade Forum and many others. However, I want, in its 10th anniversary year, to make special mention of Mary’s Meals. At the last count, Mary’s Meals was feeding more than 700,000 children throughout the world, including a total of 562,403 children in Malawi every day. That is a staggering statistic, but the reality is so distressing because that means that there are currently 562,403 children in Malawi who at worst would go hungry and at best would not be able to go to school without that daily mug of porridge. For most of those children, that is their one meal of the day, but it enables them to go to school and to have the energy to concentrate and to learn. We should be proud of that Scottish charity and of all the other charities and NGOs working in Malawi but, more than that, we should support them, for all is not yet well in Malawi. The new President, Joyce Banda, has inherited a very difficult economic situation. She has made great strides in her short period in office to begin to put the country back on a straight course, but in recent months the kwacha has been devalued and the fragility of the economy has been exposed. The cost of living has soared and food prices have risen. There are fuel shortages and real food shortages in the south and central areas of the country—so much so that the World Food Programme estimates that some 2 million people are facing hunger over the next six months. The Government under President Banda is working extremely hard to resolve the food shortages but it is vitally important that Malawi’s friends continue to work with the President if she is to avert a crisis. We all know that the poorest are the worst affected by climate change, so I very much welcome the effort that the Scottish Government is supporting in that regard and in regard to renewable energy. On the economic development of the area, we can see the progress that some of Malawi’s near neighbours in Africa are making, but Malawi is not strong in that area of work, because she does not have the natural resources that some of her neighbours have. Consequently, Malawi has no real history of international trade. I understand and accept that the Scottish Government funds projects that assist Malawi and does not offer direct assistance to the Government. I very much support that stance, but wonder whether the time has come when the Scottish Government might consider what additional help it could offer in that specific regard. Could Scottish Enterprise’s skills and know-how be used to assist Malawi in the same way that the skills and know-how of experts in renewable energy are to be used? Could the Scottish Government encourage the UK Government to focus some of its agencies on the development of Malawi? I recall that Professor John Lennon of Glasgow Caledonian University carried out important work that looked at how Malawi might develop its tourism industry in a sustainable way without jeopardising its natural beauty, but I am not sure whether his suggestions were followed through. Can the minister or the cabinet secretary tell members about that in the closing speech? I encourage the minister and the cabinet secretary to consider whether the report might still be relevant and might help Malawi to make good use of its title of “The warm heart of Africa” by encouraging tourists to visit the country. A special mention must be made of the Scotland Malawi Partnership, which keeps us all informed about Malawi and does much to promote the country here. I understand that its sister organisation—the Malawi Scotland Partnership—is also increasingly becoming a force for good in Malawi. Having launched that project in 2006, I take great pleasure in wishing it well. Earlier in my speech, I mentioned President Banda, who took over in April. Even those with the loftiest of political ambitions would not envy her the task that is before her, but she has demonstrated courage and common sense in her role so far, as well as compassion and grit. She is a strong leader and a strong woman, and I hope that history will recognise her strengths and will be able to record that great social and economic change occurred during her presidency with help from the international community and with Scotland playing its part. I move amendment S4M-04694.2, to insert at end: “; congratulates President Banda on the strong stance that she has taken since coming to office on a wide range of equality issues including women’s representation and the education of women and girls; recognises the work of the Scotland Malawi Partnership and the contribution that it has made to developing relationships between the two countries, and believes that the partnership between Malawi and Scotland will continue to grow”.

I am sorry to interrupt Mrs White’s flow, but would she, like me, welcome any other colleagues who might wish to take part in the pairing initiative to join us and help us to spread the word and make more connections with our colleagues in Malawi than we can at the moment?

I congratulate Kenny Gibson on securing the debate and apologise profusely to you, Presiding Officer, and to him and my colleagues, as I will have to leave the chamber at the conclusion of my speech. I know that Mr Gibson will not take it amiss when I say that I do not often find myself able to support the parliamentary motions that he lodges, but he has my full support on the motion and issue that we are discussing. Some 650 people in the UK are waiting for a donor organ. That is 650 people who are unable to live their lives to the full and who have to cope with pain and discomfort every day, and 650 people and their families who are living with stress and anxiety in wondering when or if an organ that is a match for them might become available. Those 650 people know that, with the medical advances of recent years, a replacement organ is likely to be successful and to transform their life, freeing them from the restrictions that their ill health imposes. Often, a replacement organ allows people to go back to work and to live a full and meaningful life. It is significant that, when asked, some 90 per cent of people support organ donation, but fewer than 50 per cent are registered on the national health service organ donor register. There is an even more depressing figure. As Mr Gibson said, Scotland has one of the lowest organ donation rates in the world, at approximately 13 per million. That suggests to me that people in Scotland are dying unnecessarily because some of us simply have not got round to signing up as donors. That is why I support the motion, why I was so pleased to sign up to the Evening Times campaign, and why I congratulate NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde on its respect my dying wish campaign. I recognise, as Mr Gibson does, that there must be safeguards to ensure that vulnerable people are not exploited or coerced, and I believe that young people under 16 should be exempt. There will, of course, be people whose religious beliefs do not allow organ donation, and there will be occasions when bereaved individuals have extreme concerns about their loved one’s organs being harvested. We must respect those views, but sensible solutions work elsewhere and they can work here, too. In my lifetime, the first organ transplant took place in the UK, the world’s first heart transplant was carried out and the organ donor scheme that we have today was launched. We have come a long way, but it is time to go further and adopt the kind of scheme that has increased organ donation in other countries by between 25 and 30 per cent. If we achieved the same percentage increase, we would take 195 people off the waiting list. Surely, for the sake of those 195 people and their families, it is time to change to a system of presumed consent. I sincerely hope that Kenny Gibson’s motion leads to progress on the matter, and I look forward to playing my part in future debates on legislation in the area.

In two years, the people of Scotland will be asked to vote in a referendum on our country’s constitutional future. There will never have been a more important question posed in our lifetime. The future shape of our society and the direction of our economy will be directly affected by the decision that is made on that day. The basis of that decision must be informed debate across a wide range of serious issues. Clarity and transparency are necessary prerequisites, if our constituents are to play a full part. Nothing less will do. Our national conversation must be firmly rooted in evidence; it must not be simply the subject of the loudest declaration of mere unsubstantiated assertion. The contradictory comments of the First Minister and his deputy on the matter of legal advice on an independent Scotland’s membership of the European Union is an unhappy example of how not conduct such weighty business. The First Minister, in attempting to explain his behaviour on the legal advice over EU membership that never was, has at best made himself and his deputy appear to be ridiculous and, at worst, has left them open to the charge of indulging in duplicitous behaviour. Either way, Mr Salmond has irrevocably damaged his reputation and—much more serious—has tarnished the office of First Minister. Mr Salmond’s inability to admit to mistakes is not a strength, but a weakness. Let me offer him the advice of Denis Healey—a real political heavyweight—who said: “It is a good thing to follow the First Law of Holes: if you are in one, stop digging.” That is a law that the First Minister should resolve never to break again. The First Minister could have made it clear that his response to Andrew Neil was a slip. Instead, he ducked and dived and bobbed and weaved. When he could no longer dodge the issue, he sent his deputy, Nicola Sturgeon, into the ring to take the punishment. It was not an edifying performance, and it is unfortunate that what we have heard from SNP back benchers today has been little better; it has been a weak imitation of their master’s voice. The people of Scotland deserve more than the faithful reaffirming of SNP back benchers’ belief in Mr Salmond’s inexhaustible self-regard. The people of Scotland require, from their First Minister and from all their elected representatives, transparency and a frank discussion of the issues. That is why today’s debate matters. The First Minister must clean up the confusion that he, alone, created. The debate has been a curate’s egg; it has been good in parts. Ruth Davidson made an interesting point at the beginning of the debate—[Interruption.] I am sorry if SNP members do not want to be fair-minded and to listen to a point of which it is worth reminding them. Ruth Davidson commented on the appalling waste of money that is the court case that the SNP Government took forward to try to hide the fact that it had a piece of paper with nothing on it. Aileen McLeod made the case for us. The debate is about the conditions under which Scotland might be a member of the EU; it is not about quoting treaties that in some cases have been overtaken and in others apply to members of the EU and not to states that might accede to membership. Therein lies the problem. We will have legal advice about the status of an independent Scotland in Europe, but it will not be consistent and it will need to be tested. That is why scrutiny by this Parliament is so important. Jamie Hepburn drew attention to our colleague Catherine Stihler’s request to the First Minister to refer himself under the Scottish ministerial code. Catherine Stihler went further than that, though: she said that in her view the ministerial code might have been broken. She also asked whether an investigation could consider whether there had been a clear abuse of power and position. Those facts and matters will not be considered under the set-up that the First Minister has put in place. Hugh Henry and Jackie Baillie were right to distinguish between the types of legal advice to which the First Minister and Deputy First Minister have referred. The ministerial code is very clear, so it is a shame that the First Minister has chosen to twist the terms of the code before running to hide behind his own selective quotations. Lewis Macdonald was right to remind us that the First Minister could have asked for permission to disclose that he had sought legal advice—or not, as we found out—months ago, but chose not to do so. On the issue of the likely status of an independent Scotland in Europe, why was it that members of Christina McKelvie’s committee refused the opportunity to have an inquiry into just that matter? [Interruption.] If she is telling me from a sedentary position that that is not what happened at the committee, perhaps—

No. I have listened enough. I will be happy to take Ms McKelvie’s intervention when I have finished my point. The point that I was going to make to Ms McKelvie—who, by the way, was not in a position to take interventions in her speech—is that I have written to her, as she will know, and I have asked her to undertake such an inquiry. If the opportunity had not previously arisen, it has now. Is Ms McKelvie going to take it?

Perhaps Ms McKelvie should be more assiduous in checking her correspondence. I can assure Ms McKelvie that the letter was sent to her and to the clerk of the committee before it was sent anywhere else. My colleague Paul Martin is right to draw attention to the inadequacies of the review that the First Minister has put in place. The swaggering way in which the First Minister described his record of victories to Bernard Ponsonby last Thursday was particularly unedifying. Some humility was called for in those circumstances, but I suppose that that was too much to expect. Willie Rennie’s assessment of the Edinburgh agreement is absolutely correct. [Interruption.]

The fact of the matter is that Willie Rennie’s assessment is absolutely correct because the agreement is only about the section 30 order and not about any negotiated settlement that would have to follow a “yes” vote in the referendum. That settlement would take years following a referendum and it is something on which we have yet to hear the points that the SNP Government would want to discuss with the rest of the UK—other than its headlines of wanting to keep the Queen and the pound. Jackson Carlaw is also correct. [Interruption.] He is—absolutely. I seem to remember that Mr Swinney was very fond of the approbation of Mr Carlaw and his colleagues in previous sessions. Of course, as the SNP is fast finding out, constitutional politics means that people have on some issues to ally themselves with people with whom they would not normally have a great deal in common. [Interruption.]

As I was about to say, Jackson Carlaw is correct to say that the First Minister could have cleared up this whole sorry issue quite some time ago. He could have done it very easily and he could have avoided this whole farrago. The people of Scotland demand clarity and transparency so that they can weigh the evidence when the SNP puts forward its case in support of separation. Issues such as public sector pensions, the division of the UK’s liabilities and assets, the currency options that would be available to a separate Scotland, fiscal policy and taxation require scrutiny that is based on the facts—on actual evidence. Mr Salmond’s habit of stating a fiction loudly and at length, hoping that it will provide an adequate substitute for fact, will not do. The farrago that we have witnessed on the question of EU membership must not be repeated. The First Minister must come clean. We have already heard today from Johann Lamont that Labour believes that a full judicial inquiry and nothing else will do. That has been borne out not just by the events of the past week, but by the way in which the debate has been conducted on the SNP benches.

11. To ask the Scottish Government what the priorities will be for the proposed employability fund in 2013-14. (S4O-01376)

Last year, the Scottish Government allocated additional money to Skills Development Scotland to allow SDS to fund a set amount of college places with a clear focus on employability. The minister’s letter of guidance to the funding council this year indicates that the funding for that scheme in 2013-14 will consist of £24 million but, on this occasion, that will be transferred out of the college funding line. Does the minister plan to allocate any money directly to the scheme, or is she content to reduce further the funding that goes directly to already cash-strapped colleges?

I thank the cabinet secretary for advance sight of her statement. I also welcome the publication of the analysis of the consultation—some 165 days after the consultation ended. Today an editorial in The Times said: “The Electoral Commission is not, however, just some arm of the Westminster Government, to be treated as a butt of SNP abuse. It is an independent legal entity, answerable to Parliament, there to guarantee the fair running of elections in Britain. To cast aside its judgment would not only be irresponsible, it would be unprecedented”. Does the cabinet secretary agree with that assessment? If she does, will she take the opportunity to allay the fears concerning funding that her speech to her party conference created and indicate to Parliament that the Electoral Commission will be entrusted with the setting of spending limits for the referendum campaign? If that is not her position will she explain to Parliament why it is not?

This has been an interesting debate and the Justice Committee is to be congratulated on its work so far. I extend my sympathies to Colin Keir, who I suspect may not get to speak very often at future committee meetings following his comments to Christine Grahame, the committee convener, although I am sure that she will forgive him soon. I come to the debate as someone with not only a keen interest in the media but a concern to ensure that our justice is system is as robust as it can be and that it serves our country well. Roderick Campbell referred to the evidence given by an individual who suggested that the public and not the victim is the main player. I fundamentally disagree with that comment because, to my mind, the victim must be at the heart of the system. At the end of the day, victims are emblematic of us all: they are the symbol of our community in court on that particular occasion. They must be central to our notion of justice and the system that we put in place to deliver it. We must take great care not to turn their tragedy into a soap opera. We must also take seriously the difficult job that we ask jurors to do on our behalf and the responsibility that we entrust to them. Any changes that we make must help to shine a light on the proceedings in our courts, not trivialise the role of the court service or jurors or—worse still—expose them to danger just for doing the job that society demands of them. I share the concerns raised by many members that the use of social media in its many forms makes it difficult for jurors to maintain their impartiality. There is a concern that its increased use could see jurors led or witnesses influenced by information that may appear online during a trial. That is not in anyone’s interests, but it is right that the Justice Committee progresses the discussion about how, or whether, the use of social media should be regulated on our behalf. In evidence to the committee, one witness, Matt Roper of Scottish Television, made the telling point that, with the use of the internet and the plethora of hand-held devices that are available to us, “The media can be the public at large”.—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 2 October 2012; c 1778.] How do we regulate such matters and, indeed, should we? As we have heard, going to court is one of the most traumatic things that a witness or victim will ever have to do—in some ways, it is perhaps even more traumatic than the original crime or incident. We must ensure that victims or witnesses are not prevented from giving the best evidence that they can or do not try to avoid appearing at the trial at all. My colleague, Lewis Macdonald, was correct to point out the difficulty that can arise when a person who is found innocent by the court is, in effect, given a life sentence by the court of public opinion. That is something that we must all guard against. John Lamont was perhaps correct to suggest that the filming of the sentencing of a convicted person may be appropriate in some cases. My hope is that the starkness of that particular element of the trial may even act as a deterrent to others.

Christine Grahame is absolutely right about that. That is the way it should be, and that approach helps to encourage the starkness of that particular element of the trial as I have described. My colleague Graeme Pearson highlighted how difficult it often is to persuade witnesses to come forward and cited the need to use closed-circuit television. In my view, that is proof of how difficult it can be to make witnesses feel that they are giving their evidence in a safe and secure environment. Four years ago, I sat through the many weeks of the public inquiry into the Stockline disaster in my constituency, which was an extremely detailed and interesting process. The inquiry considered the events that led up to an incident that ultimately caused the death of nine people and injury to several others, and it allowed a highly detailed discussion to take place in a calm and reasoned way. It occurred to me at the time that television coverage of that inquiry might have been in the public interest. The key distinction to make is that it was not a trial. It was a very different beast with a very different way of working and a very different atmosphere, and it was something that involved—to pick up on Mary Fee’s point—a minimum of legal jargon. Indeed, the presiding judge was quick to pull up anyone who strayed into that territory too often. My own view is that we need to be extremely cautious in taking forward this debate. I am not convinced that a right to televise trials would be a step forward, and I worry about the way in which social media are often used. However, Alison McInnes had a point when she suggested that there are other ways that might usefully be considered of making our courts and their processes more transparent, open and accessible to members of the general public with a legitimate interest. That was a useful point to make. Similarly, Annabel Goldie was absolutely correct to say that, in taking forward its inquiry, the Justice Committee needs to look at the broader evidence—of course it will do that—at what the data suggests is the effect of televising and using social media to cover court proceedings, and at what impact that might have on individual jurors in particular. If our discussion has told us anything, it is that the Justice Committee is right to have begun its debate on the issue. I wish it well with its deliberations. I do not think that it has taken on an easy task, as this afternoon’s debate has demonstrated, but it is an important piece of work, which I am sure will be complementary to the Lord President’s review.

I, too, thank Linda Fabiani for securing this timely debate. The motion emphasises the importance of early detection in all cancer cases, and recognises that the Scottish Government’s detect cancer early initiative will first target breast cancer. I add to that of Aileen McLeod my praise for the staff who work with people who have been diagnosed with cancer, and who do such great work, not only at the time of diagnosis, but through treatment and often beyond. We know about breast cancer statistics: some 4,500 women, and some men, are diagnosed each year, and 1,000 will die each year from the disease. Linda Fabiani’s motion says that, in 2010, 460 women in the NHS Lanarkshire area were diagnosed with the condition. When I read the motion, I immediately checked to see how many women in my area—Greater Glasgow and Clyde—had been so diagnosed, as I am sure many of my colleagues did for their areas. Statistics are a valuable tool: they help to inform us as legislators, and they allow services to be shaped. However, every one of those statistics is a person who has been given a diagnosis that they feared and who now knows that they are likely to face months of treatment. I have an admission to make: when I looked at the figures that were helpfully provided by Breakthrough Breast Cancer, my first thought was not to look at the latest figures, but to check how many women in Greater Glasgow at the time shared my experience of being diagnosed with breast cancer—I cannot remember precisely when, but I think it was four years ago in 2008, which seems such a long time ago—and the number was 940 women. The cancer that I had affects only 1 per cent of those who are diagnosed and, although surgery and reconstruction were required, I was exceptionally lucky because I did not need chemotherapy or radiotherapy and was back at work less than two months after surgery. I am not sure that was a benefit, but there we go. My reason for mentioning my own case is simply to reinforce the message that although screening is important, being aware of changes to your breasts is essential, no matter one’s age. Members may find it hard to believe, but when I was diagnosed I was too young—just—to have been called for screening. I had noticed a change; it was not a lump—I will spare people the details—but let me just say that in my case size really did matter. My experience is why I think that the Scottish Government’s current adverts that remind women of the need to be aware of any change to their breasts are so important, and why the TLC campaign is vital. I decided to mention my experience because I am worried about the number of women in constituencies like mine who do not attend screening. As with so many other health issues, women from poorer areas are least likely to attend and most likely to need radical surgery and treatment when they are eventually diagnosed. I ask the minister to consider targeting those communities in order to encourage more women to come forward. If we return to the statistics, only about 70 per cent of women in Glasgow take up the opportunity to have screening. I suspect, too, that the statistics cannot tell us the number of women who continue to soldier on when they know they have a problem, either because they are afraid of what it may mean or because they are worried about who will look after their children if they have to go into hospital and whether their employer will be sympathetic when they need time off. My message is clear: “If you are called for screening, go. If you spot something that’s just a little bit different from normal, go to your GP as soon as you can. Follow the TLC campaign, encourage your daughters, your friends and anyone you know to do so, too. In most cases, you won’t have cancer and, if you do, the earlier it’s caught, the simpler the treatment is likely to be and the greater your chances of making a full recovery.”

This has been an interesting debate about the Gaelic language plan that Bòrd na Gàidhlig has published as part of the requirements under the 2005 act. I thank Bòrd na Gàidhlig for its considered work. In particular, I thank Arthur Cormack, who has provided so much inspiration to so many. I am sure that many of us share Arthur’s aspirations for the language, but few share his level of passion for or his commitment to Gaelic, or indeed his knowledge of its history and culture. I firmly believe that if the language is to flourish and not just survive, it is to our children that we must primarily look. Languages are more easily learned in childhood, and Gaelic-medium education seems to me to give young people the opportunity to learn the language in a comprehensive way while, importantly, equipping them with the confidence and ability to use the language. As others have said, children are also likely to be more comfortable with other languages as their education progresses, which is a point that Hugh Henry discussed in his contribution. For a time, my constituency played host to a Gaelic-medium primary school. In fact, it was the one to which Hanzala Malik referred in his speech, as it was in his ward. The school was located in an ethnically diverse area and it was always a pleasure to visit the school and to see and hear the progress that the children were making. However, the greatest joy was to visit the nursery school that was attached to the primary school—Annabel Goldie and Mary Scanlon might be particularly interested in this point—because there we could meet children, some as young as two or three years old, who at home might have spoken Punjabi, Mandarin, Polish or English, but who at nursery all spoke Gaelic. It was their common language and because they wanted to play and interact with their friends, they picked it up quickly and within a few short weeks thought nothing of it. The importance of Gaelic-medium education was brought home to me by a constituent who chose to have her child educated at that particular school. Neither my constituent nor her husband has Gaelic, but her parents did. They were of a generation that was actively discouraged from speaking their native tongue at school, so their use of the language did not develop and they did not have the confidence to pass it on to their children; now, however, they take great pride in their grandchild’s fluency. In my view, Bòrd na Gàidhlig is right to prioritise that area. However, as Lewis Macdonald pointed out, it is also important that young people then have the opportunity to use the language in their further education and in their wider life. I am convinced that another great spur to the stability of Gaelic and its encouragement is the development of BBC Alba. I thought so in government when I announced the initial funding for the channel and I still strongly believe that to be the case. If we take the language seriously, it is important that it is reflected throughout the cultural world with which we engage. Although many of us do not speak Gaelic, I am sure that we all now value the channel and its influence. I understand that the supporters of a certain football team have recently developed a particular interest in BBC Alba. Of course, I mean the supporters of Glasgow City women’s football team, whose UEFA cup away game will be broadcast live tomorrow night. It is worth watching. Talking of BBC Alba, I congratulate Alasdair Morrison on his four-year tenure as chair of the organisation and I wish Maggie Cunningham well in her new role as Alasdair’s successor. There have been many interesting speeches in the debate and I have enjoyed listening to them. I apologise to John Finnie that, because of translation difficulties, we heard only the last few words of his speech. John indicated that he has learned Gaelic and is not a native speaker, so I say to him that, although we heard only the end of his speech, the language is so beautiful that it was actually a pleasure just to listen and to hear the enthusiasm that he has brought to learning it. It occurred to me that although the minister has great fluency in the language, we do not have any native speakers in the Parliament now—we used to have native speakers in Alasdair Morrison and John Farquhar Munro. That tells us a lot about the way in which the language has developed. I hope that, 10 years from now, we will look round the chamber and see many Gaels speaking fluently because they have learned the language from an early age. Lewis Macdonald made a powerful point about the importance of people being able to use the language in their community, workplace and life. I say constructively that the Scottish Government might like to think about what encouragement it could give to employers in the Gàidhealtachd who want to encourage Gaelic in the workplace, so that we can help to strengthen communities and keep people with the language in their communities. Jean Urquhart is absolutely right to point out that many languages have been lost across Europe and to encourage us to ensure that Gaelic is not also lost. Hanzala Malik was correct to draw attention to the work that is being done in Glasgow not just on Gaelic but on other languages. At present, more than 100 languages are spoken as a first language by the children in schools in Glasgow. It is a great responsibility for a local authority to have to cope with the demand that that puts on the education system. We must never forget that although those languages must be encouraged, young people need to be supported as they learn to speak Gaelic—sorry, I mean English, although I hope that they will speak Gaelic, too. They need support as they learn to speak English so that they can fit into local communities and begin to make their way in education. That does not come cheaply. We in the Labour Party think that there is little point in producing a plan that seeks to deliver particular outcomes unless we can measure those outcomes. I was reassured that the bòrd included in its report a section that outlines how it will monitor results. However, to emphasise the importance of the point and the responsibility that the Scottish Government has in that regard, Scottish Labour will support the amendment in the name of Mary Scanlon at decision time this evening. The Parliament clearly supports the Gaelic language and wishes it to flourish. To misquote the minister, we want it to be used and not lost. I believe that, on that, we can unite.

1. To ask the Scottish Government whether it will provide an update on the meeting of the Remploy stakeholder group of 19 September 2012. (S4O-01326)

I am grateful to the minister for his answer and for the work that he has been doing in this regard. As he will be aware, the long-awaited decision on the Springburn factory, which we had expected from the UK Government, has not materialised and workers now face a further delay as they wait to hear their fate. I ask the minister whether the Scottish Government will consider two important facts in relation to the Springburn factory: first, that it constructs and adapts wheelchairs; and, secondly, that there is a backlog of national health service patients who are waiting for delivery of a wheelchair or for essential maintenance. Even at this late stage, will the Scottish Government consider the possibility of acquiring Springburn Remploy as part of the NHS family? That would provide a secure future for the dedicated workers and a ready supply of wheelchairs for those who need them.

I congratulate the Health and Sport Committee for holding this short debate and for the inquiry that it has commenced. I also congratulate the convener on his excellent exposition of the issues under consideration. This has been a remarkable summer of sport, with tremendous athletes—too many to mention individually—participating in the Olympic and Paralympic Games. As if that was not enough, Andy Murray proceeded to complement his Olympic medals with his first grand slam trophy. Even great athletes have to start somewhere, and over the years I have listened to many of them talk about how their careers began. For some, it was an enthusiastic teacher at school who spotted their potential and for others, a parent encouraged them to get involved. For many, a particular coach whom they encountered early in their career set them on the path to success. Not everyone will be willing or able to make a career in sport, but coaching staff are also crucial to the enjoyment of sport. I suggest that the committee give, in its deliberations, serious consideration to the role of coaching staff. Many are volunteer workers or parents who have taken on the role because of the interest of their daughter or son. I cite as a good example Sapphire-Gymnastics Club in Glasgow, which is run by parents and has its own mums’ gymnastic display team. We require coaches to be checked by Disclosure Scotland and we want them to be trained to a level that allows them to safely operate in their sport and it should not be any other way. It is a facility that all Scotland will be proud of. However, do we support people enough in the process? Is gaining qualifications too expensive for them? Is there a way to help them to continue and to recruit others to share the job? Facilities are also key, and nowhere are they more important than in our schools. A school can be the community hub that supports an area’s sporting life. In my constituency, John Paul academy now operates its own football academy for pupils. The minister might like to visit that, in connection with the announcement that she made today. That football academy is possible only because the school has the pitches for it and has extremely enthusiastic staff and pupils. I am sure that the committee will look at the availability of facilities and the cost to clubs of using them. Duncan McNeil was right to mention the issue of encouraging women and girls to remain active throughout their lives. For many women and girls, the lack of quality changing accommodation to accompany what might be good playing fields or other sporting facilities can be a serious deterrent. We have in my constituency the possibility of a paddle-sports centre being created on the Forth and Clyde canal, which would give people the opportunity to become involved in canoeing and kayaking. If the funding applications succeed, that facility could also help to keep elite paddlers in Scotland, as they would no longer have to enrol at the University of Nottingham to use the facilities there. The flexibility of facilities is also important. As Duncan McNeil and the minister said, and as is identified in the motion, sport hubs are valuable tools. However, when we consider that the number of sports clubs in Scotland is at least 80 times greater than the number of planned hubs, it is clear that a lot more needs to be done to support our local clubs. I said at the beginning of my speech that the committee is to be congratulated on securing this debate on grass-roots and community sport, and it should be, but I am genuinely disappointed that the Government has not yet arranged a debate that would give us all the opportunity to celebrate the outstanding achievements of our athletes in the Olympic and Paralympic games and, of course, Andy Murray’s first grand slam victory. The 80,000-plus people who turned out in cities across Scotland last weekend demonstrate that enthusiasm has not waned, so I respectfully ask the minister to agree to a debate at the earliest possible opportunity—perhaps one without a motion, so that we need not divide.

I am in my last minute. Such a debate would give us all the opportunity to celebrate this wonderful summer of sport and to discuss in a serious and considered way how we can harness all the interest and enthusiasm in order to ensure that Scotland has a sporting legacy that takes us to the Commonwealth games in 2014 and the youth Olympics in—I hope—Glasgow in 2018, and which leads to us all becoming part of a fitter and healthier nation along the way. I wish the committee well in its deliberations.

The cabinet secretary knows of my concern that those communities that are most blighted by crime should receive a proportionate amount of money from the cashback scheme. Will he give details today of how the Scottish Government measures that that is happening? If it is not happening, what action will the Government take to ensure that it does?

Will the member give way?

The minister knows of my long-standing interest in this project. I recently had occasion to write to Network Rail about its consultation process on EGIP. It promised me that it would have consultation events in my constituency in the summer, and then it promised that it would have them in the autumn. However, neither of those things has happened. The letter that I have received from Network Rail notes the announcements by the minister and says: “in partnership with Transport Scotland, Network Rail is working through the detail of what this will mean to the scope of works and associated timescales that we had previously consulted on. This work is now underway and will take a number of months to conclude.” Can the minister tell us what the up-to-date timescale for that work is?

Will the minister take an intervention?

I thank the minister for his support, but he will be aware that the leader of Scottish Labour has written to him to ask whether it would be possible for the Scottish Government to consider a range of measures, like those that have been proposed by the Welsh Assembly Government, such that employers who wished to take on redundant ex-workers from Remploy would be assisted to do so for up to four years in order to carry out any necessary modifications to their premises and to see to other related matters. The minister might not be aware that I have written to the Equal Opportunities Committee to ask that it undertake an inquiry into the entire issue of Remploy because—as Bob Doris rightly said—there are a number of issues about how the process has been carried out. Does the minister intend to agree to Ms Lamont’s proposals, and will he back my proposals?

3. To ask the Scottish Government what progress it has made with the merger of the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland with Historic Scotland. (S4O-01218)

I am sure that the cabinet secretary is aware that I am not completely convinced that the proposed merger is the right option for either organisation. Given that funding for Historic Scotland is set to fall by 30 per cent over the budget period, will she assure me that a merger is not simply an expedient measure to save money and that any merger will be carried out with the interests of both organisations and their work to the fore? How will she ensure that there will be no redundancies at either organisation as a result?

I, too, offer my congratulations to Annabel Goldie on securing the debate, and I add my congratulations to the BBC and the cast and crew of “River City” on the 10th anniversary of the programme, which we are celebrating in the debate. Unlike Ms Goldie and Ms Baillie, I cannot claim a local connection with Shieldinch, although I consider myself a relatively near neighbour. As colleagues will know, for many years, Maryhill, which I hail from, was the home of the delightful Jack Jarvis and Victor McDade, residents of Osprey Heights in the fictitious district of Craiglang as featured in the BBC production “Still Game”. Therefore, I can understand the particular pleasure that the citizens of Dumbarton take in “River City”. For residents of Maryhill, part of the joy of watching “Still Game” was in spotting local landmarks—the pub, the cafe and the old graving docks on Maryhill Road, for example. On one occasion I was chuffed to spot my surgery poster on the wall of a community centre that was being used as a location. However, apart from the fun of spotting local places there is also the value that comes with such productions. As Jackie Baillie said, “River City” is broadcast every week in Australia and the much missed “Still Game”, which was ultimately broadcast throughout the United Kingdom. Maryhill also benefits from the location of the BBC Comedy Unit there. The production units built to accommodate “River City” in Dumbarton and “Waterloo Road” in Greenock in Duncan McNeil’s constituency continue to bring skills and work to those locations. I know that the spouse of one of my colleagues—I had better not say which one—has appeared as an extra in “River City”. Colleagues might like to guess who that might be. The BBC has recognised the need to distribute its productions more proportionately throughout the country—a welcome if overdue development. Success often breeds success in the arts and having these programmes made in Scotland will encourage the emergence of more home-grown talent and will help to boost the local economy and provide a pool of talent for the television, film and theatre sectors. I concur entirely with the remarks of my colleague Jackie Baillie about the SNP Government wishing to break up the BBC. It is rather ironic that the SNP wants to keep the Queen and the Bank of England but to ditch the BBC. Often, the mark of a good programme is how it becomes part of our everyday thinking and language. That often happens because of the catchphrases that the characters employ. I remind colleagues of the lighthouse keepers’ catchphrase on “Chewin’ the Fat” as an example that eventually began to drive us all round the bend. For a long time, I could not mention my constituency of Maryhill without some wit impersonating the late Mark McManus and telling me, “There’s been a murder in Maryhill.” I do not recall “River City” adding to the lexicon in quite that way, but I have always been intrigued by the nickname that was given to the character of Bob Adams, who is played by Stephen Purdon. I have always felt some sympathy for Bob, because it is quite a while since we last saw him wear a shellsuit, but the name has stuck. I have a particular reason for feeling that way. In 1999, I read a newspaper column, which I recall was appropriately called “Bitching from Bruntsfield” and which appeared in the Edinburgh Evening News. For some reason, the column focused on what I wore at the Parliament’s opening ceremony. Apparently, I was not dressed formally enough to meet Her Majesty the Queen. That is fine—I can take criticism, and that was hardly the worst thing that has been said about me in the press. However, the columnist concluded her piece by saying that, as I was from Glasgow, she could only be thankful that I had not gone the whole hog and worn a shellsuit. Colleagues will therefore understand my fellow feeling for poor Bob Adams. I thank the cast and crew of “River City” for 10 years of enjoyable, gritty and witty entertainment. I wish them well for a long-running future.

The First Minister has brought before us his legislative programme for the coming year and we finally have a timeframe for the legislation that will allow the independence referendum to take place. Everyone in this chamber accepts that the SNP has a mandate to hold an independence referendum and we know that the First Minister has the MSPs to pass the legislation. We know just how compliant they are to the First Minister’s instructions—although he does seem to be testing their limits on NATO somewhat—so there is little doubt that legislation will be introduced and that it will be passed. What remains in doubt is the detail of that legislation. That doubt should remain when the First Minister benefits from a lifetime of conviction, five years in office and numerous consultations and deliberations at the taxpayers’ expense is truly astounding. Anything other than a single question referendum providing for a clear and unambiguous outcome will be an abuse of the trust placed in the SNP by the people of Scotland. This will be the single most important decision that the people of Scotland will be asked to make and the First Minister must stop using it as his own personal political plaything. Devolution and independence are not the same and it is simply wrong to suggest that they should appear on the same ballot paper. Scotland deserves better. Scotland deserves the chance to determine whether it wants to separate from the rest of the United Kingdom and it deserves the facts to allow it to make that decision. The First Minister’s Government needs to start making decisions and give the people of Scotland the information that they need to make an informed choice. While we on the opposition benches try to tie the First Minister down to making decisions about the process, people in offices, schools and factories around the country have already started to have the debate about independence but without having a clear idea about what it would mean for them, their families and their communities.

The First Minister may think that the current situation suits him. He clearly thinks that it allows him to portray himself as the Scottish David against the Tory Goliath at Westminster. However, this is a battle manufactured by the First Minister and it does a great disservice to the people of Scotland. While playing out this manufactured battle loudly and on the front pages of Scotland’s newspapers, the First Minister is also quietly battling on another manufactured front—his battle against Scotland’s own freedom of information law. It is a battle conducted at the taxpayers’ expense and a battle to keep from disclosing exactly the kind of information that the people of Scotland deserve to have—legal opinion on a separate Scotland’s place in Europe. Scotland deserves better.

I will give way to Mrs MacDonald.

I do not accept Mrs MacDonald’s assertion that my party is backing up the coalition Government—it is doing anything but that. [Interruption.] I must say that pots and kettles come to mind when I hear members of the SNP talk about my party’s position. As Ms Lamont reminded us, it was Mr Salmond himself who said, “Don’t vote for Labour”. He has reaped the wind that he has sown. What Scotland needs now is to hear what the First Minister’s vision is, not of the number of questions on a ballot paper or how he sees himself being remembered in future, but of the kind of Scotland he thinks that separation will deliver.

The First Minister is being rather disingenuous. Those of us who have been in politics for some time remember that the SNP has more to be embarrassed about in relation to the coalitions that it has formed in UK politics than any other party in the Parliament. [Interruption.] The First Minister might assert that his vision is for a Scotland with “the ability to take our own decisions”— that is, after all, what his manifesto said. [Interruption.]

However, since the manifesto was produced, we have witnessed the First Minister becoming increasingly lukewarm on the issue of decision making and ceding powers that he has not yet won to institutions over which a separate Scotland would have no control. His much-talked-of economic levers would lie in the hands of the Bank of England and he even wants a separate Scotland to remain in NATO. No doubt he thinks that a separate Scotland can be independent in NATO as well as independent in Europe. To the First Minister, it is all just a slogan. It is about whatever it takes to win a vote. To the people of Scotland, however, it is about their future and their children’s future; it is not about Alex Salmond’s place in the history books. Scotland deserves better, and the members of this Parliament deserve better than the antics from the SNP front bench that we sometimes see—and have seen today—when members rise to speak.

I will do so. In the absence of a coherent vision, the people of Scotland are deciding what a separate SNP Scotland would look like. They are using the evidence that is available right now to make that decision. They are looking at the drop in nursing numbers and the cuts in public funding. They are looking at a Government that is described as “feeble” on fuel poverty. The people of Scotland are making their decision on those issues.

5. To ask the Scottish Executive what investment it plans for town centres and high streets. (S4O-01203)

As the minister will know, I was a supporter of the previous town centre regeneration fund and saw the good work that was achieved using that money. It would be helpful if the minister could consider reinstating such a fund or introducing a similar mechanism, particularly to help to tackle the problems of town centres like Springburn, where the facilities are in private ownership and there are consequently fewer levers to promote the change and improvement that is badly needed.

I am sure that I am not alone in having attended and enjoyed school awards ceremonies in the past few weeks. It is always inspiring to hear of the achievements of school pupils, to see their delight in the progress that they have made and to witness and share the pride of their families and teachers. For those who are leaving school, it should be a time of great excitement and anticipation as they look forward to a life beyond school and to moving into further or higher education or into training or work. However, for those whose next step should be further education, it has instead been a time of uncertainty that has been caused by the policies and funding choices of the Scottish Government. I have witnessed at first hand the efforts that have been made by my local college, North Glasgow College, to minimise the effect of the cuts on the young people whom it serves, on the staff whom it employs and on the range of courses and number of places that are available. However, with a cut of £1 million last year and a further reduction of £823,000 this year, something had to give. Like many other colleges, North Glasgow College has sought to make voluntary severance arrangements with its staff and has, as a result, lost 31 jobs in 2011-12 and a further 16 in the current year. Numbers on paper do not tell the whole story, however, so I will elaborate a little. The loss of 31 jobs last year equated to the loss of some 500 years of experience and a great deal of on-going anxiety for staff. It has also resulted in the number of places on courses as diverse as communications and support for learning being reduced. This year, places have been lost in plumbing, tourism, and music and sound production, among other courses, and I am grateful to all the potential students and their families who have contacted me with their concerns. The music and sound production courses are popular and have been the subject of media interest. It seems to be ironic that music and sound production courses are being reduced during the year of creative Scotland—a year in which, the Scottish Government tells us, we should all celebrate our culture and our cultural life. I am afraid that the young people who are being denied places on those courses have little to celebrate. Thankfully, North Glasgow College has been able to relocate potential students to other colleges and to other courses, but that has tied up valuable staff time at an important point in the college year. Looking to the future, the college’s senior management team has done its best to ensure that it will be well placed to capitalise on its areas of expertise when formal merger discussions begin. North Glasgow College is the only college to be located entirely within my constituency, so it is the one that I know best and the one that concerns me most. Nevertheless, I took the opportunity to check the situation concerning the other Glasgow colleges, and the figures are staggering. In 2011-12, Glasgow’s colleges lost 39,258 weighted student units of measurement—the recognised measure that is used to work such things out. To put that in perspective, I note that 39,258 weighted SUMs equates to almost exactly the number of SUMs that Stow College has in 2012-13 and is more than the total at John Wheatley College. It is, in effect, the equivalent of losing a Stow College or a John Wheatley College completely. An entire college’s complement of student units of measurement has been wiped out because the Scottish Government does not consider the work of those colleges to be a priority. I seem to recall that the Scottish Government promised that there would be an education or training place for every young person in Scotland. However, there are currently 12,700 unemployed young people in the 16-to-24 age group in Glasgow. Where are the employment, training or education places for them? Let us remember that 12,700 young people are unemployed at a time when there are 39,258 weighted SUMs fewer in Glasgow’s colleges. If the Government was living up to its manifesto commitment, it would not be cutting college budgets in the way that it is. These are, after all, the very people who will help to work us out of recession. We can judge a Government by the priorities that it sets and the choices that it makes. In its support and encouragement of our young people, the Government has been found wanting; in its recognition of the value of college staff, the Government has been found wanting; and in its commitment to taking young people out of unemployment, the Government has failed dramatically. I very much hope that the minister will, in closing, be able to offer at least a glimmer of hope for our young people, colleges and communities.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I thank Ms White for taking my intervention. She and Ms McAlpine have suggested that I have, in some way, criticised the idea of merger. My only comment about merger in my motion and in my speech was to point out that North Glasgow College was working hard to best position itself for a future merger. I did not criticise the merger itself. I would also be grateful if Ms White could point out the inaccuracies in my speech, if she can find them.

The minister’s statement mentions the Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement programme. Is that project on track to be delivered by 2016? Will the electrification of the Cumbernauld line be completed in time for the Commonwealth games, as promised in the games bid document?

I, too, congratulate Rob Gibson on securing the debate and on his tenacity in championing Robert Cunninghame Graham. Rob Gibson suggested that a quote from Cunninghame Graham should be included with those that adorn the wall outside this place, and I have no problem with that, although I would perhaps have a problem with the particular quote that he chose. I have a suggestion for another Cunninghame Graham quote to use, which consists of words that he used to begin a speech in Parliament and which might stand as a lesson to us all. On this particular occasion, the witty, urbane and passionate Cunninghame Graham announced to Parliament, “Gentlemen—”

I apologise to Fiona McLeod—I had a lectern malfunction, and I am sorry if the noise interrupted her speech. I congratulate John Mason on bringing this debate to the Parliament, and I thank the many constituents who took the time to contact me on this important issue. I grew up in the 1960s and 1970s, so I am only too aware that our country abolished the death penalty relatively recently. The last hanging in Scotland took place in Aberdeen in 1963, and the last hanging in the UK was in 1964. By then, public opinion had begun to demonstrate concern about the use of the death penalty, not least because of cases such as that of Derek Bentley, the teenager who was convicted in very unsatisfactory circumstances of killing a policeman. The Murder (Abolition of Death Penalty) Act 1965 suspended the use of the death penalty for five years. However, before the end of the moratorium, in 1969, Parliament—in a move that was controversial to some and much welcomed by others—abolished hanging as a punishment for murder. It is worth noting, as members said, that the death penalty was retained for crimes such as treason and piracy with violence until the signing of the sixth protocol of the European convention on human rights in 1999. My opposition to the death penalty is one of principle. I do not believe that we have the right to take away someone’s life. However, I am also acutely aware that, on a practical basis, the death penalty just does not work. It is not a deterrent, as Fiona McLeod demonstrated, and it sullies us all. We know of many cases in which it seems clear that people were killed for crimes that they did not commit. Equally worrying is that, if the death penalty had continued to be an instrument of the justice system after 1969, others who were wrongly convicted, such as the Birmingham six, might well have received the death sentence. As John Mason correctly said, this debate is not an attack on India. India is a sovereign state and must make its own decisions, and it is welcome that in the past seven years no executions have taken place in India, as Amnesty International said, although 110 people were sentenced to death in 2011. It is notable, however, that the mercy petitions that were submitted in respect of five people have been rejected. Activists fear that those men, having exhausted the legal process that is available to them, are extremely vulnerable. John Mason was right to highlight the physical and mental health issues that often arise for prisoners who are kept incarcerated with the threat of death hanging over them, sometimes for many years. The motion highlights the case of Balwant Singh Rajoana, who was convicted of the assassination of the former Punjab chief minister, Beant Singh, and was due to be executed in March. Pressure from Sikhs around the world and from pressure groups such as Amnesty International has resulted in a reprieve for Balwant Singh, which is of course very welcome. The message from tonight’s debate is that the death penalty is not acceptable, wherever it is practised. I am grateful to John Mason for securing the debate. It seems to me that the death penalty, instead of being a deterrent, as its supporters claim that it is, is a signal from a Government that it considers life to be expendable. I am sure that no nation really wants to set such an example.

This has been an interesting debate and, as a patriotic Scot, I can say that there has certainly been some food for thought in many of the contributions. That seemed to send a frisson through the SNP.

I have not got started, so Mr Mason might as well have a go.

That hardly bears answering. It is exactly the kind of narrow-minded attitude that turns people away from the arguments of Mr Mason’s colleagues. I will ignore his remark for now, but will return to it later. It has become clear to me that while the SNP seems to be struggling to identify—or perhaps it is struggling to agree—why it wants Scotland to separate from the rest of the UK, Scottish Labour is clear about the kind of Scotland that we want to see and we are focused on playing our part in delivering it.

No thanks, Dr Allan. Labour believes that the Parliament was created in order that its members could work towards a fairer and more equal Scotland and that we have made good progress in that regard. My colleague Richard Baker cogently made the economic case for Scotland to remain part of the UK. It is worth remembering that according to the latest Scottish Government estimates, the annual value of exports from Scotland to the rest of the UK is £34 billion, while the value of exports to the rest of the world is £19 billion. The same statistics tell us that the annual value of imports into Scotland from the rest of the UK is £44 billion and the value of imports from the rest of the world is £19 billion. Scotland is importing twice as much from the rest of the UK as it does from the rest of the world. Given those facts, why would we want to give up the opportunity to influence the economic decisions of the rest of the UK?

No thanks, Mr Neil. I thank my colleague Drew Smith for reminding us of the relative youth of some of our newer members. They have a slightly different perspective, but it is an important one. Drew Smith’s comments about the consensus on the Constitutional Convention that preceded this Parliament are valid. Lewis Macdonald was spot on when he talked about the importance of the referendum being fair and legal. It must also demonstrably be so. It seems that there will be plenty of time before the referendum, so let us hope that plenty of effort is put into guaranteeing that it fulfils those criteria. I listened with great interest to Linda Fabiani, as I always do. Ms Fabiani and I share many political interests in common but on this one we are divided. I know that she holds her views on Trident dearly, as do many people around the chamber. I do not want to see Trident on the Clyde either, but I do not want to see Trident in Portsmouth, Southampton or indeed anywhere else in the UK. [Interruption.]

I do not want to see such missiles deployed anywhere in the world, but simply to assert that we should not have them in this country does nothing to assist people who hold that view elsewhere. I was very interested in Mark McDonald’s excellent contribution. I very much respect what he said. I also sincerely respect his grandfather’s contribution in the second world war. Mark told an interesting story about his grandfather’s experience. My father served in the middle east during the war and our predecessors—my father and Mark’s grandfather—fought with colleagues from around the UK to protect this country, and indeed Europe, from fascism. They fought with people from other countries, too, including Australia and New Zealand. However, they are also the generation that returned to this country and were responsible for the creation of the national health service and the welfare state. My father and Mark McDonald’s grandfather would have disagreed on the issue of separation, but I think that their joint experience would have taught them to respect one another’s position. I think that both of them—I can speak for my father, if I cannot for Mark’s grandfather—would have been embarrassed by Kenny Gibson’s contribution. Humza Yousaf made an interesting speech—I always enjoy listening to Mr Yousaf. He made valid comments about free personal care and other good policies that have been established in Scotland but I gently point out to Mr Yousaf that those were achieved with the powers of a devolved Parliament. We do not have to wait for an independence situation to arise in order to be able to do good things. We will not see the Scottish Government’s white paper on independence for at least a year, but for those who want a sneak preview I have one suggestion: look at the opinion polling and trends as they unfold in the coming months. It is becoming increasingly clear that the SNP is trimming its policy to match the trends that the pollsters identify. Previously, the SNP was in favour of a referendum on whether the Queen should be the head of state in an independent Scotland but, as Her Majesty’s popularity is growing among Scots, it seems that we no longer need such a referendum. Previously, the SNP was in favour of the euro and was scathing about the pound but, as the situation in the euro zone has worsened, the SNP’s enthusiasm for the euro has also waned. Is the SNP simply following the trend, or does it want to try to hoodwink the country into thinking that nothing much will change and that a separate Scotland will carry on as usual with no discernible difference to people’s lives? Either way, the SNP does our country and our people a disservice.

No matter what age each of us is, I am sure that, if we individually thought back to our own childhood, we would agree that our lives are significantly different from those of our mothers and fathers. In the majority of cases, the energy that our parents expended going about their daily lives was significantly greater than that which we expend. Most men in my father’s age group worked in manual jobs and travelled by public transport, and they often had a walk at either end of their journey. Mothers carried home shopping every day because freezers were not commonly available. If they had employment outside the house, they often came home knowing that they still had several hours of cooking and cleaning ahead of them without many of the labour-saving devices that we take for granted. The children with whom I grew up walked to school every day, and we played with our friends outside the home every moment that we could in sun, rain or snow. We seemed to walk for miles. Indeed, studies show that, per person per year, people walked 63 miles less in 2003 than they did in 1975. Our working, home and school lives involved much more built-in activity. My point is that our lives and lifestyles have changed so significantly over such a relatively short period of time that we have hardly noticed, and our physical actively levels have dropped to a point that is seriously bad for us. The fact that the problem is relatively recent might account for so little having been written about it and there having been so little interest in the area until recently. We know that inactivity contributes to heart disease, strokes, diabetes and some cancers as well as to mental health problems. Therefore, it is important that we all consider our lifestyles and increase the amount of energy that we expend. For that reason, we have every sympathy with Alison Johnstone’s amendment, and we will vote for it at 5 o’clock. Some studies have suggested that the walkability of local neighbourhoods is directly related to physical activity levels and that the promotion of physical activity should be a key element of urban planning in the future. Being active often also encourages us to be more interactive with our families, neighbours and friends. It can be particularly important for older people, who can all too easily become isolated. I think that that is the point of the Greens’ amendment, and I look forward to hearing what Alison Johnstone has to say about it. We would all do well to remember what I have said when we talk about planning in the various committees and levels of the Parliament. The health benefits of activity are undisputed and the relationship between poor health and inactivity is clear, but we are debating the link between obesity and inactivity. We must bear in mind that there is conflicting evidence on that. There are studies, including one that was carried out in Plymouth over a period of 11 years, that seem to show that it was not so much a lack of exercise that caused children to gain weight, but that they became less active because they had become heavier. My colleague Dr Richard Simpson will address that issue more fully in his contribution. However, whether obesity and activity are linked as closely as the motion suggests, it is absolutely clear that being overweight or obese is very bad for a person and that being active is good. I have drawn members’ attention before to a statistic that worries me, and I make no apology for doing so again. It is a fact that, until the age of 12, boys and girls are as active as each another, but at the age of 12 or thereabouts, girls stop being active and almost immediately drop to a level that their male counterparts do not reach until they are 40. Therefore, we need to continue to encourage young women and girls to find new ways to increase their participation, whether in dance, Zumba, cheerleading or organised sport. I welcome the minister’s comments in that regard. Most of those young women will go on to become mothers, and statistics show that children are more likely to be overweight and inactive if their mothers are overweight and inactive. It is frightening that many parents do not recognise obesity in their own children. Understandably, they do not want to admit that there is an issue and a problem in that regard. We need to ensure that support and help are given to those families. We need to break that cycle and if we can use the Commonwealth games and indeed the Olympic games to spur people on to become involved in sport, in dance or in just walking more often we should do so. We must instil better eating habits in our young people. After all, our nation seems to have not only a unique and dangerous relationship with alcohol but a particular obsession with fast food. I am genuinely depressed at the number of young people to be found queueing outside fast-food outlets at lunch time, particularly as many of them are school or college students. We all enjoy the occasional curry or fish supper but, when it is a person’s daily lunch time meal, it is not good for their health and cannot be good for concentration levels after lunch and, in turn, overall attainment levels. As a result, we must actively combat the twin evils of bad diet and low activity levels.

I certainly think so. However, we must also ensure that the food that is offered in schools is appetising enough to encourage young people to stay and eat it, instead of leaving the school in the way that the member has indicated. Breakfast clubs, which were an early first step in my area, have had a significant effect on local school pupils’ eating habits. Instead of—as is often the case—skipping breakfast altogether, the children who attend the clubs are encouraged to have fruit and cereal in the morning. They are also encouraged to get into the habit of brushing their teeth regularly, with the knock-on effect of a reduction in the number of primary school students needing treatment for dental caries. Again, that must be a good thing. Although I find the Scottish Government’s motion optimistic, I have to say that the minister has backed it up with some very interesting information on current Scottish trends and I am pleased to hear that we appear to be bucking the trend in activity, if not in obesity. Of course, that is often due to the initiative of local groups and the encouragement that they get from local authorities and community planning partnerships, which understand the benefits of increased participation in local communities. At this point, I want to mention the North Glasgow Healthy Living Community in my constituency, which organises a range of activities over the year. The most notable is probably the annual 5K, in which I have taken part for the past four or five years—and, in case anyone doubts that, I have the medals to prove it. I am usually in the walking category but the event is also attended by those who are wheelchair bound, families with their buggies and so on. It is a fantastically social occasion and a good way of getting people out to enjoy the fresh air. The event is supplemented by 1Ks for local primary school pupils and attendance levels are remarkable. Literally thousands of people have taken part in those events over the years and I am always delighted to be a part of them. Both our amendment and that of the Conservatives seek to remind the minister that her Government has still a long way to go to deliver on its PE pledge. Not only has the commitment been watered down, but even the watered-down target is nowhere near being achieved.

Unfortunately, I am in my last minute. I am sure that the minister will take the chance to respond later. We accept that PE is not the only factor in creating a healthier and more active nation; nevertheless, it is a good place to start, although I stress that it must be PE of good quality. Indeed, my colleague Mark Griffin will say more about that later. As PE classes in schools are often where we find tomorrow’s sporting stars and those who will inspire future generations of young people and encourage them to become active, I sincerely hope that the Scottish Government will refocus its efforts and its activity to deliver that important pledge. That said, I welcome the minister’s announcements and look forward to hearing more about them and having a very constructive debate about their content in the weeks and months ahead. I move amendment S4M-02094.3, to insert at end: “but, in noting the importance of establishing good habits of physical activity from an early age, regrets that the SNP’s manifesto pledge of two hours per week of quality physical education has been delayed and watered down.”

I am struck by the point that the minister has just made, particularly in the context of Dennis Robertson’s point about the fact that we ourselves fail to have that healthy work-life balance. Perhaps a legacy of today’s debate might be that we start an informal group of MSPs who are interested in these issues and might want to walk together now and again, either at lunch time or in the evening. I am sure that, across the parties, there would be enough of us to make that something that we could do to set an example.

I, too, offer my congratulations to Christine Grahame on securing the debate. I was struck by Nigel Don’s comment about Montrose’s arm being sent to Aberdeen. Apparently, there was great disappointment because they had been promised a leg. It is just another example of the inadequacy of the powers that be at the time that things got a bit mixed up. As the motion and the debate have reflected, this year is the 400th anniversary of the birth of James Graham, the fifth earl and first Marquis of Montrose—a fact that will be celebrated next Monday at St Giles’s Cathedral. The motion tells us that Montrose was rated one of the finest battlefield commanders of his day. It is undoubtedly true that that is how he was rated at the time, but I would not disagree with my colleague Lewis Macdonald, who perhaps has a slightly different slant on his military capabilities. Montrose was celebrated across Europe largely on account of the history of his exploits that was written not long after his first activities by his chaplain, George Wishart, in Latin, which was the academic language of the day. That led to Montrose being offered an appointment as lieutenant general in the French army and the award of the rank of field marshal by the Emperor Ferdinand III. The motion also tells us that he was a poet, a philosopher and a political thinker, all of which points can be and have been argued both during his life and in the centuries that have followed. The motion does not tell us that he was a contradiction: a man who fought with the covenanters and then became a loyal supporter of the king; a man who was sometimes distrusted by the covenanters with whom he fought and who was later disavowed by the king whom he had served and sentenced to death by the Parliament in which he had served. It seems to me that his career very much reflects the turmoil of the time and the fast pace of the politics of the day. Perhaps he was fairly typical of his class and his time. His efforts as a covenanter, which culminated in the signing of the Cumbernauld bond because of his distrust of some of his fellow covenanters, also show that he had something in common with today’s politicians—but perhaps we should not look into that too seriously. The motion also asserts that we should be more aware of our distinct history because of the effect that it has on the present. If this period of history teaches us anything, it must be that the peoples of these islands are inextricably linked and that political agendas are framed not only by high principle and deep conviction but by other motivations, too. Having perhaps injected a slight element of dissent or controversy, something that I am sure James Graham would have been familiar with, I end by saying that he deserves to be remembered as an important Scot with allegiances that were perhaps framed more by religion than by geography, but also as a poet whose works should be more widely read. His best known poem, which has already been mentioned this evening, “My Dear and Only Love”, stands the test of time. I thoroughly recommend to colleagues the version by the Corries, which adds beautiful music to moving words. It is not the only legacy of James Graham’s short life, but if it was, it would be legacy enough.

Colleagues who took part in the stage 1 debate will recall that Scottish Labour raised its concerns about this particular area at that time. We are grateful to the cabinet secretary for listening to that debate, and for seeking ways in which the powers can be limited. However, we believe that—as Liam McArthur has outlined—the powers that Scottish ministers already have in connection with the National Library of Scotland are more than sufficient to allow them the type of control that is commensurate with their role in that regard. To have any more powers is really just to be excessive. We do not believe that there is a persuasive or compelling case for those powers to be described as they are, nor do we view them as having a place in the text of the bill. We allowed the cabinet secretary the opportunity to consider and to listen to the stage 2 debate, but we are not persuaded that she has come quite far enough as yet to allow us to be satisfied with the Government’s current position. Stewart Maxwell has indicated that he has a list of bills in which Liberal Democrat ministers have signed off similar powers of intervention. I remind Mr Maxwell that history has a habit of contradicting itself, and I remember him being vehemently opposed to ministerial powers of direction in a similar area not that long ago.

Scottish Labour, too, welcomes the bill and recognises that reform of the structures that support our National Library is necessary. The fact that the existing legislation has served for 87 years is testament to it, and I very much hope that the legislation that is before us today will prove to be equally durable. We have been happy to be involved in the discussions on the form that the reforms should take, and we are largely pleased with the outcome. I know that Parliament as a whole recognises the need for change. I congratulate the Education and Culture Committee and its convener and clerks on their work in scrutinising the bill, and the cabinet secretary on being amenable to discussion with the committee about the way forward. I congratulate the staff and the current board of the National Library—especially its outgoing chair—on their hard work and on the care that they take of one of our most precious assets on a daily basis. The Faculty of Advocates should also be praised for its co-operation, both at this time of change and in the past. In the stage 1 debate, many members expressed reservations about specific elements of the bill, and many of those have been addressed. The size of the board exercised members, and I am pleased that the cabinet secretary has taken steps to allay those concerns and to ensure that the board is small enough to avoid being cumbersome and slow to act, but big enough to reflect the wide range of interests and expertise that we need if the National Library is to continue to be well managed. I am pleased that some of the existing members will remain on the board to aid the process of transition. That is a sensible move, which will allow the transition period to be as smooth as possible. At stage 2, the minister sought to clarify the issue of collaboration. It is right that the bill, as it is now amended, reflects the National Library’s role as an active collaborator rather than just as a facilitator of collaboration by others. The National Library is also often an exemplar of good practice and works with the other national collections, as well as with libraries and librarians, but a ministerial power is not necessary to make that happen—that is the core of the National Library’s work. I think that it is going a step too far to include such a provision. As I mentioned, the act that underpins the structure of the NLS is 87 years old. Although it has served us well in the past, the future is likely to see changes in the ways in which information and data are exchanged and stored. As we probably cannot yet envisage the nature of those changes or the rate at which they will happen, it is good that consideration has been given to how the bill can be future proofed to accommodate such changes, as well as advances that we can anticipate, such as the imminent regulations for legal deposit libraries. At stage 1, Scottish Labour made it clear that we would like the cabinet secretary to reconsider the ministerial power of direction. We are pleased that she has done so to some extent, but we had hoped that, following the completion of stage 2, she might have gone a little further and lodged a stage 3 amendment that would have prevented the chamber from dividing on the matter. Unfortunately, that did not happen and we felt compelled to back Liam McArthur’s stage 3 amendments. I am genuinely sorry that the Scottish Government could not see its way clear to making such a concession and that we had to divide on an issue on which the cabinet secretary knew well the views of many members and stakeholders. As a matter of record, I say to Stewart Maxwell that the previous Administration did not seek any kind of intervention into artistic matters. In any case, we would have removed the relevant provision entirely, because we took the consultation that we did on our proposed culture legislation very seriously and we would not have pursued that element. However, we are where we are. I have rehearsed on previous occasions my real interest in the work of the National Library of Scotland and the impact that I know that it has on Scotland’s culture. I look forward greatly to watching it grow under its new governance arrangements, and to continuing to be surprised, educated and enthralled by its collections and its exhibitions for years to come. I wish it well in its new format.

Does the cabinet secretary believe that the sustainability of the future investment of structural funds is important and that the use of the structural funds should demonstrate clear added value to the possible use of other funding in the kind of work that the cabinet secretary has outlined? Does there need to be a legacy effect from the use of those funds? What might such effects be?

I am delighted to have the opportunity to debate our national performing companies, and I am sure that the debate will be consensual. Scottish Labour decided to amend the Government’s motion only so that we as a Parliament could recognise the important contribution that is made to our national companies by local authorities and businesses and by the many individuals who contribute to their financial and artistic success. I thank the Government for indicating that it will agree the amendment at decision time. The five companies that we now know as the national performing companies each have a long and proud history, but they have not been without their problems over the years. In the early years of the Parliament a number of those companies experienced a series of financial and artistic problems, which, by 2006, were largely behind them. With the creation of the National Theatre of Scotland, the time was right to create a new funding and governance regime that gave performing companies equal status with the national collections and the recognition that they deserved. Artistic excellence and aspiration was the mark of the new relationship, as was raising the bar for the amount and quality of the outreach work that the companies undertook. My colleague Claudia Beamish will say more about the value of that work, but anyone who has watched or participated in the work that those companies do in our schools cannot fail to be impressed by the standards that are achieved and delighted by the end result. I have explained the rationale behind our amendment, but I ask the cabinet secretary to consider two points. I am sure that she will take my suggestions in the spirit of consensus in which they are made. First, the Government should recognise the significant contribution that some local authorities make in supporting the national performing companies, and the arts more generally. The cabinet secretary will be aware that when budgets are tight there is often a concern that the softest target for cuts will be the arts, and sport suffers in that way too. I realise that we have moved on from the concept of ring fencing, and I am not suggesting that it should be reintroduced, but I wonder whether the cabinet secretary would consider raising with her cabinet colleagues the idea of incentivising or rewarding those local authorities that champion the arts. We know that the arts contribute to educational achievement, assist regeneration, boost tourism and generally add to the dynamism and character of an area. It is vital that the progress that Scotland has made in that area in recent years is not lost. Incentivisation would send a gentle signal to those local authorities for which the arts are not such a priority or those that are tempted to look for savings in the arts to take a more balanced approach. The second of my suggestions concerns the national youth performing arts companies of Scotland. When I announced the new designation of national performing companies and their new funding arrangements back in 2006, I made it clear that, although the list contained the five companies that exist today, it would be open to other companies to apply for that status and perhaps to receive it. Obviously, any aspiring company would have to meet the qualifying criteria and demonstrate that they perform at a significantly high level of artistic endeavour. I also made it clear that the designation was open to all, including both adult and youth organisations. I suggest to the cabinet secretary that now might be the time seriously to consider awarding that status to our youth organisations. For the past three decades, the National Youth Choir of Scotland, the National Youth Orchestras of Scotland, the Scottish Youth Theatre and YDance have demonstrated a history of and a belief in excellence, have engaged in outreach work and have been strong ambassadors for our country wherever they have travelled. Like their adult contemporaries, the national youth performing arts companies of Scotland work in every local authority area in Scotland, and each year they involve some 162,000 young people in their activities but, as the document that the companies presented to the cabinet secretary’s predecessor in 2009 stated, “the statistics are colourless as the real impact of what we do is found in compelling performances on stages and concert platforms throughout Scotland and internationally; in improvisations and imaginative sessions in community halls, streets, stadia, and leisure centres; in myriad inspiring tuition sessions in schools and local venues in every part of Scotland”. I know that the cabinet secretary is reviewing the work of the youth companies, but I sincerely hope that she will give my suggestion serious consideration. It would be a bold move, but one that would be widely welcomed and which would give additional impetus to our youth companies and to all the young people with whom they work. One of the hardest tasks of Government is to monitor the performance of the companies from the point of view of artistic quality, financial responsibility and outreach without interfering in their artistic freedom. Another important and complex area is the number of people who attend performances, which the cabinet secretary touched on. I fully accept that audience numbers are not the only measure of success or of value for money and that fluctuations occur for many reasons. The staging of an unpopular but important play, a focus on smaller venues, a change in artistic leadership or even the weather can cause audience numbers to drop. The figures that were released recently by the Scottish Government show a 20 per cent increase in audience numbers over the five companies in the past year, but—and it is a significant “but”—that seems to have been accounted for solely by the National Theatre of Scotland, which increased the number of its performances in 2010-11 and, consequently, its audience. I do not want to single out any one company because, as I said, variations can be wildly misleading, but the performance of each of the companies is an issue that their boards will need to take seriously.

I entirely accept the point that the cabinet secretary makes, but I think that it suggests that the publications that give us those facts and figures need to reflect to a greater extent the rationale behind the raw numbers, because statistics—damned statistics—can be very misleading indeed. It would be helpful if that could be considered. I want to recognise the work of Stéphane Denève and Ashley Page. As the cabinet secretary said, Ashley Page is departing as the artistic director of Scottish Ballet after 10 years in that role. Anyone who attended a performance of “A Streetcar Named Desire” will know that Ashley leaves Scottish Ballet having developed it into a strong player in the world of dance. Along with the board and the management team, he has transformed the company, and I know that he has many exciting projects to look forward to. Stéphane Denève arrived in Scotland just as the Royal Scottish National Orchestra was about to become part of the family of performing companies. He has had a huge impact on the orchestra and I am sure that, like Ashley Page, Stéphane will not be a stranger to us. We owe them both a great deal and, of course, wish their successors well. We are right to be proud of our five national performing companies, but I believe that the time has come to increase their number to six, to welcome the national youth performing companies of Scotland as the latest member of the national performing companies of Scotland and, in so doing, to recognise the achievements of our young people, all those who work with them and the great potential that they undoubtedly have. I move amendment S4M-02738.1, to insert at end: “, and congratulates those local authorities, companies and individuals that also support the work of the National Performing Companies.”

I, too, thank colleagues around the chamber for their interesting and thoughtful contributions to what has been a very good and consensual debate. That is a good thing, particularly as we are on the eve of being not quite so consensual, at least for 48 hours. I want to reflect on some of the comments that colleagues have made. I always enjoy Clare Adamson’s speeches; I particularly enjoy her quotes, as they are always highly pertinent. The quote that she used today was particularly apt. She did me the service of reminding me of an area that has had little mention—the technical skills that go towards making our national companies such a success. “A Streetcar Named Desire” is a particularly good example of those skills—I do not think that I have ever seen beer crates used in quite such a creative way as they were in that performance. Clare Adamson was also right to talk about the innovation that we see in productions such as the National Theatre’s “The Bacchae”, which was amazing in many ways. The most recent of the National Theatre’s offerings that I have seen was a performance of “An Appointment with the Wicker Man”. I went to see it with my American intern, who, at the time, was new. I was not 100 per cent sure what he would think of it or whether he would catch the in-jokes and the almost smutty humour, but he was so enthralled by the entire thing that he decided to do the project that he was to complete for me on the National Theatre of Scotland. I am very pleased that Brian O’Bannon has completed his report, which he has now given to me. In it, he makes the interesting point—I was reminded of it by Jean Urquhart—that Scotland waited more than 600 years for a national theatre. In my view and in Brian’s, it has been well worth waiting for. Malcolm Chisholm spoke about the collaboration between elements of the national collections and the national companies on the “Desire” project. Such collaboration is extremely important, and I would like to see it reflected in the reports that we get about the activities of our national companies and our national collections. Malcolm Chisholm and Joan McAlpine drew our attention to the health benefits that can derive from the field of culture. I have seen many projects through which the arts and the creativity of our companies have been used to good effect to assist people who struggle with mental health issues. I was delighted to hear Joan McAlpine mention the work that the RSNO does with Rachel House, which seems to me to be a fantastic way of using the skills and the dedication of our artists. Malcolm Chisholm’s comments on the five-minute theatre project reminded me of the 15-minute operas that I watched in Òran Mór a number of years ago, which Claudia Beamish mentioned. Not all of them were wonderful operas, but they were all very interesting and very different. It was a bit of a challenge that they were all presented in one afternoon, but it gave people a great opportunity to see some highly innovative things happening on a very small and localised scale. There was something extremely intimate about that experience that worked particularly well. Malcolm Chisholm mentioned that opera and politics often go together. Although Sandra White’s speech did not open with any opera, there was a wee bit of theatre and improvisation on the part of Ms Goldie, which was quite enjoyable, even if the cause of it was accidental. Sandra White was correct to identify that many of the national companies are located in Glasgow. One or two of them used to be located in my constituency, before the boundary changes were made. I am sad to have lost them, but I know that Sandra White will take good care of them. I am sure that she would agree that although Glasgow is fortunate to have those companies located there, it is a shame that the national collections do not better reflect the significance of the work that is held there. There might be opportunities for Glasgow’s treasures to become part of that family of collections, but that is perhaps a debate for another day. In an important speech, Claudia Beamish made very important points about the current performances about the Arab spring, which demonstrate the importance of portraying the human side of conflicts, to which I think that we are often desensitised by watching them on the television in our living rooms. That is a safe environment for us and, as we watch those tragic events unfold across the world, we become a little bit desensitised to them. Seeing them in the stark reality of a stage performance can help us to reconnect with what is actually going on, why it matters and why we should care about it. I am indebted to Annabelle Ewing for giving me a slight prod in the direction of local performances. It is incumbent on me to mention that, in my schedule this week, I managed to fit in time to see a performance of “Oliver!”, which was undertaken by the pupils of St Monica’s primary school in my constituency. I think that it is the first time that the school has ever tried to do something like that, but those primary school children were word perfect in song and dialogue and were perfect in movement. It was a fantastic experience and one that it was well worth taking a few hours out of campaigning to go to. Jenny Marra mentioned her interest in the El Sistema project. I am sure that we all applaud and are all delighted with that project, which was originally brought here by Richard Holloway. Jenny Marra has a bit of competition in the struggle for El Sistema, as I have been trying to get it into Possilpark in my constituency for a wee while, and I think that the Deputy First Minister also has an interest in having it in her constituency. We might have a wee bit of a wrangle about that one. However, the important thing to remember is that the project makes a difference and has been seen to work. We might need to think about our strategy for rolling out that model or a similar one across Scotland. Annabelle Ewing—sorry, Annabel Goldie; I have done it now. It is obviously going to be one of those days. Annabel Goldie mentioned the importance of working across the various areas that we have in our remit and thinking about tourism. I agree entirely. Our cultural activity is very much a driver of our tourism sector. In a previous debate, I asked the cabinet secretary whether she would give us a little bit more information about the kind of activity that our national companies would be undertaking around the Commonwealth games. I would be interested in any update on that that there might be. I reiterate my genuine suggestion to the cabinet secretary concerning the national youth performing arts companies, which have a huge role to play. They would be appreciative of being given the responsibility that comes with being part of our national performing companies. I hope very much that that will merit discussion in the time ahead.

Today is not the first time this year that Scottish Labour has felt compelled to bring the issue of transport to the Parliament. We make no apology for doing so; indeed, we are proud to be able to stand up for our constituents who depend on public transport to go about their daily lives. We do so today to highlight another area where the SNP Government is simply out of touch with the lives of ordinary Scots. We are not alone in wishing to express our concerns to the minister. On 13 March, the leaders of all the political groups in the City of Edinburgh Council, including the SNP group leader, wrote to the minister about the changes to the bus service operators grant and the effect that they knew that those changes would have on the people of Edinburgh. The leader of Glasgow City Council, Gordon Matheson, did likewise, and the leader of the SNP group on Glasgow City Council has stated publicly that she wishes that she had thought to write, too. All the parties in Edinburgh think that the minister is wrong, the leaders of the Labour and SNP groups in Glasgow think that the minister is wrong, the bus operators think that the minister has got it wrong, and the workers in the Lothians know for a fact that he is wrong, but the minister persists in his wrong-headedness.

No, because my time has been cut. The minister stated in answer to a parliamentary question that bus operators “have been told and have accepted that we must move to provide further support for operators in rural areas, where there are pressures from fuel duty costs”.—[Official Report, 23 February 2012; c 6553.] However, we have heard from Dr Murray and others that rural operators have not been protected. Does the minister really not understand that fuel duty is charged at a flat rate, that city buses use more fuel per kilometre because they have to travel at lower-than-average speeds on lower-mileage routes and that they have to use high-capacity vehicles and operate in heavier urban traffic? All that begs the question: who are the operators that the minister seeks to protect? The irony is that—I never thought that members would hear me say this—the UK Government, which is also making changes to the BSOG, seems to be handling the issue slightly more sensibly and sensitively. It is devolving payment of the BSOG to local authorities and transport authorities to ensure that the changes to the grant take account of local circumstances. Those bodies are consulting passengers and bus operators before they make any changes to ensure that there is no disproportionate impact on particular services. In contrast, the SNP Government made a three-year agreement on the BSOG with the Confederation of Passenger Transport but, after a matter of months and without discussion, it broke the agreement. The Government failed to consult bus operators or passengers before deciding to cut funding for urban bus services and made no effort to assess the impact of the changes on services. At the end of the day, what will be the effect of the minister’s decisions? We have already seen them: cuts to routes; fare-price hikes; possible job losses; and a reduction in investment in newer buses and things such as low-floor buses, which are important to disabled people and people with children in buggies. The minister’s latest decision on the BSOG is only the tip of the iceberg. We need a complete overhaul of the system. There is no democratic accountability in the planning and delivery of bus services. The public do not understand why services are not organised to take account of local communities, or why it is so hard for local politicians to influence decisions. Who can blame the public for that? In Milton and Springburn in my constituency, 60 per cent of households do not have a car and 20 per cent of people are pensioners. The areas have the highest jobseekers allowance claimant count in the country. However, earlier this year, the number 31 bus service was withdrawn. The service allowed my constituents to take one bus to access the nearest large supermarket, from an area where there are few local shops. The service also allowed people to access the city centre for work and, most important, their local hospital and the nearest accident and emergency department. Over the years, there have been cuts and reductions in services in the area. I have campaigned long and hard, in and out of government, on many of the issues. At public meetings and in other ways, I have collected the names of thousands of constituents who have been affected, although ultimately often to no avail. My constituents need a bus service that is democratically controlled by people who understand their lives and who care about the decisions that they make. We need to find a better way to organise our bus services, and Scottish Labour is committed to doing that. This time, I hope that SNP members and others will support us.

I am aware of the difficulties that have been experienced for many years with regard to securing an acceptable future for the ship the City of Adelaide, which is also known as the Carrick. Has the minister had assurances from the Australian national maritime museum about the ability of the heritage group, Clipper Ship “City of Adelaide”, to maintain the ship in a manner befitting its importance and its listing if it is allowed to go to Australia?

I, too, congratulate Jim Eadie on securing this evening’s debate, which is on an issue of great importance. I apologise to him if he feels that I am slightly plagiarising his speech. That is not my intention. The fact that more than one of us focuses on an issue perhaps shows the importance that we ascribe to it, and also the solidarity of feeling on the matter across the Parliament. The catalogue of atrocities that is slowly emerging from Syria—often as a result of the extreme bravery of individual citizens and journalists—makes horrific reading, but coming as it does from a country and a regime that were already the subject of much international concern, we should not be surprised that the response to civil unrest has been extreme and brutal. Amnesty International has recorded the names of 8,000 people who it thinks have been killed in protest or unrest in the past year. It has documentary evidence of torture and degradation and the names of more than 18,000 people who have been imprisoned. Although the majority of the violence can be laid at the door of the state security forces or others acting for them, there are some reports of armed gangs imprisoning and attacking Government supporters. At the same time, Oxfam estimates that between 100,000 and 200,000 people have fled their homes, taking little with them. Many of those who remain endure a shortage of food and water, and the injured have little or no access to medicines or medical care. Driving home last night from a constituency event, I heard the welcome news that Syria had accepted Kofi Annan’s six-point peace plan. The UN and Arab League envoy was quoted as saying that this was an important first step but that the implementation of the plan is key. Mr Annan is, of course, correct, and that caution is understandable given what Hilary Clinton has described as President Assad’s “history of over-promising and under-delivering”. The six-point plan does not call for Mr Assad to give up power, nor does it impose any deadline for the removal of troops or heavy weapons. Nonetheless, it is important because it is the first UN Security Council-backed strategy for ending the conflict that has the backing of Russia and China. However, we also need Russia and other states to end the supply of weapons to Syria, both to end the conflict in Syria and to prevent the further destabilisation of the region. Amnesty International is right to call on the UN to ensure that any UN mission that is deployed in the country must contain human rights monitors who can consider the situation on the ground and pass evidence to the independent international commission of inquiry on Syria. Earlier, I mentioned the faint glimmer of hope I felt when I heard on the radio news last night about the adoption of the six-point plan. However, less than 12 hours later, while I was travelling to the Parliament, the BBC quoted Navi Pillay of the UN, whom Jim Eadie mentioned, as saying that the Syrian authorities are now systematically detaining and torturing children—not one or two, which would be bad enough, but hundreds. No matter how effective diplomatic efforts are, they will come too late for those children. We must never allow ourselves to be numbed into silence by the scale and horror of the situation. We must speak out and put on record our extreme concern in this Parliament for the men, women and children of Syria, and send our respect and thanks to those aid organisations and human rights bodies that stand ready to help the people of Syria and bear witness to their suffering.

The minister is well aware of the good work that is carried out by the staff and volunteers of the Lambhill stables, in my constituency. By September 2011, they had reduced CO2 emissions by just over 165 tonnes with help from the climate challenge fund. The project submitted a carefully worked-out bid for further help from the climate challenge fund, which would have reduced emissions by a further 600 tonnes, but that bid was rejected by the SNP Government. Can the minister advise what other sources of funding might be made available to that important community initiative?

We often begin speeches in the Parliament by saying that it is a pleasure to take part in a debate. I am afraid that this is one of those rare occasions when it really is not a pleasure to take part in a debate. Having said that, I am proud to have the opportunity to stand up for my constituents and their colleagues across the country who are threatened with redundancy. It is an honour to represent people who, in spite of the adversity that they have encountered in their lives, have the satisfaction of knowing that they are doing a meaningful job and contributing to their society and communities. Therefore, I sincerely thank the Scottish Government for bringing the debate to the chamber. Why would anyone want to take jobs away from disabled people? When 20 people are chasing every job vacancy in my constituency, why does the coalition Government think it acceptable to put another 46 people on the dole? What makes the coalition Government think that those 46 people will have a better chance of getting alternative employment than their peers in a country in which some 75 per cent of able-bodied people have jobs but in which, as Gordon MacDonald said, only 45 per cent of disabled people are in work? We know that disabled people want to have a choice about where they work and that, for many, that will be in mainstream or open employment. However, for a substantial number of those who work at Remploy that choice simply does not exist. Some have tried to fit into other workplaces and have encountered problems; others simply could not get work that would suit them or their disability. If the Minister for Disabled People, Maria Miller, thinks that it will be easy for those workers to find alternative employment, why does she not allow them to remain with Remploy until they do? Ten of those who work at Remploy in Springburn are deaf, but they were not even given the courtesy of a signer when the news was broken to the workforce that their factory was to close—so much for the respect agenda. There was, however, a human resources consultant in attendance, whom we understand is being paid £300 an hour to assist the management through the closure programme. We know that the Remploy model is a particular one with a particular history, but I do not recognise the picture that the Conservative amendment paints in talking about a segregated workforce. Nor do I see any sense in the suggestion by the minister at Westminster that by putting 1,500 people on the dole she will be helping others into work. That is perverse logic in my view. The irony is that the Remploy factory in my constituency is in the same industrial estate as Royal Strathclyde Blindcraft Industries, which colleagues have mentioned. That is a supported workplace that is run like a social enterprise and it has a strong future ahead of it. Its employees are supported and encouraged to learn.

I agree very much with Mark McDonald. I will come to that a little later in my speech. In RSBI, in my constituency, those who have returned from Afghanistan and Iraq with disabling illness or injury are given support and training to re-equip them for the world of work. However, today’s success at RSBI required financial investment. It required support and imagination from the management and—importantly—a commitment to go out and look for work. Gordon MacDonald is correct in saying that that is something that Remploy signally fails to do. I know, from press reports, that the First Minister recently visited RSBI and was very impressed by it—who would not be? That is the kind of model that we should be looking at if we are serious about the future of Remploy. The Scottish Government has indicated that the PACE process could be rolled out to assist Remploy workers. That is very welcome, but we hope that the Scottish Government can go further. The Labour amendment is a sincere suggestion to the Scottish Government about an alternative model that we think can work—a model that gives the community the chance to take control of the situation and which provides sustainable employment for the workforce. We also hope that the Scottish Government will consider carefully how it can further encourage Government agencies and non-departmental public bodies actively to seek opportunities to increase the use of article 19 in their procurement practices. We very much hope that the Scottish Government can support those proposals, and we would be happy to work with the Government, the trade unions and the workers at Remploy to try to secure the future of those workers. Senior directors of Remploy’s enterprise businesses met the lead officers of the GMB and Unite on Monday and indicated that the first redundancy could take place as early as 4 July, in spite of an accord that promises that voluntary redundancies should be sought before compulsory ones are made. Also, no consideration has been given to how the workers’ pension rights will be protected—at least, that has not been explained to the workers. As on so many other issues, no information has been provided on that. Mark McDonald is right: the timeframe that has been identified is wrong and gives no opportunity for a meaningful dialogue with Remploy. That is one reason why we look to the Scottish Government for assistance. What is happening is a redundancy process, not a genuine consultation. I will not argue with Clare Adamson about the history of support for Remploy, but I say to her that we sincerely hope that, at 5 o’clock, our parties can join together with anyone else who wishes to come with us to show our support for the Remploy workers. It ill behoves the Parliament not to be united when we are all here to try to support those workers. I genuinely hope that the Government party will join us in considering a modest suggestion of a way forward for the Remploy workers. If we really care about what is in the workers’ best interests, the SNP will vote for Labour’s amendment.

Will the minister give way?

I am pleased to speak in the debate, particularly as I was a member of the European and External Relations Committee for much of the previous session of Parliament. I congratulate the current committee on securing the debate. It might have been helpful if there had been more than a week between the publication of its report and the debate but, nevertheless, the debate is an important one, and it is good that the committee has brought the Parliament’s EU priorities to our attention at this stage in the session. As the convener identified, our engagement with Europe is important to our work in the Parliament and to the policies that we pursue on behalf of the people of Scotland. We should remind ourselves that the importance of our engagement with Europe is reflected in the fact that the committee is a mandatory committee of the Parliament and not one whose services we can dispense with. The decisions that are made by the institutions of the EU have implications in so many areas of our work that it is right that all the committees of the Parliament should be aware of the work programme and priorities that are set in Europe, and that each committee should consider seriously whether there are particular issues that it wishes to highlight to the European and External Relations Committee and to the Parliament, and to decide on the areas that it wants to focus on. The European and External Relations Committee does us all a service by organising such an exercise and by bringing its report to Parliament. Its report builds on the work and ideas of its predecessor committee. It is also important that the European and External Relations Committee leads on the overarching issues, and the committee is right to focus its attention on the reform of structural funds, horizon 2020 and, of course, the fast-moving situation in the euro zone. I very much welcome the news that the convener outlined of the conference on the 2020 programme. That is an area of work that I think has great potential for the Parliament, and it will be interesting to hear the outcomes of that event and to participate in it, as I hope to do. The committee must also lead on the scrutiny of the Scottish Government’s engagement with the EU, and I hope that the committee might at some point consider in detail the work of the Scottish Government in Europe. It is clear from the Government’s action plan on European engagement that ministers are engaging frequently with the formal and informal structures in Europe, as well as with individual member states. It would be interesting for Parliament to hear the considered opinion of the committee on the value of that work. I know that there is a good relationship between ministers—particularly Ms Hyslop—and the committee but, when I visited Brussels as a member of the Local Government and Communities Committee in the previous session, I was very surprised to find that particular EU officials were critical of the level of engagement by Scottish ministers. That genuinely took us by surprise.

John Swinney took the trouble to dispute with me that fact, which appears in the paper that the Local Government and Communities Committee submitted to SPICe. I wanted to mention it in the context of another piece of work that I thought might be helpful, rather than as a criticism of the Government, which is why I did not go into it in huge detail. In a debate such as this, it is not possible to consider in great detail the priorities that individual committees have set, but a number of them are of particular interest. I note that the Health and Sport Committee, in identifying the issues that it was concerned about, asked for support from the Brussels officer and from SPICe. I sincerely hope that that committee will, in spite of the changes to the Parliament’s working arrangements, still be able to get the support that it needs. The work of the Brussels office has over the years been invaluable in supporting members of the European and External Relations Committee and its predecessor committees, as well as colleagues from other committees, and I hope that the new structure will not disadvantage them in any way. The work of the Local Government and Regeneration Committee in continuing to monitor the issue of child poverty, following on from the work that was done in session 3 by its predecessor committee, is important in and of itself.

However, that also reads across to the work of the Commission, which has identified that “children remain on average more at risk of poverty and social exclusion than the overall population”. With enlargement of the EU—

The debate has been an interesting one that has underlined the importance that the Parliament attaches to the European Union and our work therein. It has been interesting to hear the comments from the EU reporters from other committees. The European and External Relations Committee has sometimes been seen as a bit of a Cinderella committee in the Parliament, although I do not subscribe to that view. I will perhaps return to that point, but the debate shows exactly why that is not correct and why the committee must never be considered in that way. Jamie McGrigor was absolutely correct to identify the role of Irene Oldfather in bringing to the fore the European issues with which the Parliament can and should engage, and the scrutiny that it must undertake. I am sure that Irene would be delighted to hear Jamie’s praise for her work over the years. Of course, she would be the first to say that she had ample support from the committee members who served with her during that period. Helen Eadie rightly identified public procurement as being an issue in the EU and in Scotland. Almost by coincidence, the interest that the EU is taking in the issue comes at a good time for us because the Scottish Government is also considering it. I was pleased to read in Catherine Stihler’s contribution to the report that the rules will be simplified and that environmental costs and consequences for local communities will be taken into account more clearly in the future, which will—I hope—provide a more level playing field for all the communities of the EU. We have all been clear that the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee has a particular role to play. That has always been the case; it and its predecessors have always had a significant interest in matters European. A number of our fishing and farming communities have looked to it to take the lead, which is absolutely right, as was ably set out by Jim Hume. David Stewart talked about the importance of structural funds and ably outlined the importance and impact that they have had in the Highlands and Islands over many years, and the improvements that have occurred as a result. Perhaps we can consider in more detail the interesting point that he posed to the cabinet secretary in connection with horizon 2020. I would be interested in hearing the cabinet secretary’s thoughts on that strand. Aileen McLeod listed the large range of issues that the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee is committed to investigating. That list highlighted how important our scrutiny of the EU is. I mentioned at the beginning of the debate that there are those—as I say, I am not one of them—who have sometimes not taken seriously the work of the European and External Relations Committee. I will demonstrate that with an anecdote. I joined the committee at the last meeting of the session in June 2008 but was, because of ill health, unable to attend my second meeting until November 2008. By that point, I was the second longest-serving member on the committee because of turnover of members. Today’s debate, however, has demonstrated the importance of the committee’s work. The committee has done an excellent job in bringing forward the Commission’s work programme. I wish it well in its work and I wish it a successful horizon 2020 conference when it comes.

I share the enthusiasm of the First Minister and Sandra White for the Commonwealth games and for what they can bring to Glasgow and Scotland. Is the First Minister satisfied that the games will deliver a tangible legacy for all areas of Glasgow?

This has been a consensual debate, which has reflected the consensual nature of the committee’s discussions. I welcome Alex Johnstone to the world of culture and hope that he will be a regular visitor from now on. I have a feeling of déjà vu, because I suggested reform measures for the National Library in the draft culture (Scotland) bill, which was consulted on when Labour was in government. I do not know why the Scottish National Party decided to remove those provisions from what became the Creative Scotland Bill, but that is water under the bridge. In today’s debate we must focus on the bill that is in front of us. Many members have put on record their high regard for the National Library of Scotland and libraries in general, and I share that view. Since 1925, as we heard, the National Library has been Scotland’s only legal deposit library, but it is so much more than that. Indeed, the National Library is an important guardian of our history and culture and part of our family of national collections. I remember the great excitement when the library was able, with help from the Heritage Lottery Fund and the generosity of the Murray family, to purchase the Murray archive, which contains the private papers, manuscripts and records of luminaries of literature such as Jane Austen and Sir Walter Scott and important figures such as David Livingstone. The library was kind enough to give the President of Malawi a gift of a copy of a drawing that was sketched by David Livingstone in the margin of the diaries that he wrote during his travels in Malawi. I know that the president treasured it. As an admirer of the poetry of Byron, I remember my reaction to being given a draft printed copy of the poem “Childe Harold”, with handwritten corrections by the poet, to hold and to look at. I am sure that the minister will agree that the post that she occupies is one that comes with challenges but also with great opportunities. I was delighted to hear the minister’s announcement about the film archive moving to Glasgow. The city will make a good home for the archive and the Kelvin hall is a splendid place for it to be located, as it is close to the Kelvingrove museum. I look forward to seeing the archive there. Scottish Labour agrees with the Government that the time has come to modernise the governance arrangements for the National Library of Scotland. However, as Neil Findlay has pointed out, we still have questions that we hope that the minister will address. I was glad that the minister took on board the issue of the size of the board. We look forward to hearing a little more about how she sees that fleshing out and developing, although I think that it is heading in the right direction. However, I have to say that Clare Adamson tempted me to suggest a further restriction to the size of the board when she spoke about the First Minister potentially losing his job. In that vein, I very much hope that Marco Biagi has not taken the minister’s decision about the board of the National Library too personally—I am sure that the decision was not intended in that way. We are concerned about ministerial powers of direction and the shape and form that those powers might take. I caution against anything that would call into question the curatorial independence of the library or its ability to decide on its own research or exhibitions or on its acquisitions policy. I mentioned earlier the draft culture (Scotland) bill. Some members may recall that, in the consultation on that bill, I floated the idea of there being ministerial powers of direction in respect of what is now Creative Scotland—I am sure that Mr Maxwell remembers those debates well. Having considered the responses to that consultation, I decided that we would not pursue that power in relation to Creative Scotland as its use would have been so limited as to render it unnecessary. I believe that that is even truer of the bill we are discussing today. Indeed, the further restriction of the opportunities that ministerial direction would give, which the minister outlined today, makes the case against ministerial direction even stronger. However, I look forward to hearing more about that issue as we go forward. Ministers will have the power to make appointments to the board, and the chief executive officer is an accountable officer to the Scottish Executive, so a strong framework will already be in place. I think that anything additional to that would be questionable in terms of proportionality and might compromise the National Library’s ability to raise money from donations. We understand that the library might want to capitalise on its ability to raise money from merchandising, particularly around a popular exhibition. However, as Neil Findlay has indicated, we are concerned about those aspects of the bill that suggest that the library might charge for certain services or for the provision of goods. Similarly, what mechanism does the minister see the National Library adopting to allow it to borrow money and, more importantly, to pay it back, and to what purpose would it do so? Like colleagues, I am intrigued by the idea that the library might want to set up new companies. Perhaps the minister might clarify how they would operate and to what purpose they would be put. I was interested in Mark Griffin’s remarks concerning “Oor Wullie”, and I bow to Mr Johnstone’s family expertise in that area. However, I simply say to Mr Griffin that there are other families that have the tradition that his seems to have. I also point out that you know that you have received one too many “Oor Wullie” books when you notice that the stories are being recycled—an experience that my brother and I have discussed on more than one occasion. We all want the National Library to be able to grow and flourish and to be able to move with emerging technologies. So far, it has been remarkably good at doing so, and nothing that we put in place now should stifle that ability. Scottish Labour is happy to support the principles of the bill and looks forward to hearing more from the minister about some of the specific points that we have raised in the debate. We also look forward to the discussions that we will have as the bill progresses.

I accept that the minister does not intend to interfere with curatorial independence. However, I suggest that she reflect on the fact that the ministerial power now seems to be drawn so narrowly that it does nothing to allow any problems to be dealt with for which there is not already scope in the framework of governance. Perhaps the power is just not needed.

I congratulate Sandra White on securing this debate. I apologise in advance to you, Presiding Officer, and to Sandra White because I will have to leave immediately after my speech as I have a constituency engagement. I sincerely regret not being able to stay to hear colleagues’ contributions and to celebrate this important day with them later. The theme for the debate and for Commonwealth day is connecting cultures—the thought of which has prompted a number of images to flash through my mind. The first is the image of the Malawian singers and dancers who flooded through Parliament’s doors into the garden lobby to entertain us in their inimitable and joyfully exuberant way. We could not stop their performance that night, but I do not think that anybody wanted to, because we were all enjoying ourselves far too much. I have never witnessed members of this Parliament dancing in the garden lobby either before or since that event. The joy in the music of others allowed us to share that unique experience. I also recall the ancestor ceremonies in which I participated in Australia and which take place before any major public event. They remind Australians that they hold the land and country in trust for those who come after them, and that those who came before also matter and should be remembered. I recall, too, hearing Jack Mapanje, the Malawian poet, reading some of his poetry at the St Magnus festival in Orkney. The attentive audience learned more about Malawi in an hour with him than they would have learned by reading numerous briefings and guide books about the country. The power of the words and the voice of one man were testament to the condition of his country. Culture also allows us to hold a mirror to our own experience and to see ourselves in context. I recently attended an excellent event in a primary school in my constituency. The children were celebrating, as many have done, the award of an eco-flag. They had done a tremendous amount of work and had even created working musical instruments from cornflakes packets and washing-up liquid bottles, which they used to accompany the school choir. That visit reminded me of another school—a very different school—in Malawi, where the children played musical instruments that were made of oil cans and plastic bags. They were not deliberately recycling; they were using what they had in order to express the music that they love and enjoy. Jack Mapanje is a celebrated poet who has won countless awards and much recognition, but his poetry collection “Of Chameleons and Gods” led to his arrest in 1987, because his words were seen as being critical of the Banda regime. The power of culture in its broadest sense is that it challenges our experience, brings joy to our lives, understands our sadness, moves our economy, challenges power and gives a voice to the oppressed. We must value and connect with culture and recognise it as the important tool that it really is in so many aspects of our lives. The connections that we share within the Commonwealth emphasise what we have in common and what binds us. As Sandra White correctly said, we will be able to celebrate and demonstrate that personally in the Commonwealth games in Glasgow in 2014. I hope, as we celebrate Commonwealth day, that Scotland will continue to play its part in the Commonwealth for many years to come.

The First Minister will be aware of the UK Government’s decision to close four Remploy factories in Scotland, including one in Springburn. I am sure that he will share my concern about how the announcement was made and the situation in which the workers have been placed. What actions will the Government take to support Remploy workers in Scotland? Will the First Minister encourage the increased use of section 19 provisions in Government procurement? Did the Government respond formally to the consultation on the Sayce report? If not, what action did it take to influence its outcome?

Like Bill Kidd, I congratulate Sandra White on securing this debate, and I join her in her praise of the production staff at the BBC. Ms White is right to point out the value that we should all give to informed, independent broadcasting, particularly at a time when the future of our country is being discussed, sometimes quite hotly. We know that more people than ever rely on the broadcast media for news and current affairs, so it is important that the service they get from our biggest broadcaster is as comprehensive as possible. I tabled an amendment to Sandra White’s motion because it did not emphasise enough the concerns about job losses and their possible effect on both the quality of the BBC’s output generally and on individual programmes, and I still believe that to be the case. I am sure that colleagues will have received the briefing from the BBC, which relates directly to the motion before us and seeks to correct certain inaccuracies in it. We are told that a third of BBC Radio Scotland production staff will not lose their jobs, but that that figure relates only to radio production staff employed wholly within the news and current affairs operation, and that the total number will be about 11 over some five years, although that is still a matter for discussion. We are also told that about 30 posts in total will be lost over the next five years out of a workforce of some 240, based in nine centres throughout Scotland. The situation of “Newsweek Scotland” and “Scotland at Ten” has also been explained, and it would appear that although “Newsweek Scotland” will no longer be broadcast, “Good Morning Scotland” will extend its reach into Saturdays, increasing from one to three hours the amount of news and current affairs on that day of the week. “Scotland at Ten” will end completely, but apparently there will be additional daytime coverage. Although it might be possible to give some explanation for the changes to programming, it appears that staff members who are fortunate enough—I use “fortunate” advisedly—to retain a job, will be required to do more with less. Furthermore, although the explanation might be absolutely correct, I, like Ms White, do not see how the changes that the BBC says will happen will produce the kind of savings that BBC Scotland is being asked to make. Of course, the changes and cuts are necessary entirely because the licence fee has been frozen, and I am genuinely interested to hear from the cabinet secretary what the Scottish Government’s view is of that freeze. The BBC needs to engage more with its staff and the trade unions, to minimise job losses and protect the conditions under which staff work. If the services of some members of staff are dispensed with, there will inevitably be more pressure on those who remain. The BBC has a duty of care to its employees, both to those it currently has and the reduced number it expects to have in a few years’ time. The BBC must also explain the measures to this Parliament and the viewing public, and reassure us that the quality for which the BBC is renowned will be maintained in Scotland. We should expect nothing less of the BBC; it is a public service broadcaster, and one that is renowned throughout the world. At a time when our future is under such discussion and our debates and our world of politics are under such scrutiny, we need a comprehensive and independent broadcaster that can explain to the people of Scotland exactly what the issues are and bring to them a point of view that everyone recognises as independent.

Those aims and the items outlined in the pillars by the cabinet secretary are laudable, and I am sure that we could all sign up to them. However, all those things cost money. Does the cabinet secretary support the freeze in the licence fee? At the end of the day, we will either have an increase in the licence fee or face the consequences.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. The motion recognises the real concern felt by many in communities in and around Glasgow about the future of their local train stations. Five stations in my constituency are on the list. Colleagues will recall the members’ business debate in my name when I and members from all parties represented in this chamber sought a clear statement from the minister that no station would close as a result of the consultation. I will not rehearse the argument that I made during that debate against the closure of those stations, because it is on the record. I note from the Government’s amendment that the mantra of “no plans” has been supplemented by there being no intention to close stations, but I had hoped that the minister would have taken this opportunity to say unequivocally that no stations will close. It has been suggested—we have heard this again today—that the save our stations campaign is mischief-making. We have also heard again today that the names of the stations were only provided in response to a request. The reality, however, is that when a consultation with a foreword by a cabinet secretary and a minister highlights 11 stations, it is entirely reasonable to ask that they be named. Moreover, when it becomes apparent that those 11 stations are part of a potential group of 60, it is also reasonable to question why they have been singled out, to work hard with concerned local communities to bring their concerns to the attention of the Government and, when we fail to secure an unequivocal statement from the Government that no station will close, to redouble our efforts. It is no coincidence that since my members’ business debate a month ago, when the minister did not take the opportunity to shut down the debate once and for all, my office has been inundated with e-mails, letters and requests for petitions, because people understand that the phrase “no plans” does not equate to a guarantee that their local station will be safe. The Evening Times first identified the potential problem and is to be congratulated on the way in which it has supported communities in Glasgow on the issue. The Evening Times understands Glasgow and the economic, social and environmental problems that the stations’ closure would cause. It is a shame that the Government does not get it, too. The amendment in the minister’s name talks about the benefits that the Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement programme will bring. Let me tell members what EGIP could mean for train travellers in my constituency. The Anniesland to Glasgow Queen Street service, which runs through my constituency, is a busy route, with journey times of between five and 15 minutes. In recent years several new stations have opened, and passenger numbers have increased year on year. The plans for EGIP threaten the service. Currently, the service arrives at a high-level platform at Glasgow Queen Street, but the advent of additional trains between Glasgow and Edinburgh would leave simply no room for the Anniesland to Queen Street service. It appears that options are being discussed whereby passengers along the line would be required to travel in the opposite direction, back to Anniesland, where they would change trains and make their way to Queen Street by a more circuitous route. Anyone who has ever travelled on the line knows that that is not a viable option. The journey from Ashfield to Queen Street would take not the five minutes that it currently takes but more than 30 minutes. Few people would consider making such a journey, and my concern is that the overall number of passengers would decrease and threaten the line’s viability. The logic of the minister’s speech—

I remind the minister that it is not only Labour, the Tories or others who have campaigned on the issue; his own party has done so, too. In the spirit of his consultation as he has espoused it, how many people who responded to the consultation and said that a station should be closed will it take to make a station close?

Does the cabinet secretary agree that the best way to enable workers with a disability to maintain employment is by increasing the number of jobs that are open to them? Would the cabinet secretary like to comment on the number of Government contracts that are issued that include clear provisions under section 19 of the Disability Discrimination Act 1995? Does he think that those section 19 provisions might be one way in which we could increase the number of jobs that are available for such workers?

15. To ask the Scottish Executive what its budget priorities are for Glasgow. (S4O-00653)

The cabinet secretary might be aware of my concern about a local train service in my area. Has he discussed with Network Rail or with his Cabinet colleagues the cost implications of upgrading the Cowlairs junction as part of the Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement programme, to allow my constituents who live in an area of high unemployment and low levels of car ownership to easily access the city centre?

I genuinely welcome the allocation of £1.1 million of consequentials to culture in Scotland, which I am sure will be put to very good use. In January 2006, I was pleased to announce to Parliament that a new body, which was to be called creative Scotland, would be established. That new body would be charged with supporting the arts in Scotland and creating a climate in which culture could flourish and in which people could experience and enjoy all that a truly creative Scotland had to offer. The gestation of creative Scotland may have been difficult and it may have gone on longer than any of us could have imagined in 2006, but we now have an organisation that is fully equipped to carry out the changed role that it has been tasked with. Creative Scotland is up and running and is beginning to establish itself as an important part of the cultural and artistic life of Scotland. Therefore, as an organisation, Creative Scotland is well placed to play a key role in the year of creative Scotland and to work with its partners—particularly EventScotland and VisitScotland—to bring forward a programme of exciting and inspiring events across the country. I am delighted to see the collaboration between the agencies and their partners continue, and to see that the cultural olympiad, which will accompany the London Olympic and Paralympic games, will be a component of that. I congratulate the minister, who body-swerved for Scotland in avoiding Mr Smith’s request on this occasion. It was interesting to hear more detail about the Olympics festival, but I wonder whether Mr Ewing—if it is he who will be closing the debate—will say a little more about the festival events that will take place immediately around the football events in Glasgow. The three agencies—EventScotland, VisitScotland and Creative Scotland—were always intended to complement one another and to work with other partners for the benefit of our country. I am pleased to see that they are working so well in practice. People come to Scotland as visitors for many reasons, but research tells us that culture in its widest sense is a key reason for visiting our country. People know about our festivals, particularly the Edinburgh festivals, and they increasingly recognise Glasgow as the home of world-class galleries and museums but, as we know, every area of our country has its own unique culture and there is no single identifiable Scottish artistic style, any more than there is one type of scenery or even consistent weather throughout Scotland. It is vital, therefore, that the year of creative Scotland emphasises those differences. Scotland is not a homogenous destination or place to live, and that is part of its attraction both to visitors from abroad and to those who live here. We must do everything that we can to protect and enhance that local cultural scene.

I absolutely agree with Ms Fabiani on that. To take the connections a little further afield, one thing that has always impressed me is the way in which the Royal Conservatoire of Scotland has been able to combine the teaching of classical music at the highest level with the teaching of our more traditional music, also at the highest level. We should be proud of that and celebrate it. From Celtic Connections to Up Helly Aa to the Wickerman, we celebrate our differences. The creative places strand of the funding arrangements, which we heard about today, has a role to play in that, particularly as it aims to help smaller communities to position themselves as tourism destinations through creative activity. Scottish Labour’s amendment emphasises how important we believe it is that local people—and not just visitors—have the opportunity to enjoy what is on offer in the year of creative Scotland. I suggest that, to be successful, it must achieve that aim. Everyone in Scotland should be able to enjoy and experience the arts and culture in their local area. The excellent outreach work of the national collections and national performing companies is a good example of what can be achieved. I am aware that a great deal of organisation and logistical planning is required to make it happen, but I was delighted to hear the minister outline the additional programme of work that will take place in this special year. I hope, too, that the first-in-a-lifetime fund will go some way towards addressing that point and that, when we look back, we will see that local art and creativity have been stimulated for the longer term by that investment. I was interested to hear the minister’s point about the investment in advertising. It often seems to me that we need to look beyond the usual outlets in advertising our country’s cultural life. The minister mentioned the film that she saw today, which the Evening Times described as “quirky”, and on that basis alone I look forward to seeing it. I often think that these debates offer us an important opportunity to contribute to the advertising package, because we are able to hear and discuss what is going to be available. It is particularly important that local cultures are celebrated and that local communities are given the opportunity to be involved, particularly at a time when local authorities may have to make cuts in their budgets as a result of Government decisions. My fear is that, in some areas, culture and the arts will be seen as an easy hit. We must ensure that the Government does what it can—by setting an example and by setting the agenda—to discourage local authorities that might be tempted to make sacrifices in their support for art and culture from doing so in their area. By contrast, local authorities that have invested consistently in arts and culture have reaped the benefits, and the benefits have far exceeded the value of any such investment. I hope that the celebratory year will give local authorities a clear view of the direction of travel that the Government and Parliament want them to take. I note that the material that we have been provided with cites architecture as an important element of our culture, and I whole-heartedly agree that it should be. Indeed, on the day when Parliament is to celebrate Scotland’s places, it would be wrong if it were otherwise. Yes, people in Scotland and beyond recognise images of Scotland’s scenery, but they also recognise images of our distinctive architecture. I wonder whether, in closing, the minister might be able to explain a little bit about whether Architecture and Design Scotland, the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland and Historic Scotland have a role to play and, if so, what that role might be. I hope that today’s debate can be positive—I am sure that it will be—and that we will consider and discuss what Scotland has to offer. However, in discussing a celebratory year of this sort, it is necessary to remind ministers that financial control must be better than seems to have been the case with the year of homecoming 2009. The motion draws our attention to the series of focus years that the year of creative Scotland is part of. Perhaps we should pause at this point and consider whether we run the risk of diluting the concept of celebratory years. We need to take stock and ensure that such a valuable contribution to our cultural and tourism offering is not devalued by overuse. We benefited from the year of Highland culture in 2007. The 2009 year of homecoming might have been a bit more of a mixed bag, and there have been some other focus years along the way. This year—2012—has great potential, but there is a danger that we might try to do too much in 2014 and that the effort might not be focused enough. As members will know, the arts are an abiding interest of mine, as is sport, but so is our history. I am concerned that a year of homecoming that celebrates our sporting effort and achievement while trying to look back to remark on the Bannockburn anniversary might just stretch the concept a little bit too far. Scottish National Party colleagues should note that I do not, for a moment, deny the importance of the Bannockburn anniversary to our country, but I hope that we can do justice to the Commonwealth games, the Ryder cup and Bannockburn by celebrating them all together. I look forward to the remainder of the year of creative Scotland and, in the months to come, to reading about and perhaps debating the outcome of any monitoring of the event and of the concept that is such a valuable tool for our tourism and cultural offering to the country and beyond. I move amendment S4M-01870.1, to insert at end: “but recognises that the Year of Creative Scotland must provide opportunities for people around Scotland to experience cultural events and activities in their communities.”

As other colleagues said, the debate has been interesting and informative. I was particularly taken with the point that Annabel Goldie made in her opening speech about—if I describe her comments correctly—what might have been sacrificed to allow the year of creative Scotland to take place. To judge by the speeches that we have heard, that is a concern for all of us. My take is that, if there is a legacy from the spend, perhaps we do not have to worry too much about any displacement. Miss Goldie was also correct to refer to the importance of the Edinburgh tattoo. This year, as always, it will be an important part of what Edinburgh offers to Scotland and the world. My only worry about it now including references to the diamond jubilee and the Olympics is that the tickets are likely to sell out even more quickly than they normally do. Perhaps we need to be more creative and consider ways in which we can expand that element of the Edinburgh festivals. I was also taken by Clare Adamson’s comments about the calendar of events. I, too, have had a look at the calendar. I must admit that I always find such calendars quite difficult to read. There always seems to be so much in them that I have to have a second and, sometimes, third read before I can get my head round what I want to go to, hear, see or experience. Clare Adamson was also correct to refer to Alasdair Gray, who, over the years, has played a highly significant role in the culture of Scotland and in promoting the natural culture that comes from deep inside. If it is not too much of a plug, thinking of that reminded me that, this evening, somebody who operated in a similar ilk and whom we have lost all too soon—Gerry Rafferty—will be remembered in a recording of the excellent concert that was on at Celtic Connections a week or two back. It is good watching for anyone who has a spare hour this evening. My colleague Margaret McCulloch mentioned the Hollywood stars who came to Glasgow with Brad Pitt to make “World War Z”. Anyone who walked through Glasgow when that film was being made would have recognised that something special was going on. Meetings in Glasgow city chambers and many of the other buildings around George Square seemed to be distracted inordinately by the need to go to windows, open them and comment on the way back about who had happened to pass by. The serious point is that the film brought a huge amount of money to our country and put us on the world stage. It does not really matter that Glasgow will be portrayed as, if I remember rightly, Philadelphia. What matters is getting the work to come here and being recognised as the kind of country that can cope with such an experience. I was also taken by Margaret McCulloch’s reference to Rosslyn chapel, which I remember visiting around the time at which the popularity of “The Da Vinci Code” was at its height. We have talked about how we need to be more proactive about advertising. When I visited the chapel, a neighbouring farmer had a sign on his gate that said, “Da Vinci potatoes available here”, which was perhaps taking entrepreneurship a bit too far. Mark McDonald made some interesting points about using art to regenerate communities, and I strongly agree with his comments. You will come across such art in communities in the area of Glasgow where I live and which I represent. Members will all be familiar with the work of Andy Scott, who works in my constituency, who built the Clydesdale that we see on the M8 and who is responsible for many of the other wonderful sculptures that we see around. The arts can be used to stimulate regeneration. For example, a couple of schools in my constituency that have—I need to be careful how I say this—a slightly boring exterior are, I hope, to be enhanced through the use of colour on the outside of the building. As small an element as the introduction of colour can make a huge difference in a community. It is valid to emphasise the role of art in regenerating communities.

Absolutely. If we involve young people in their community, whether through arts projects or other activities, that is the result that we will get—they will have respect for and pride in their community. That is what we want to instil in all our young people. In an extremely interesting and informed speech, Jean Urquhart mentioned the Unity Players. I do not recall them, but I had a great uncle who was a member. The Unity Players produced many of those actors and actresses who were household names in my early childhood, whom I still think of with a great deal of affection. Many of them were leading lights in organisations such as Mayfest, which helped to promote the idea of Glasgow as a city of culture, which came to fruition in 1990. Jean Urquhart was quite right to say that there were those who doubted that Glasgow deserved its status as city of culture. Time has shown them to be wrong in taking that point of view, and it is to be hoped that fewer people will hold such an attitude in the future. Jean Urquhart’s speech reminded me of the Maryhill Integration Network in my constituency, which works with asylum seekers and refugees to make them feel at home in their new community. It does that largely through the use of social and artistic activity. Some of the most enjoyable artistic events that I have been to in recent years have been organised by that organisation. It is wonderful to experience the different cultures that are on offer; we all learn so much from them. Dennis Robertson said that he had never heard Huntly mentioned so often. After his speech, it is fair to say that never has Dougie Vipond been mentioned so often. Joking apart, I congratulate Huntly and all the other creative places—those that are recognised formally and those that are not—on the contribution that they make to Scotland. Kevin Stewart mentioned the Aberdeen international youth festival, which I have attended in previous years, at the invitation of Nanette Milne. I have found it to be a joyous occasion, on which young people from Aberdeen and other places around the world work together to celebrate their shared enjoyment of music and the arts. That is always to be welcomed. I am conscious that the Presiding Officer will want me to draw to a close very shortly, so I apologise to those colleagues whose excellent speeches I have not been able to mention. I will just say that the speeches of members of all parties have demonstrated that it is not just 2012 that is the year of creative Scotland; it is every year.

Will the member give way?

Mr Scott may recall that, in the previous session, a bill on the same issue in the name of my colleague Charlie Gordon fell because it could not attract support from other parties in the Parliament. Is Mr Scott in a position to commit his party on the matter at this stage?

For members of Scottish Labour, there is a slight feeling of déjà vu about the debate because we recall the production of the claim of right in 1989. In that year, we dedicated our party and ourselves to all the principles set out by the claim of right. The document was signed by all but one of our Scottish MPs; by leaders of church and faith groups; by the Scottish Trades Union Congress, the Liberal Democrats and the Green Party; and by representatives of civic Scotland. The Labour Party was represented by our then chair, Johann Lamont. Almost all Scottish opinion was united on the issue of finding Scottish solutions to Scottish problems and in agreement over the need to work together. Only two parties stood aside and refused to take part in the work of renewing our constitutional arrangements in a way that would advantage Scotland. To be exact and to be scrupulously fair, at that time the Tories were consistent: they opposed any change to the polity of the UK, which was at least a clear position if, in my view, a wholly mistaken one. The other party that refused to support the claim of right or to work within the Scottish Constitutional Convention was the SNP—the very same party that is calling on us today to vote for a motion that is an extract of the 1989 claim of right. I quote someone whose opinion we should all listen to: “The manner in which the SNP decided not to participate was bungled. Over the course of a weekend, party members found out that they were suddenly opposed to something that they thought they were supposed to be enthusiastic about”. That was Professor James Mitchell.

Mr Russell’s version of events is known to him and perhaps to some of his colleagues. He may not wish to share it with the rest of us. I point out one simple and obvious fact: the Labour Party is already a signatory to the claim of right. We have no need to sign it again. We signed it in 1989 and, unlike others, we have never had reason to resile from it. Ms Sturgeon and her party may think that the SNP’s unwillingness at the time to discuss the modernisation of Scotland’s constitutional arrangements has been forgotten but that hugely disappointing record has not been forgotten by members on this side of the chamber or by the people of Scotland. What we need now—more than 20 years later—is not a repetition of that frankly disappointing unwillingness to work with and discuss issues with others; we need the SNP to discuss these serious issues with Parliament and Scottish society so that the people of Scotland can have a clear choice regarding their country’s future. The claim of right was not an end in itself; it was one step on the important journey towards devolution. What followed the claim of right was the tireless work of the Constitutional Convention, which discussed and debated to achieve the goal set out for it in the claim of right. Its proposals formed the basis for the referendum that followed and, of course, the act that secured this Parliament. When people voted in the 1997 referendum, they knew exactly what they were voting for. Scottish Labour has consistently called for cross-party talks and for the involvement in discussions of representatives of Scottish society. We therefore welcome the First Minister’s announcement today about discussions, although we look forward to hearing more about the scope and extent of those discussions. In opposition, Scottish Labour and its partners, all with differing views and principles, managed to build consensus around a plan for the Scottish Parliament that we have today. That required serious debate and compromise. A majority SNP Government can surely do no less, and today’s concession is a good first step. Yesterday, the First Minister launched the referendum consultation in this Parliament and promptly left to brief invited press at Edinburgh castle. This is the fourth time that the Government has launched such a consultation, but at no time has it spelled out the effect of a vote for separation on the lives of Scotland’s people. In their letters and comments about the referendum, constituents have asked me what Scotland’s separation from the rest of the UK would mean for their pensions. They ask about the benefits system. They ask whether there will be an army and a navy. They ask what the cost will be. They ask about the effect on families living in other parts of the UK. They also ask why their children who live in England because there are no jobs for them in Scotland will not get a vote in the referendum.

I might privately give Mr Gibson, who was heckling from a sedentary position, a list of all those SNP members who over the years have told me that if Scotland became independent they would be members of the Labour Party. He might find that interesting reading.

Ms Grahame should be able to spot them easily—they are the ones with very red faces. Mr Mason has actually made my point for me, and I will come back to it in a moment. I can give an answer to those of my constituents who have expressed concern about the fact that their children living south of the border will not have the vote, because the answer is set out in the constitutional referendum document that we received yesterday. As for the rest, I, like Mr Mason, have to say that I do not know, that no one knows and that not even the First Minister really knows because those discussions and negotiations have not yet begun. If Mr Mason is correct in his view that all that will depend on the Government that is elected after the passing of a separation bill, he might need to discuss the issue with Mr Russell. We might have the SNP Government’s plans for a referendum, but we do not have any clear description of what a separate Scotland will look like.

All I can say to Ms MacDonald is that my constituents have asked me that question and, until yesterday, we did not know what the Government’s position was. Now we do and, as I have said, I will be able to relay that information to them. Whether or not they agree is, of course, another matter entirely.

If the SNP Government now acknowledges the claim of right, it must also realise that saying so is not enough. If the Scottish people are to exercise their “sovereign right ... to determine the form of government best suited to their needs”, they must have all the information they need to allow them to make that informed choice. We cannot ask people to break a 300-year-old union without telling them what the effect will be and giving them the opportunity to discuss and debate those matters. As it stands, the Scottish people will at best be asked to vote on a proposal that is the SNP Government’s opening negotiating position.

In closing, Presiding Officer, one thing that I am sure we can all agree on is that a vote for or against separation is an important one—probably the most important that any citizen of this country will cast. Every last citizen must be fully informed as to its effect.

I thank all members who took the time to sign the motion. The Evening Times deserves our thanks for focusing attention on the issue in its inimitable campaigning style. I would also like to thank all those of my constituents who have signed the petition and all the community councils and community groups that have organised meetings and circulated petitions in their areas. The issue has generated a great deal of concern in my constituency and beyond, and has demonstrated just how important our local train services are and how much effort people will put into protecting them. Tonight, I want to speak about two train services in my constituency and the threats that they face. The Anniesland to Glasgow Queen Street service, which travels through my constituency, is a busy route with journey times to Queen Street of between five and 15 minutes. In recent years, several new stations have opened and their passenger journey numbers have increased year on year. However, in a recent discussion with rail officials it became clear to me that, as a result of timetabling challenges for the additional services that are proposed between Glasgow and Edinburgh, and the congestion that occurs at the Cowlairs junction, an option was being discussed that would require passengers to travel in the opposite direction, to Anniesland, where they would change trains and make their way on to Queen Street on the low-level service. That would make a journey from Ashfield to Queen Street take not its current five minutes but, instead, more than 30 minutes—a journey that I suspect few people would choose to make. Obviously, passengers from Kelvindale would have a shorter journey to Anniesland than passengers from Ashfield, but the worry is that the decrease in passengers from the southern end of the line would lead to a gradual drop off in the overall numbers and threaten the viability of the line. I should also point out that nowhere in the Edinburgh to Glasgow improvements programme consultation document is any detriment to suburban rail lines mentioned, which must surely call into question the effectiveness of the consultation. How can someone respond to a consultation when they do not know that it has any relevance to them? The second threat arises from the consultation, which seeks views on train stations that are no longer required and asks how it should be determined that a station should close. It highlights 11 stations within the Glasgow commuter area.

The list of stations is in a fact sheet that accompanies the consultation document. I will come to plans in a second. Nine of the stations on the list are in Glasgow itself, and five are in my constituency. Four are on the line that I have already spoken about and one is at Barnhill, on the high-level Springburn to Queen Street line. As my motion notes, each of the nine Glasgow stations has seen an increase in passenger numbers over the past two years, with Ashfield seeing a 32 per cent increase during that time, and the threatened Gilshochill station and Possilpark and Parkhouse stations increasing by 189 per cent and 145 per cent, respectively, since 2005. The consultation fact sheet claims that it names those stations because “they are located less than one mile from another station offering similar services”. No other criteria were offered for the inclusion of the stations. I know that those stations are within that one-mile restriction, but I also know that, because of the urban nature of rail services in the west of Scotland, there must be many more in that category than the 14 that are listed. Indeed, in an answer to a question that was lodged by my colleague, John Pentland, the minister identified 60 stations that are within one mile of another station and offer a similar service. The naming of those 14 stations, therefore, causes concern among my constituents. The subsequent admission that the stations have been singled out, as a further 50 or so in the same category are not named, has compounded that concern and has led to increased calls for the minister to state clearly and categorically that the stations will not close. The impact of the proposed closures would be severe. Constituents who live around the threatened stations not only are worried about losing their train services, but are anxious that derelict stations would attract antisocial behaviour. Those who live next to the remaining stations fear not only that a decline in passenger numbers will lead to the loss of the service completely over time, but that there could be an increase in the number of unofficial park-and-ride commuters in their locality, causing increased congestion in their area as well as on main roads such as Great Western Road, Maryhill Road and Balmore Road—all of which are always extremely busy, in any case. Several of the areas that are served by the stations have poor bus services, low levels of car ownership and a high number of elderly residents. The Anniesland to Queen Street route also serves two local schools and provides the only direct route to them for many of the pupils. Naturally, on finding out about the potential threats to local rail services, I immediately wrote to the minister, asking for the opportunity to meet him to discuss matters. I wrote to Mr Brown on 24 November because officials had advised me that they would make recommendations to ministers at the end of January. I was surprised to receive a response from the minister’s private secretary, not the minister himself, and even more surprised to be told that it would be premature to meet before summer 2012. My surprise, however, turned to dismay when a constituent copied me in to a letter that they had received from an SNP list member, indicating that he had discussed these very issues with the minister at a meeting on 11 January. The slight to me is insignificant and I leave it to the Presiding Officer to consider the discourtesy to Parliament, but the offence that has been offered to my constituents is unforgivable. I sincerely hope that the minister will consider that. Meeting the minister clearly failed to reassure the list member, however, and even appears to have caused greater confusion. Within the past few days, I have had sight of both a letter from him to a constituent stating that the stations are not under threat and an SNP “Save Our Stations” leaflet in which he appears and in which the stations are described as being “threatened”. With such confusion within the SNP itself, is it any wonder that my constituents will accept nothing less than an absolute assurance from the minister? We do not want to hear that there are “no plans” to close any station, but we do want to hear that the stations will not close. In concluding, I ask the minister to state clearly here tonight that the stations, which allow such a necessary service to be provided to travellers across Glasgow, will remain open for use in the years ahead and that the Anniesland to Queen Street high-level service will continue to operate as at present. My constituents and those of many of my colleagues need to be reassured by a clear and unequivocal promise. The uncertainty that has been generated by the consultations must be removed once and for all. If the minister is willing to make such a clear statement, he will do commuters a great service.

Will the member give way?

Thank you, Presiding Officer—I was not aware that members always got extra time if they were intervened on. I just point out to Mr Doris that we have to retain the train service before we can talk about its being extended—something that I would dearly love to see. I also point out to him that his photograph is on the leaflet. He cannot claim that he did not know about the leaflet, and it completely contradicts the stance he is taking.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

The minister will forgive those of us in Glasgow who are slightly cynical when there are proposals and no plans, because that is exactly what Stewart Stevenson said to us the week before he cancelled GARL. I am conscious that the minister has almost finished his speech but has not referred to the issue in my constituency that arises because of EGIP and the congestion at Cowlairs. That is an extremely serious point and I would be grateful if he would address it.

I am pleased that the Government’s consultation document, which was published today, acknowledges that an independent Scotland would open formal negotiations with the EU. Of course, many of us have known for some time that that would be the case. Having conceded that principle, will the First Minister publish the legal advice that his Government has commissioned on that issue?

When, before Christmas, Scottish Labour decided to use today’s debate to talk about Scotland’s future and the First Minister’s much vaunted referendum, we could not have guessed that the subject would be so timely. Given this week’s events and the First Minister’s announcement to the press—not to the Parliament—it is entirely appropriate for Scottish Labour to devote this debate to the issue. We have heard much this week about the referendum and the views of Mr Salmond and the Westminster Government on how and when it might be held. Of course that process is important and I will devote a small part of my speech to it. However, what has often been lacking this week has been any kind of debate about the Scotland that we want. As the proponent of separation, the Scottish Government has a particular responsibility to explain why and how it believes that separation is the best option and to tell Scotland what separation will mean for communities and families throughout this land. Process matters, but more important still is the need to identify the policies, the ideas and the vision that each of us has for our country. How power is used is just as important as where it resides and in my speech I plan to talk about the process, consider the contributions of colleagues across the chamber and then focus on the kind of Scotland that we on this side of the chamber want—a Scotland where the policies of Government promote social justice and the elimination of poverty. I hope that, regardless of our views, as politicians we all want a well-run referendum campaign followed by a well-run referendum vote on, as the Deputy First Minister has indicated, one clear-cut question that leaves no room for dubiety or confusion. The First Minister referred us to the 40 per cent rule that applied in an earlier referendum, but I say to him that that referendum stands as an example of exactly why we have to be clear, concise, straightforward and transparent with the people of Scotland about what we are seeking to do on their behalf. We should charge the Electoral Commission with overseeing that process as we do with elections to this Parliament, to Westminster and to the European Parliament. Surely no one in this Parliament will question the commission’s expertise or, indeed, its impartiality.

I simply remind Mr Neil that while in opposition Labour managed to construct a national dialogue to deliver this Parliament. The least that this Government with its majority can do is try to do the same thing by consensus. During the course of our discussions we also need to talk about the franchise. Members made that point, and Kezia Dugdale gave a good explanation of the difficulties in a particular area, but that is not the only aspect of the franchise that should be discussed. Labour is open to discussions. In my humble view, Scotland will not easily forgive any politician who allows the issue of the referendum to be mired in court proceedings, who allows the decision to be further delayed, or who makes the issue one about politicians and their beliefs instead of the needs and aspirations of Scotland. Scottish Labour is not afraid of the verdict of the Scottish people. We relish the opportunity to put the question to the people, just as we did in 1997, when, within four months of taking office, a Labour Government and a Labour Secretary of State for Scotland, Donald Dewar, put the decision on devolution to the Scottish people and then, having won their support, passed the necessary legislation and had the Scottish Parliament up and running within two years. The current First Minister should be as bold as Donald Dewar was and as determined to work with other parties and civic Scotland to allow the citizens of Scotland to take part in the debate and give their verdict. If he followed Donald Dewar’s example, he would seek agreement and, having done so, fight his corner. No doubt a spirited debate would follow, if this morning’s debate is anything to go by. I was slightly concerned by a point that Mr Salmond laboured in his speech, which was echoed by Ms McAlpine and perhaps even by Mr Swinney, if I understood his point correctly. Mr Salmond and Ms McAlpine laboured long and hard to make the point that the SNP won a majority in the Parliament, not just in the constituencies but in the regional lists. We know that. We knew it in May. However, Scotland did not elect only SNP members to the Parliament. Is Mr Salmond saying that our mandate is less valid than that of members of his party? The implication of his not wanting to include other parties in the Parliament in discussions about the referendum is that that is his party’s view. If Mr Salmond reflected on the words that he used in his speech, he would see that my point is valid.

I am afraid that Mr Swinney is guilty by omission. He forgot to mention the other parties in the Parliament in his speech and in his intervention. He will excuse our feeling uncomfortable about that when he considers that the Government is amending our motion to take that aspect out. I very much respect Linda Fabiani and always enjoy listening to her, but I say gently to her that the Labour Party did not block a referendum—indeed, no party in the Parliament blocked a referendum—in the previous session of the Parliament. The Scottish Government never put the referendum to the test. Many members have reminded us that Wendy Alexander encouraged the First Minister to bring forward the referendum option. I am afraid that he decided not to take her up on the matter. Mr Mark McDonald was at pains to tell us about his youthfulness. I accept that he would have been too young to sign the claim of right. Members of my party have reminded me that I am perhaps not as youthful as I once was—I am certainly not—

Yes, I know, it’s hard to believe, isn’t it? Labour members pointed out to me that Mr Yousaf got his analogy slightly wrong. Castle Grayskull was not some kind of dark, louring place that people took their inspiration from; it was the place where the good guys got their power. If Labour is being associated with Castle Grayskull we are quite happy to accept that. The Scottish Labour Party has always supported home rule for Scotland and we are proud that we delivered it in 1999, working with the Constitutional Convention, the other political parties and, latterly, the SNP. However, for us the constitutional settlement is not the pre-eminent issue; it is not a cause to which every other policy is subservient. In his memorable speech at the Parliament’s opening ceremony in 1999, our then First Minister said that a Scottish Parliament—a Parliament, any constitutional settlement—is “Not an end: a means to greater ends.” Scottish Labour firmly believes that a progressive devolved system of government within the UK is the best means of achieving the greater ends of equality and social justice. We want a Scotland in which kinship carers are rewarded for their devotion to their task, in which looked-after young people go into the world with an education that prepares them to be the best that they can be, in which our children are free from the blight of poverty and in which the opinions of others are heard and respected. Devolution will continue to develop—that is its nature—but separation is neither progressive nor the solution to the issues that continue to beset our country.

I congratulate Jim Eadie on bringing the debate to the chamber, and on giving the Parliament the opportunity to shine a light on some of the worst industrial practices in the world. As we have heard, 10 years ago two American politicians, Eliot Engel and Tom Harkin, thought that the work that they had done to highlight the human rights abuses in the chocolate industry had finally had a result when the heads of eight major chocolate companies, two US senators and a member of Congress, together with the ambassador from the Ivory Coast, the director of the international programme on the elimination of child labour and other trade bodies and trade unionists witnessed the signing of a protocol bearing their names. It sought to establish a voluntary way to certify chocolate as being free from “the worst forms of child labor”, and to confirm that the companies were not contravening ILO convention 182. In 2009, global sales of chocolate totalled approximately $100 million. Most of it comes from west Africa, as we heard from Jim Eadie, and particularly from Ghana and the Ivory Coast, as the cocoa tree grows only within 10 degrees of the equator. Unfortunately, the report from Tulane University that Jim Eadie’s motion mentions suggested that those companies, which make large profits, have not adhered to the protocol and that children are still being used to work in the industry. Indeed, it is suggested that the number of children under 12 who work in the cocoa industry would not fit into the stadiums of Manchester United, Manchester City, Arsenal, Liverpool and Tottenham Hotspur combined. The children work in dangerous conditions that involve them in the use of chemicals and sharp knives. Ten companies dominate the industry and, in Cameroon, it is estimated that three companies control 95 per cent of cocoa production. Those organisations are extremely powerful, while the farmers who work for them are impoverished and have little bargaining power. The lack of a stable government in the Ivory Coast in recent years has exacerbated the problem. Companies do not use their power to avoid slavery, trafficking and child labour. That is demonstrated by the fact that only 5 per cent of chocolate can demonstrably be said to have been produced without recourse to such dreadful practices. Some of those companies originated in the UK, and some were originally established by members of the Quaker movement. They took enormous pride in establishing places in which their workers could work in safety and good health, where they could have a decent standard of living and they knew that their children would have an education. However, that was 150 years ago; today, we are seeing the exact reverse of that happening in the name of some of those companies, which are no longer in the hands of those Quaker families, and purely in the name of profit. At a time of year when our thoughts turn to celebration and we rightly focus on the children in our families, it is entirely appropriate to pause and consider the children who produce the chocolate that we will no doubt consume over Christmas, and it is appropriate that we use our voice to put pressure on chocolate providers and suppliers to change those dreadful practices. Once again, I thank Jim Eadie for bringing the issue to the chamber.

Would the minister agree, however, that the growth in the sales of fair trade chocolate and indeed fair trade products generally has been due not to any fantastic idea from manufacturers but to public pressure on manufacturers from people who have said that such conditions are not good enough?

I was interested to hear the minister mention in closing that there are only 945 days to go before the opening of the 2014 Commonwealth games. I had planned to open my speech with that very number but she has pre-empted me. Then again, she seems to have pre-empted me on a number of matters—which is no bad thing. It is but a relatively short time before the Commonwealth games will open in Glasgow and, of course, a considerably shorter period until the summer, when the Olympics will open in London. Scottish Labour welcomes today’s debate and we hope that it marks the beginning—indeed, the continuation—of a positive dialogue across the chamber as we seek to play our part as parliamentarians in ensuring that the Commonwealth games are successful, a credit to Scotland and of lasting benefit to its people. The discussion must not only cover the significant and encouraging progress that is being made in preparation for what will be the largest multisport event ever held in Scotland, but focus on the challenges that still lie ahead, and which must be met if we are to ensure the games’ success. By success, I mean not only that of our sportsmen and sportswomen in competition, although we all want a large haul of medals in 2014. The progress of our athletes through the Commonwealth games in Manchester, Melbourne and Delhi suggests that by the time we get to 2014 our medal haul will be extremely significant. However, the games’ benefits must not be enjoyed only by the elite athletes who have the honour and pleasure of participating on behalf of Scotland, but by Scottish society at large. There needs to be advantage to our country, not only in the legacy of improved sporting infrastructure, important though that is, but in the legacy that is secured for our economy, particularly the tourism industry, and the legacy in our communities, particularly in health and in sporting and physical activity. We also need an advantage in confidence building, which is the less tangible part of the legacy that we hope for. Significant progress has certainly been made since 2004, when it was decided that we would back a Scottish bid. I vividly recall the day—16 August 2005—when the Scottish Executive, under the then First Minister, Jack McConnell, with the support of the United Kingdom Government, all the parties at Holyrood and the other devolved Administrations, announced that Glasgow would bid to host the 2014 games, building on the reputation that the city already had as a major conference and sporting venue. That decision was a good one, but it was made only after a great deal of research and scrutiny and only when we were sure that Scotland could make a success of delivering a first-class Commonwealth games on time and on budget and, crucially, that the games would benefit our country. Too many countries have taken the opportunity to host Olympic games, Commonwealth games or other major sporting events without being able to guarantee that. The announcement that the Glasgow bid had been successful was greeted with great enthusiasm by people around the country and we owe it to them to ensure that their expectations are met. Since the announcement of the winning bid in 2007, a great deal of work has gone into making the games a success. As the minister rightly outlined, that has involved the Commonwealth Games Council for Scotland, the organising committee, Glasgow City Council and the Scottish Government working together to get things done. As the motion points out, the recent evaluation commission report is testament to that. As we know, many of the venues for the games already existed, which is a real advantage in cost and timing terms, but a new velodrome and indoor sports arena had to be built, while other facilities needed to be renovated or extended. It is a pleasure to see progress being made in Glasgow on the venues and athletes village. Earlier this year, I was delighted to visit the new velodrome and arena with colleagues. Although the facilities were still some way from completion at that point, it was clear that they will be truly world class and will continue to attract major sporting events to Glasgow in the years ahead. Glasgow City Council has said that it will begin to use the venues on their completion in 2012 so that by the time of the games in 2014, all the teething problems will be ironed out. They will be community facilities. As the minister said, not all the games events will take place in Glasgow. I look forward to hearing more about the work that other local authorities are doing to maximise opportunity for their residents from the Commonwealth games. So far, I have struggled to find much written commentary on that element of the complete picture, although perhaps I have not been looking in the right channels. It is good news that the evaluation commission has endorsed the work that the partners have done to ensure delivery of the games, but we cannot be complacent. In the previous parliamentary session, the Public Audit Committee raised important questions about conflicting information being provided by a senior Scottish Government official and the chief operating officer for the games concerning the use of contingency funds and the impact of inflation. I ask the minister to indicate whether clarification has been provided on that. As a long-time supporter of the 2012 Olympics and London’s bid, I was delighted that the 2012 games were included in the motion and I was pleased to hear the minister’s comments about the success of Scottish businesses. Businesses in Scotland secured contracts in the very early stages of the Olympic bid; one produced the banners that were on display around the country when the bid evaluation team visited the UK, and a company in Leith was awarded the contract to produce the bid document. Scottish firms have been involved since the beginning, and it is good news that so many have been able to secure contracts. A particular issue with ticketing and ticket distribution has arisen in recent months in relation to the Olympic games, which might provide a challenge for the Commonwealth games. Will the minister tell us in closing whether lessons have been learned from the way in which tickets for the London Olympics have been distributed? I realise that it is perhaps a little early for precise details about ticketing arrangements, but it would be good to hear reassurance that the ticketing arrangements in London have been evaluated and that any lessons from that will be learned. I am confident that, in working with its partners, Glasgow City Council will continue the excellent work that it has begun in order to deliver the venues and infrastructure that are needed for the games. In many ways, I believe that the real challenge lies in delivering the legacy—the minister also identified that concern. Nowhere is that more evident than in respect of health. In Scotland annually, some 2,500 people die prematurely because they are inactive. If we are to make real progress in that area, we must devote much of our effort to our young people. We have to break the cycle that afflicts too many of our adult population, who probably played football, hockey or netball vigorously at school but did not continue when they left. I share the minister’s enthusiasm for the active schools programme, and I think that it is a key component of the drive to increase the number of our young people who are active while they are at school. By making links with clubs outwith the school, it will encourage them to consider exercise to be an important component of their lives. The Commonwealth games lottery fund will also help to encourage an imaginative approach. I have noticed in my own constituency that there has been an increase in zumba classes at Springburn academy and basketball coaching at Miltonbank primary. Having been invited as an MSP to see many such things in schools, I was slightly anxious that the trapeze project might end up with my name on it. I hope not. We in Scottish Labour want to work with the Scottish Government because we share its ambition for the games. We will be critical when it is appropriate, but we will also be supportive. What we ask for from the Scottish Government is openness about the achievements and the problems. I am grateful that, following our conversation this morning, the minister has agreed that regular update meetings will be held with front-bench spokespersons from the parties that are represented in the chamber. I look forward to them. I move amendment S4M-01620.1, to leave out from “will maximise” to end and insert: “has the potential to maximise the legacy for the whole of Scotland from both the London 2012 Olympic Games and the 2014 Commonwealth Games, and calls on the Scottish Government to report more regularly to the Parliament on the implementation of the Games legacy plan for Scotland.”

In inquiries that have been undertaken by committees of the Parliament into trade missions to China, the importance of raising the issue of human rights with the Chinese Government and its officials has always been paramount. In light of the fact that the First Minister, on this occasion, raised the issue of human rights in China with the Chinese Government, will the Deputy First Minister comment on the response that the First Minister received?

I read the cabinet secretary’s statement with interest and I thank him for the advance sight of it. I also read the appendices that are attached to it. Why is Glasgow City Council one of only a handful of councils whose revenue funding will decrease year on year, according to his figures?

The debate has been an interesting one on a subject that is of importance to us all. It has been useful to hear about colleagues’ experiences and priorities and to understand better the challenges that communities throughout the country face. As Michael McMahon said, the debate is a useful continuation of some of the themes that arose in last week’s debate on architecture and place making. I suspect that many of the issues that have been raised today, not least the stalled spaces agenda, will recur in the debate that we are to have on the cities strategy. I wonder whether it might be worth while having a longer debate, perhaps over a whole day—I am being optimistic—in which we have the opportunity to range over all those issues. It is difficult to cut one off from the other, and I wonder whether we should try to do so. The cabinet secretary is right that there is no silver bullet. It is good that the Scottish Government is using the JESSICA fund in the way that he described. After all, that is what the money is for. However, if memory serves me correctly, the funding streams are in minimum quantities of £1 million. If a local community is to access and use money on that scale, it will need support to maximise the opportunity. I hope that the cabinet secretary will say something about that in his closing speech. I have previously asked the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth to clarify one or two points about enterprise areas. We have had enterprise zones and enterprise areas before, but what they were best at was encouraging work, employment and jobs from one area—sometimes an area of relatively low employment—into an area of even greater unemployment. I sincerely hope that that would not be the effect of any new initiative. The cabinet secretary was right to say that we need a co-ordinated approach. For that reason, I am pleased that the Labour amendment has expanded the scope of the debate and focused some of it on our further education colleges. My constituency is currently in the unenviable position of having the highest claimant count in Scotland. In that context, our local colleges make a vital contribution to the life of our communities. I will talk a little bit about the experience of North Glasgow College, which is the college that I know best. This year alone, it has reduced the number of its faculties from five to three, lost 30 full-time equivalent posts at a one-off cost of £568,000, and—most important of all—lost 500 years of staff experience. A price cannot be put on that experience, but we can consider the findings of the “Review of Scotland’s Colleges: Transforming Lives, Transforming Scotland: An Overview by the Review’s ‘Core Group’”, which estimated that, for every £1 that was spent on further education colleges, £3.20 accrued to the Scottish economy. The then education secretary, Ms Hyslop, described that figure as “conservative”. North Glasgow College and others are surely exemplars of the initiatives that the minister seeks to achieve. Therefore, I sincerely hope that the Scottish Government will think again about the punitive cuts in further education in the years ahead that it proposes. Those colleges are at the heart of our communities, and they are best able to work with local schools and employers to work out what skills are needed and to educate and train the very people whose hard work will get us out of the economic crisis. They also have an effect on our young people’s life chances and help them to break the cycle of deprivation that Aileen McLeod spoke about. It is clear that housing continues to be an area of interest across the chamber. It was therefore disappointing to learn last week that the Scottish Government proposes to cut the transfer of management of development funding budget for Glasgow and Edinburgh. I have been told that Glasgow’s budget looks set to be reduced from an expected £174 million to around £114 million over the next three years.

I am sorry to disabuse Mr Mackay, but I am not talking about things in the narrow way that he is; I am talking about the budget that Glasgow was led to believe it would have compared with the one that it now looks as though it will have. Perhaps he can tell me where that money has gone. I would be very interested in that. The effect of the budget reductions—this is where they really matter—is to put at risk budgets that provide money for adaptations; work to achieve our homelessness targets next year; important reprovisioning projects; and, of course, the transformational regeneration areas, in which I have a particular interest. If Mr Mackay is seriously saying that those areas do not matter in Glasgow, Edinburgh or anywhere else, I would be most surprised. In closing, will the minister address Glasgow City Council’s genuine concerns and advise members as to whether he is still confident about achieving the homelessness targets? I say to Kenny Gibson that we have heard peddled before the figure for the number of houses in local authority areas for which Labour and our Liberal Democrat colleagues were responsible. Actually, he is incorrect about that number. However, we must look at the wider picture, which indicates that, between local authorities and housing associations, over the period of the previous Labour Administrations, more than 31,000 new social rented houses were provided. The Scottish Parliament information centre will verify that fact, if Kenny Gibson does not believe me. He may want to denigrate the housing associations’ contribution, but I suspect that he does not, so perhaps he should think more carefully in future about what he says.

No. I have already heard what Kenny Gibson has to say on the issue. The minister also mentioned the town centre regeneration fund. I was delighted that Maryhill in my constituency received funding from that stream. Later this month, the Maryhill burgh halls will open, and the town centre regeneration money was part of a huge mosaic of funding for that project. I think that the minister has already visited the burgh halls or is about to, and I am sure that he will agree with me that they are a stunning example of what can be done with our heritage. As I have said before, I was, of course, disappointed that the community-led bid from Possilpark, which is near Maryhill, was not as successful as the Maryhill bid. However, that is what happens. Duncan McNeil and Neil Bibby gave us examples of the regeneration of the areas in which they are most interested. They are right to argue to secure their funding. I say to George Adam that he must not talk Paisley down. That comment is slightly tongue in cheek, but there is a serious point to it. He clearly was not listening to Sandra White, who indicated in her speech that any criticism of what the Government intends is unacceptable. We must be able to make constructive criticism, and it was refreshing to hear a little bit of gentle criticism of the Government from George Adam. I now do not have time to range over all the issues that I would have liked to cover. However, I will say that we will not be able to accept the Conservative amendment, which indicates that the Conservative Party thinks that “regeneration spending should be targeted where it will bring most benefit to the wider community.” The Labour Party believes that it should be targeted where it is most needed.

It is a pleasure to speak in the debate, which is on an issue that is always topical and never irrelevant. However, I have a cautionary word to say. Casting my mind back to a previous session of Parliament, I remember a debate on architecture that was scheduled and that I was very much looking forward to leading but which, unfortunately, had to be postponed for some time because, two hours prior to it, one of the roof beams in the chamber came loose. As I was growing up in Glasgow in the 1960s and 1970s, it was impossible not to be aware of the widespread change that was going on around me. Whole communities were moving from overcrowded and often insanitary tenemental flats to entirely new communities. Some of them, which were designated “the Glasgow overspill”, were outwith the city in new towns such as Cumbernauld and East Kilbride; Drumchapel, Easterhouse, Castlemilk and Pollok were located on sites on the periphery of the city; and a third group, mainly comprising multistorey flats, were built in existing communities. Many of those new communities thrived, while others have become more successful in the longer term after they were revitalised and sometimes reduced in scale. Unfortunately, some of them failed, such as the multistorey flats in Red Road, where I lived for most of my childhood, or developments in the Gorbals. Although the reasons for that failure are complex, the blame for much of it can be laid at the door of those who planned and designed homes without thinking about the facilities that were needed to sustain them. It is sobering to think that some of those developments were, at the time, lauded internationally and that they won prestigious awards for their architects. The irony is that those communities were designed with the very best of intentions: to address a real social need and to provide good housing with decent-sized rooms and a bathroom and kitchen for every family. However, in the drive to do that, the idea of the place—or the community, as I prefer to call it—was overlooked. As a child, I sensed only the enthusiasm that families brought with them to the new homes. However, even then, I was aware that my mum had much further to go to shop, that my school was overcrowded with portakabins in the playground, that the bus was often too busy to stop and that the two lifts in my building, each of which held only eight people, simply could not cope with the needs of a building that more than 400 people called home. That was no joke if you lived on the 30th floor. In nearby Springburn, the situation was perhaps even worse, as communities were split to accommodate roads or, perhaps more accurately, our dependence on cars. A vibrant shopping and social district was changed for ever and much of its character was lost, which many people regret to this day. The motion talks about “the importance of sharing skills, vision and practice in design and placemaking”. I heartily agree with that sentiment, but we must go one better and learn the lessons from the developments of the 1960s and 1970s, good and bad. We need to build on the models of successful regeneration in recent years, always ensuring that local people are at the heart of decisions about regeneration and planning in their communities. Similarly, we should remember that the thing that Glasgow got spectacularly correct was recognising, before it was too late, that people like living in traditional tenements and communities, which led to the halting of the wholesale demolition that had been planned. Many Victorian tenements in Glasgow and other cities were saved and adapted rather than demolished, which will allow them to serve the housing needs of those cities for many more generations to come. However, good housing alone does not tie us to the areas that we live in. It is the character of the locality that does that, and it is the distinctive nature of the architecture and the shared sense of community and history that help us to have that feeling of place and the comfort of the familiar. Our older buildings are invested with materials and energy as well as history, and we need to be more creative about reusing them as well as preserving them. I congratulate Maryhill Housing Association in my constituency on its innovative project to convert the very old Maryhill primary school building into very modern homes. Our architectural heritage is, of course, important to our tourism. When people think of Scotland, they often think of Edinburgh castle, Stirling castle, the Glasgow School of Art or one of the many other Rennie Mackintosh buildings that our country has to its credit. Therefore, I very much welcome the Scottish Government’s investment in traditional building skills, which builds on the good work that Historic Scotland and its partners have done. However, it is important that we do not lose the expertise and experience of conservation and archaeological staff in local authorities, or the experience of the staff at Historic Scotland. I note with deep concern the 30 per cent decrease in funding to Historic Scotland over the next three years.

I am grateful for that reassurance, and I hope that the staff at Historic Scotland are reassured, too. Like the Scottish Government, we believe that a change to the VAT system would benefit the economy, and we have been saying so for some time. It is the case that, in times of recession, people are more inclined to extend or improve their homes rather than move to a bigger one. We should do everything that we can to encourage such decisions, but we need to ensure that the standard of our buildings—public and private, historic and modern—is maintained, and a change in the VAT rate on renovations would be an effective way of ensuring that our buildings remain in good condition, while preserving jobs in the construction industry and helping architects to remain in practice and in jobs. We must also think to the future and recognise the need to address climate change in our building methods, as the Government’s motion suggests. I recently visited the Glasgow house, which is a partnership between City Building, Glasgow Housing Association, PRP Architects and Royal Strathclyde Blindcraft Industries. Those organisations have come together to create model homes that are energy efficient and built from materials that are recycled or come from sustainable sources. They are insulated to an extremely high standard, their windows are orientated to capture the sun, and the heating system is efficient and easy to use. Overall, they are houses that are easy to build and which cost approximately £100 a year to heat. Such houses must be the way forward, and we should congratulate the partnership on its innovative approach to housing, which I hope the Government will recognise and promote.

That is absolutely right. In a sense, the minister’s comments are central to my point that it is not just a case of creating good housing; good housing must be somewhere where people want to live and will continue to want to live in the future. If, as I suggested earlier, communities are about more than just good housing—I think that they are—we must also consider the environment that people live in. In our amendment, we make the point that too often in our communities we see land being left fallow and becoming an eyesore after demolition. It often becomes a place where antisocial behaviour and fly-tipping prevail.

The member has a point, but the issue goes wider than those sites in the west end, as I will come on to explain—if he will bear with me. At the same time as those brownfield sites are becoming eyesores and places where antisocial behaviour prevails, the green belt is being eroded by new developers. I urge the Scottish Government to do everything in its power to encourage the use of such brownfield sites and to actively prioritise their development where possible. At a time of reduced spending on housing and construction more generally, I recognise that many of those areas are, in effect, stalled spaces. A small amount of investment to carry out minimal landscaping and maintenance until a use is found for the land can make a huge impact on an area and help local communities to feel safer. It might even encourage developers to come in over the longer term. I commend Glasgow City Council for its initiative, which provides small grants to help local communities turn such land into cycle tracks, community areas for growing or wildflower meadows. We need all levels of Government to address the issues that have been raised in this debate, because they all have responsibilities. We produce excellent architects and skilled tradespeople, and we are a country with fantastic natural assets. However, if we cannot employ those architects, and if we downskill our tradespeople—as some companies are currently trying to do—and fail to create the opportunities for them to use their skills, we will all be the poorer for it. I move amendment S4M-01287.2, to insert at end: “; notes that prioritising the use of brown field sites, in addition to the renovation of existing buildings, would both protect the greenbelt and enhance local communities, and considers that local communities should be an integral part of any regeneration of their local environment or facilities.”

I am not sure that I said what Jean Urquhart suggests that I did. I would not suggest for a minute that multistorey flats can never work. They can and do work extremely well. The problem with the multistorey flats about which I was talking was that they were built for families but were totally unsuitable for that purpose. However, they got people out of unsanitary conditions and, in that sense, they succeeded, although they caused other problems for those communities. Multistorey flats are not always a failure. They can work well and I can take Jean Urquhart somewhere where they work particularly well, if she is interested.

Mr McGrigor is correct to highlight the importance of bringing buildings back into use and finding new uses for them. Does he appreciate that the VAT relief that most of us now want would help us to invest more money in local economies and would probably save the Government money in the longer term?

I note the minister’s dedication to the idea of disabled people finding gainful employment. Is he able to advise whether the Scottish Government has responded to the consultation on the Sayce report on the future of workplaces such as Remploy in my constituency? If so, what conclusions did it reach in its submission?

The cabinet secretary and Mr Doris might be reassured to hear that discussions have begun concerning the future of Springburn public halls and the winter gardens. Might the cabinet secretary like to consider the funding that is available for historic places of worship? That is a popular scheme and its funding rounds are often oversubscribed, with the result that a church in my constituency is unable to take advantage of a heritage lottery grant, because it has been unable to secure matched funding from Historic Scotland. Can the cabinet secretary consider whether it would be possible to better align the criteria that organisations use when making awards?

4. To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met Scottish Enterprise and what issues were discussed concerning Glasgow’s infrastructure. (S4O-00291)

I thank the cabinet secretary for his answer, but I am sure that during those meetings Scottish Enterprise would not have volunteered the fact that it has been paying £0.25 million per annum for more than 10 years to secure a site in my constituency for which it has no plans and no use. Will the cabinet secretary agree to meet me to discuss the options that have been identified locally that could provide a purpose for the site and prevent the waste of £0.25 million of public money each year?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. With reference to Mr Fraser’s point of order, would the Presiding Officers make time available should the First Minister wish to return at the earliest opportunity to the Parliament to clarify the comments that he made?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the minister take an intervention?

From the early years of photography on Calton hill in the 1840s and the establishment of the camera obscura in Edinburgh during the 1850s, we have been fascinated by the way that technology allows us to see and capture the world around us. From those early efforts, we have looked for new and better ways of preserving the images of buildings, people, places and objects for our pleasure and study and to preserve images that might be in danger of being irretrievably lost. The digitisation of our heritage is an important part of the work of recording and making accessible many aspects of our heritage, so the debate is a useful way of recognising the good work that is being done by many of our heritage and culture agencies. However, if I may say this gently, the Government motion is a little bit limited and a little bit disappointing in its scope. The motion quite rightly recognises the work that is being done by Historic Scotland and the Glasgow School of Art, which are working together on an extremely interesting and innovative project that will allow them to capture in 3D 10 world heritage sites. The motion also recognises the work of the National Records of Scotland, particularly in making family records more readily available. However, our disappointment stems from the fact that there are so many other examples of groundbreaking, innovative and world-class projects happening here in Scotland, many of which are being undertaken by Government agencies and non-departmental public bodies, which are not recognised in the motion. I am genuinely very pleased that the cabinet secretary addressed more widely the issues raised in our amendment as well as those in her motion.

I thank the cabinet secretary for that explanation. I hope that it means that the Government will be able to support our amendment. If we really want to celebrate and recognise the value of the digitisation of our heritage, we should celebrate the contribution of all those successful projects and all the agencies in a comprehensive way. As I said, that is what inspired our amendment. I hope that the Government understands that that is what we are trying to do and that it will support us in it. Digitisation is an important tool and the quality of digitised images is improving all the time, providing access for research and study. It allows access over great distances and ensures that valuable or fragile documents are available to read or to see by anyone with a good broadband connection—my colleague Mark Griffin will say more about that later. However, access to the original is also important and a digitised version can only—at least with current technology—be a substitute or a surrogate for the real thing. I was allowed access to some of the items in the Murray archive, which was acquired by the National Library of Scotland. One of the many wonderful exhibits that it contained was a draft of “Childe Harold’s Pilgrimage” by Byron. The document had the poet’s handwritten notations and corrections in the margin and to be able to see it at close quarters was a moment that could not be replicated by the best of digital archives. Similarly, I am looking forward to seeing the Scottish ten project come to fruition, but having had the privilege of visiting St Kilda, which was one of the most amazing experiences of my life, I know that the digitised version, even in 3D, will not be able to capture the feeling of utter remoteness and the raw beauty of the island—or the strength of the wind that it experiences even on a beautiful summer’s day. Similarly, many of Scotland’s museums and galleries are now digitising their collections, which can be an excellent tool for them and for education and study. However, in 2009-10 Titian’s painting Diana and Actaeon moved from Edinburgh to Glasgow, Dundee and Aberdeen. Some 140,000 people took the opportunity to see that work in their own town or city. I am sure that some of those who went along to those exhibitions were already familiar with the painting, perhaps from illustrations in books or from postcards—and yes, perhaps from a digitised version—but at the end of the day 140,000 people took the time to go along to their local gallery to see the real thing. It seems that people prefer, where possible, to see the real thing and will make the effort to do so when they are given the opportunity. While we are on the subject, perhaps the cabinet secretary might like to indicate in closing when next we might see works from our national collections being made available in towns and cities outside Edinburgh. As we look forward to the reopening of the Scottish national portrait gallery in December, perhaps we might see some of its collection go on tour in the new year, which would allow the celebration of its refurbishment to be shared by many more people. Frankly, I am disappointed that the Titian tour seems to have been a one-off. If we are to capitalise on the interest that was generated by that painting’s exhibition around the country, it is important that we continue to provide opportunities for people to see our national collections in their local place. If used properly, our digitised collections can also be part of our tourism strategy, by showing the best of Scotland in an easily accessible way. However, collaboration between our agencies is important so that, for example, VisitScotland knows what images are available on Scran and Scran knows the type of marketing campaign that VisitScotland has planned. That will enable us to think about how the two can be brought together. In talking of Scran, we should recognise that it is one of the largest online facilities in the UK. It has some 360,000 digital resources, which support more than 4,000 schools, libraries and colleges, and it makes a significant contribution to the curriculum for excellence. The contribution that the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland has made to the digitisation of our records is an early example of excellence. For a number of years now, through Canmore and PASTMAP, RCAHMS has led the way internationally in such work. Canmore is a searchable map-based database of buildings and archaeological sites, while PASTMAP is the point of entry for five separate databases that cover the built environment. The resource that they provide is envied by other countries, and the collaboration with the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Wales that has been in place since 2003 is extremely successful. The motion refers to the work of the National Records of Scotland in making family records more accessible, and there is no doubt in my mind about how valuable a resource it is. Like many others, I have used the records of Scotland to trace my family history. From time to time, it was an extremely frustrating exercise, but it allowed me to contact family members of whom I was not previously aware. It also allowed me to dispel a long-standing family myth about the origins of the man who was thought to be my great-great-grandfather. I say “thought to be” because it transpired that the man in question was not related to me at all. It remains a mystery how that connection was ever made. I am afraid that that is a story for another day, but one that is beyond even our national archives. In order to do that work, I had to use the English records system, too, and to switch back and forth between the two sets of records. To trace my Irish heritage was even more difficult, as some of the Irish records were lost as a result of the burning of the Irish records office in 1922. However, suffice it to say that the digitised records of the archives that are held across these islands were of tremendous help, and I hope that it might be possible for the National Records of Scotland to follow the example of RCAHMS and to find a way to work with its neighbours to make the process even easier than it is now. It might even get yet another starring role on “Who Do You Think You Are?”—who knows? I close by offering a word of praise for the many conservators, archaeologists, architects and information technology officers who make the important decisions about how to manage our heritage, what to manage and in what way, because we depend on them to get it right. In times of budget cuts, the work that they do in backrooms up and down the country must not be overlooked. I move amendment S4M-01023.1, to leave out from “growing interest” to end and insert: “work being carried out by Historic Scotland and its partners on the Scottish Ten project to scan digitally and record both Scottish and international heritage sites; acknowledges that encouraging and investing in the digital future of Scotland’s heritage should go hand in hand with encouraging more visitors to internationally renowned heritage sites; recognises that the use of modern technologies should complement and interact with any tourism strategy, including genealogical tourism; applauds the ongoing work of Scran in digitising and increasing access to images and media from museums, galleries and archives, and the work of Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland in digitising and increasing access to the built environment such as archaeological, industrial and maritime sites, ancient monuments and a wide range of architecture; understands that Scran works in partnership with over 300 cultural institutions in Scotland and the rest of the UK, and with this example in mind, calls on the Scottish Government to encourage a UK-wide approach to the digitisation of family and birth records, linking the Scottish national records with other UK records to further raise interest in the exploration of personal and family histories, and commends the work of Historic Scotland and the National Records of Scotland, estimated by SPICe to be facing a cut of approximately 30% and 35% respectively in the Spending Review period.”

The debate has been thoughtful and we have heard from members about their enthusiasm for Scotland’s heritage, digitised or otherwise. Mark Griffin, Jamie McGrigor and others made an important point about the availability of broadband. We tend to take it for granted that everyone has a computer with broadband access and knows how to use it. However, as we have heard, that is not always the case. To echo Bill Walker’s point, I live in Glasgow and have working farms on my doorstep but, although it is not a particularly remote or even rural area, the broadband service to my and my neighbours’ homes is at best intermittent.

I am not sure whether Mr McGrigor is recommending that as a way of getting a better connection but, personally, I do not think that I will try it. I was taken with the cabinet secretary’s enthusiasm for the work at Bannockburn. I, too, look forward to seeing the new centre, as I think that it will be absolutely tremendous. A number of years ago I was in a situation similar to hers and I remember waxing equally lyrical about the tremendous work that was being done at Culloden to make the facilities there much more interactive and interpretive. It occurred to me that, by the time that the new Bannockburn centre opens, the Culloden facilities will be almost 10 years old. I wonder how we ensure that the technology keeps up to date and is constantly refreshed, so that Culloden does not somehow become second fiddle to Bannockburn. Willie Coffey talked about the number of people of Scots descent who live in America. I was once there in an official capacity and did a morning radio interview, during which I was told confidently by the interviewer that 5 million people in America could trace direct ancestry to Scotland. I then had another interview at 5pm that evening and was told equally confidently by another interviewer that there were 15 million such people—I did not like to claim credit for the increase on the basis of my broadcast. However, it is always worth making that point. I agree with Willie Coffey that the Robert Burns monument in Kilmarnock is a fitting location for the genealogy and other records of the town of Kilmarnock. It is a beautiful and fitting place for that. Clare Adamson rightly mentioned the unfortunate passing of Steve Jobs. We should pause to think about the opportunities that he made available to so many people and we should be encouraged by the fact that he was someone who broke rules and boundaries and who, frankly, did not take no for an answer. Like Ruth Davidson, I was intrigued by David Stewart’s comments about dusty libraries and museums, because I quite like dusty libraries and museums, too. Then I realised that, as I am sure Ruth Davidson will agree, perhaps the issue is just that we had the benefit of Kelvingrove and Mr Stewart did not. I take issue with Jean Urquhart, but only slightly. It was not my intention that every organisation that is involved in the digitisation of our heritage should somehow be listed and recorded. I just felt that the Government motion singled out a couple of organisations but that many more needed to be mentioned and recognised. The debate has borne out that point. With regard to Jean Urquhart’s point about the Titian, I agree that many people want to visit the national galleries in Edinburgh, or the Kelvingrove museum or the Burrell collection in Glasgow, but the fact remains that 140,000 people turned out to see that one painting. That tells us something about the iconic status of some works of art and items in our national collections and we should not underestimate that. We should recognise that there are a variety of approaches.

I am sorry, but I am quite pushed for time. I always forgive George Adam for being parochial. That is always very interesting, and I am partial to that kind of attitude. I am genuinely sorry that Paisley has lost its historic court and prison, but if George Adam wants to wait a month or two, he would be welcome to visit Maryhill burgh halls with me when they reopen. Maryhill was originally a police burgh. We never had a court, but we still have our cells. Like Mark Griffin, I live quite close to the Antonine wall. The area that I live in has less obvious remnants of the wall, but we must remember that it is incredibly important to the people who live around it. I am delighted that the Antonine wall has been recognised as part of a world heritage site with all the other walls of the Roman empire around Europe. That is a wonderful example of work across countries that can be done and is done to make something significant and worth while. I got a bit worried again by Jamie McGrigor’s speech. He talked about Arbroath smokies and stovies. I had visions of us having to try to work up a sniff-and-taste digitised facility to get things right, but I am sure that he did not mean that. Today, I hosted a visit to the Parliament by pupils of Balornock primary school and their visitors from Greece, Spain and Portugal. They asked me questions about my work and what it is like to speak in the chamber. I explained to them that I would be speaking this afternoon, and they naturally wanted to know what I would be speaking about. That made me pause because what we are discussing is not the easiest concept to explain to a bunch of 10-year-olds. I admit that they got the digitisation bit no problem, but I think that they struggled a little bit with the idea of heritage to begin with. Those young people came to the Parliament to experience the atmosphere and scale of the building and, when they go back to their school, they will look up online some of the things that we have discussed. Their generation moves freely between one medium and another, and I hope that they do not think that our deliberations were dry or dusty; I hope that they think that they are relevant. Today is national poetry day. In closing, I want to praise the Government. I do not do that very often, but I genuinely want to do it today. The fact that the Government now has a Robert Burns app online shows that technology and art working together can really make a difference.

I am genuinely disappointed that the cabinet secretary said that the Government party will not support our very reasonable amendment, not least because if we had stuck to speaking to the Government’s motion, we would, in strict terms, have spoken about only the Scottish ten and family records. Our amendment has given members the opportunity to range much further and wider across Scotland’s heritage. That is a good thing, and I thought that the Government would have applauded that.

9. To ask the Scottish Executive what recent discussions it has had with Glasgow City Council concerning environmental improvement initiatives. (S4O-00222)

Is the minister aware that, where land can be shown to be contaminated, a local authority has a duty to identify potential hazards and, where necessary, to remediate the land in question? That is particularly important where there are houses on the land. It is intended that the cost of such work should be recouped from the polluter. Can the minister advise my constituents and Glasgow City Council who should pay for such remediation if the polluter is a company that went out of business almost 100 years ago?

Will the minister clarify the intention behind enterprise zones? I represent a constituency with a high claimant count and I would welcome any chance to increase the opportunities for my constituents. Will the minister clarify whether, under his regime, enterprise zones are likely to duplicate the problems that were found before, where jobs were taken from one area of high employment and enticed into another?

5. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s position is on an independent Scotland joining the European Free Trade Association rather than being a member of the European Union. (S4F-00131)

Is it not time that the First Minister reflected on the confusion that he and his party are in? In the past week, we have heard three different Scottish National Party policy positions on Europe—from the First Minister, from an MEP and from the Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs. The SNP’s position is so confusing that, last week, SNP back benchers seemed to be debating a motion that Ms Hyslop had chosen not to lodge. The First Minister has been at pains to reassure members that the SNP Government has a coherent policy on Europe, but given the events of the past week, I have to ask: is he sure?

I congratulate my colleague Hugh Henry on securing this member’s debate on a subject that is not only of considerable historical importance, but of continuing contemporary relevance. It gives me particular pleasure to support a motion that marks a remarkable episode in the industrial history of Scotland and the way in which that history was made through the collective action that working people took to defend their livelihoods and communities. It is my firm belief that the struggle for economic justice in which the trade unionists at Upper Clyde Shipbuilders engaged contains significant lessons for society four decades on. The text of the first UCS co-ordinating committee leaflet contains these words: “The position of the UCS workers is clear—WE ARE GOING TO FIGHT. But then it is not just our fight alone ... We appeal to everyone ... to our brothers and sisters in the trade union movement ... to business people and shopkeepers ... to clergy of all denominations ... for HELP. Helping us is helping yourself. No more redundancies—no more unemployed. DEMAND THE RIGHT TO WORK.” Those words were a call to action, but they were also a recognition that such action, if it were to prove successful, needed to include not only the trade unionists who were directly involved, but all sections of society throughout Scotland and the UK. This brief debate is not just a welcome opportunity to celebrate the refusal of those Clydeside workers who, 40 years ago, refused to walk away when Edward Heath’s Tory Government failed to intervene to prevent bankruptcy by ending its subsidy. Indeed, we could say that Heath knowingly provoked that bankruptcy, and it is sad to note that the Conservative benches are completely empty. The debate is not only a chance to pay deserved tribute not just to remarkable working-class leaders such as Jimmy Airlie, Jimmy Reid, Sammy Barr, Bob Dickie, Sammy Gilmore and Davie Torrance, but to their ingenious notion of a work-in. It was the first time that such a tactic had ever been employed. The debate is not even only an opportunity to marvel at the way in which the UCS action engaged hundreds of thousands of workers and countless citizens throughout Scotland in support of a principle that remains as valid today as then: the right to work. Remembering all that quite correctly also brings to mind the challenges that working people face today in a time of high unemployment and economic downturn. The solution does not lie in the present Government’s attempt to attack ordinary working people’s standard of life, just as it was not the answer to leave so-called lame-duck companies to go to the wall—the Heath Government’s panacea. The answer lies in combining together and helping one another to promote a more humane set of policies that recognise that, in the words of Jimmy Reid’s rectorial address, “A rat race is for rats ... We’re human beings.” Government must “include major economic decision making by the people for the people.” As my colleague Elaine Smith said, on 1 October there will be a major demonstration in Glasgow to promote the STUC’s better way campaign. The campaign calls for a secure and sustainable future for all—a future in which the right to work and to live a decent and fulfilling life is seen as the common-sense direction of travel. That campaign honours the memory of the UCS struggle and makes clear the continuing relevance of its imaginative striving for social and economic justice.

At a time when we as a Parliament are reflecting on the powers that we have and the additional powers that we need to best serve the people of Scotland, it is right that we look at how best we can pursue that agenda in the widest possible context. Part of our concern about today’s debate is that it seems to be pushing us into making a decision about the extent and level of our EU involvement, following a debate lasting only 55 minutes. We have set up a new committee in the Parliament and have charged it with the robust scrutiny that we expect of all our committees. We expect it to take evidence from a wide range of people, to consider seriously the evidence that it hears and to come to the Parliament with its conclusions. So, I am left wondering why the Government is intent on pre-empting the committee by pushing the motion to a vote at the conclusion of only our second plenary meeting of the new term. Even more surprising is the fact that the Scottish Government seems less than clear about what it wants to achieve in terms of its engagement with Europe. After the election—indeed, up until a few days ago—the First Minister seemed to be demanding a seat at the negotiating table and to have that enshrined in law. That demand was contained in a policy paper that was produced a few weeks ago, in which it was a proposed amendment to the Scotland Bill, and it was echoed in a draft of the motion for debate today that was kindly circulated by the minister last week. In spite of the softening of the motion that we are debating today, I wonder whether Ms Hyslop has reinstated the policy or whether the policy has changed in fact.

Yes—but if the Government produces a proposition for the chamber, members must be clear about what is being proposed. We should be debating whatever the Government is trying to amend in the Scotland Bill, not some other aspect of what it would like to achieve as a transitional measure. The Government must be honest with the Parliament and say what it means. I am not privy to the internal machinations of the SNP, but this seems to be a remarkable state of affairs even by the standards of the current Government. Perhaps the confusion explains the slightly strange tone of the Government motion—for strange it is. The motion seems to suggest that the present arrangement, whereby Scottish ministers can be part of a UK delegation, is not good enough. We would accept that and have said so in the past. However, the obvious question for the Government is this: what is being done about the existing procedure and on what occasions, when it was relevant for the Government to be involved, has it been denied the opportunity to attend Council meetings? Ms Hyslop has given some examples of times when that has been the case; however, she has given us a longer catalogue of occasions when the Scottish Government was represented or was representative of the UK position. We need to be clear about where the balance of the argument lies. I think that the Scottish Government has a point regarding the way in which the issue should be taken forward, which is why our amendment is couched as it is. Nevertheless, we must be absolutely clear about what we are talking about, so I would have welcomed some more information from the Government about that. I realise that what motivates SNP ministers most is separation but, as matters stand, we are one part of a member state and the constitutional position, which David McLetchie alluded to, remains that under article 203 of the Treaty of European Union the representative to the Council of Ministers must hold a position at ministerial level and be authorised to commit the Government of the member state. Thus, members of regional and subnational Governments may attend as delegates of their member states when that delegation has been agreed at national level. In theory, that seems to be reasonable. We would be prepared to listen to the Government’s arguments for strengthening the procedure, but we have yet to have it demonstrated that that needs to be done in the way that Ms Hyslop suggests. However, there is a certain irony about today’s debate. Just under a year ago I visited Brussels as a member of the Local Government and Communities Committee. I think that Mr McLetchie was in the same delegation. We were there on the Europe 2020 strategy and to consider the impact of the Lisbon treaty. We had a series of interesting meetings and it became clear that there are already many ways in which the Government can contribute to shaping EU policy and decisions. The Commission officials we spoke to highlighted the need to produce a UK national reform programme, but also indicated to us that there was absolutely no reason why Scottish ministers should not set their own targets in relation to Europe 2020, and submit them directly. Perhaps the minister would like to say whether her Government did so. Perhaps the most telling point, though, came in the same meeting, when officials indicated that autumn 2010 was the time when requests regarding the shape of the next programming period would be made. Once again, the need for a Scottish response was emphasised. In the same meeting, officials advised us of an initiative of the Welsh Assembly Government. I quote from the committee report: “The Commission” officials “noted that the Welsh Assembly Government and Welsh Assembly had jointly met the Commission recently to outline their approach to Reform. This was contrasted with what the Commission considered a comparative ‘lack of engagement’ by Scottish actors”. There are opportunities for the Scottish Government and, indeed, the Scottish Parliament to be even more involved than we are. I would very much appreciate it if Ms Hyslop could say in her closing statement whether the Government set targets for reform and whether they were submitted to the Commission. That is a particularly important agenda, and it will be increasingly important as we go forward. As matters stand, the Scottish Government has to come up with a better policy for its engagement in Europe. It must clarify its position once and for all, and it should use the opportunities it already has and demonstrate that it understands the importance of that engagement for the sake of Scotland. I move amendment S4M-00797.2, to leave out from “notes” to end and insert: “notes that the Scotland Bill Committee has been established in the Parliament to examine the case made by ministers for new powers in a number of areas including European policy making; believes that it is important that the views of the Scottish Government and the Parliament can be effectively represented in European policy making and that Scottish and UK ministers should work together to ensure that the correct approach is being taken to achieve this, and believes that the Parliament should come to a view on this matter once the Scotland Bill Committee has taken evidence on this issue and questioned ministers, as it will do in the course of its work.”

Thank you, Presiding Officer. This has been a short debate, but it is a debate on an important issue. In spite of its short length, there have been some thoughtful contributions, which I will speak about in a moment. However, Hugh Henry was right to highlight our difficulty in following the Government’s case, not least for the reasons that Mr McLetchie has just put forward. This is happening at a time when the EU is moving towards greater interest and participation in the principle of subsidiarity. We must therefore engage with that process and, outwith the mechanisms put in place by the JMCs, there are many ways in which the Scottish Government can do that. I am not convinced, but I hope to be by the minister, that the Scottish Government always takes the opportunities that are afforded to it in that respect.

I think that the Europe 2020 agenda is entirely about that. It is a very interesting discussion, which I know the European and External Relations Committee began in the previous session. That is why a number of parliamentary committees now have reporters who specifically look at what is coming from Europe so that the discussion in Parliament can be developed before being fed back to the Government, which can then share that with the other devolved nations and, indeed, the UK Government. It is an interesting time to be involved in such discussion.

I will indulge Margo MacDonald.

I am sure that an argument about that is going on in Europe—in fact, I think that it has been going on since before the creation of the EU—and that federalism is perhaps what some nations would prefer and like. However, what we actually have and what has been agreed in Europe is the principle of subsidiarity. We need to be more engaged with that principle and to take it forward as part of our agenda. I hope that every committee in the Parliament is working in that way. One of the SNP speakers—they will forgive me if I forget who it was—mentioned that a vast quantity of legislation is coming from that direction. That process is vital and is one of the ways in which we can all be part of that agenda. Jamie McGrigor made an interesting point about the effect of competition from devolved Administrations to take a place at the Council of Ministers on behalf of the UK. How the UK Government manages that aspiration is an issue. We have a shared agenda on many issues by dint of devolution. There are often small delegations, and we must be careful about what we are doing. If we are going to take forward the discussion in a constructive way, it must involve all the devolved nations. Joan McAlpine and other colleagues have mentioned Catalonia. I gently point out that the devolved regions in Spain operate in different ways, and that Catalonia’s representation is different from that of Galicia, for example. The process and the devolution there are asymmetric, so the representation is asymmetric. That is not an argument against the Government’s proposition; rather, it is an example of how complicated the whole structure can be. Several colleagues have mentioned Belgium, and Margo MacDonald touched on some issues in the politics of that country. Belgium has not had a Government for more than a year, and it is struggling to ensure that a Government is put in place because of how it is structured and because of the competing politics there. When I have been there, it has certainly seemed to manage quite well without a Government, but perhaps none of us has a vested interest in pursuing that point. I was interested in Margo MacDonald’s comment on the Committee of the Regions. I have always seen the Committee of the Regions as a way in which back-bench MSPs could take part in discussions in Europe. I have never thought that it is the end of the story or the most fantastic mechanism that there could be, but it is the only mechanism that allows MSPs to participate in those discussions. Our colleagues in the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities also participate in them. Will the minister clarify in her closing speech why her Government now wishes to ensure that the places on that committee will go only to local government colleagues and will no longer be given to MSPs? I wonder why it is thought that an amendment to the Scotland Bill can change the EU’s constitution. The EU decides who can formally take representation and act on behalf of member states—that is laid down in the article to which I referred in my opening speech. Therefore, I do not understand how an amendment to the Scotland Bill can achieve that, although I understand the idea of having a much clearer process that gives Scotland a greater opportunity to consider that matter. I have great sympathy with the Government on that. Will the minister clarify in her closing speech whether the Government is still pursuing the amendment to the Scotland Bill that has been talked about? I know that she said that the motion is intended to allow more consensus around the issue, but almost all the speeches from SNP back-bench members have been about a motion that we do not have rather than the one that we do. I welcome the minister’s more consensual approach and the tone of the Government’s motion, but I get the feeling from the contributions of SNP back-bench members that they do not share its view, unfortunately. I would welcome the Government’s clarification on that. The debate has been interesting, and it will be interesting to follow the debate in the Scotland Bill Committee. I certainly look forward to doing that and to debating that committee’s report when it comes before Parliament in due course.

Will the minister give way?

A few days ago, an article caught my eye, not least because it combined two subjects that are very dear to me: art and the Maryhill area of Glasgow where I was born. The artist who was discussed in the article, Joe O’Brien, was born and brought up in Maryhill and his art is very much influenced by his experience of growing up there in the 1960s. Joe O’Brien is, as the article makes clear, one in a long line of artists—such as Robert Carlyle the actor, Donovan the singer and Susan Philipsz the Turner prize-winning artist, to name but a few—who come from that part of my constituency. The article suggested that perhaps that is something to do with the water in Maryhill. I, too, was born in Maryhill. Although there have been some good amateur artists and musicians in my family, I am afraid that I am not one of them. Rather than there being something in the water in Maryhill, I suggest that the blossoming of talent in the area may have something to do with our proximity to the Kelvingrove art gallery, because Kelvingrove is a place that almost every Glaswegian will have visited and in which they will have found something to admire, to inspire them and to remember. I hope that future generations will be equally inspired not just by Kelvingrove but by the new developments along the Forth and Clyde canal, which now play host to the National Theatre of Scotland, Scottish Opera and the dance studios of the Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama—or the royal conservatoire of Scotland, as all of us must soon learn to call it. The BBC comedy unit and the studio of the sculptor Andy Scott are also located in my constituency. As a city, Glasgow is immensely proud of its galleries and museums. The opening of the new Riverside museum to the public this week demonstrates a continuation of that tradition of investment in the arts. However, the provision of cultural facilities is not a statutory requirement for local authorities more generally, nor is it specified in outcome agreements. As council budgets reduce and savings are made, we must help to make the case against cuts to that part of their budgets, because there is a lot at stake. Many of our local authorities also contribute to the cost of our national companies. As a result, those companies can tour the country, mount new works and engage with schools, thereby extending access to the best that Scotland produces. However, if we do not also invest in the grass roots—for example, in music tuition for school pupils—we will produce neither the performers and artists nor the audiences of tomorrow. The minister may be reluctant to argue in Cabinet for additional money for local authorities to allow them to continue to make provision for culture in their areas, but I wonder whether she can at least make the commitment today in the chamber that support for the arts will be included in the outcome agreements that are negotiated with them. This year the budget for our national performing companies and museums is scheduled to be cut by 4 per cent. There is also a 4 per cent cut to the budget in Wales. The difference is that the cuts in Wales will be spread over three years, whereas budgets in Scotland will take the full hit in just one. If we consider the complexity of running a museum or gallery, we must understand the pressure that a one-year budget imposes on those who run such institutions.

It may have protected them in 2010-11, but it does not do so in 2011-12. That is the point that I am making. We are talking about the here and now. Could the minister tell us today whether the practice of awarding moneys only for a 12-month period will persist throughout this session or whether a more strategic and sensible approach will be reinstated? I was surprised that, in her opening remarks, she did not commit the Government to maintaining free access to our national collections. I am sure that she failed to do so only because of time, as I know that the commitment was contained in the SNP manifesto. However, I would be grateful if she would confirm the principle, which Labour members guard jealously. Labour’s position is that the funding of Scotland’s museums and galleries is an investment. The Government’s studies tell us that 25 million people visit our museums and galleries every year and contribute £800 million to our economy, and that our cultural and creative industries make a contribution of £5.4 billion per annum. The United Kingdom economy is predicted to grow by 0.39 per cent per annum between 2007 and 2014, but the rate of growth in the cultural and creative sector is predicted to be 1.05 per cent per annum—three times higher. That is borne out by the experience of Glasgow. Since it had the accolade of city of culture in 1990, the number of cultural jobs in the city has increased by 43 per cent. On average, 82 per cent more performances are being staged in the city. If we are ambitious for our country, it is surely sensible for us to invest in this area. Worryingly, the cut to the culture and Gaelic budget totals 9.9 per cent. The budget for Creative Scotland has been frozen, meaning that there will be little or no cash for new organisations or funding streams. Creative Scotland is tasked with carrying out the functions of both the Scottish Arts Council and Scottish Screen, but it must also take on additional responsibilities. To ask a new organisation to take on such an onerous workload with a budget that is, in effect, reduced is potentially problematic. It is not just in economic terms that culture, the creative industries and the arts are important. Culture shapes our identity, provides us with recreation, educates us and gives us joy. I believe that John Ruskin was correct when he said: “Great nations write their autobiographies in three manuscripts—the book of their deeds, the book of their words and the book of their art ... of the three the only trustworthy one is the last.” This country has long-standing links with many developing countries. From a colonial past, we have managed to build friendships that endure. It is right that we, as a relatively wealthy nation, do what we can to assist those countries and help them to develop their potential. When that work began, there were those who said that we were wrong to do it—that we should concentrate on problems at home and not concern ourselves with such issues. I defy anyone to visit Bottom hospital in Malawi and tell us that we were wrong. I defy anyone to say that Scotland’s relationship—and Shetland’s relationship in particular—with Minga school has not improved lives. I absolutely disagree with anyone who argues that we should have stood back when people in Sri Lanka, Pakistan and Haiti were devastated by natural disasters. Scotland has made a difference, and I hope that we continue to do so for years to come. I am not for a moment saying that everything is perfect, but I think that the project-based approach is right, as is funding agencies and charities rather than Governments. We can be proud of the consensual approach that we have taken on these issues over the years, whether it has been through the cross-party groups, the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association or the wider work of the Parliament, in conjunction with the Government. It is right that the Parliament monitors and scrutinises the approach of the Government as it awards funding and sets priorities, although that is done in a spirit of genuine concern so as to achieve the maximum benefit for the countries with which we work. Those who have been involved in that work have gained, too, in new experiences and in opportunities to test their professional skills in a very different environment from the one that they are used to. It is a true spirit of partnership. In the past week, Parliament has had the opportunity to debate two important areas from the cabinet secretary’s portfolio. I am beginning to notice the familiar faces: those of us with a genuine and probably passionate interest in culture, who will be turning out for debates such as this as we go forward. This is an area where we have a huge amount to gain as a nation. If we invest now, we can reap the benefits in future. I was delighted to hear the minister—the cabinet secretary, I am sorry—talking about the links with tourism and events, which I was passionate about in a previous existence. I suggest that the inclusion of tourism in the portfolio might not be a bad thing.

I am not quite sure how to follow Jamie McGrigor’s congratulations to Ted Brocklebank and his fiancée, but I simply say congratulations to them and all the very best for the future. I should probably draw a line under the matter there—except to say that those best wishes are very sincere indeed. Like Jamie, I, too, congratulate my friend and colleague Hanzala Malik on his maiden speech. Hanzala’s own life straddles two communities in Glasgow, and his interests straddle many more. His political activity follows on from that of his mother, Philomena, and his late father Mohammed, who was a great ambassador for his local community and a great servant of it. It is fair to say that he would be very proud of his son today. In my opening speech, I could not do justice to all the areas of the debate that we were about to have. Now, I will try to pick up on some of the issues that other members have raised but which I was not able to address. I say very gently to SNP members that the interest of the Parliament, and indeed previous Governments, in culture and external affairs existed before—it did not just start in 2007. Up until 2007, culture was in fact represented at the Cabinet table, so that is not a new development. A number of the achievements that have been lauded today were not the whole or even the sole responsibility of the past or current Scottish Government. I will cover this quickly, as I do not wish the nature of the debate to be of the kind that it was veering towards in some speeches, but I seem to remember two things—Creative Scotland and the new relationship with the performing companies—as predating 2007. Similarly, the idea of the year of homecoming was not a new one; it was actually the idea of Jim Wallace, the former Deputy First Minister, and it followed on from the year of Highland culture, which was very successful. The idea of 2014 being celebrated partly as a year of sport was in the Labour manifesto in 2007, and it is something that I personally urged the Government to adopt on a number of occasions. Needless to say, I was ignored, but I am delighted anyway that we will be celebrating that year in the way that the minister outlined. Ruth Davidson was correct to say that previous Commonwealth games have normally been accompanied by a cultural festival. Indeed, I was delighted to attend the cultural festival that accompanied the 2006 Commonwealth games in Melbourne. Entry to the festival, which lasted for two weeks and mirrored the timetable of the games, was free to anyone who wanted to go along. I wonder whether, in her closing speech, the minister could advise the Parliament of the developments that are probably already under way for 2014, as it would be interesting to hear them being outlined. This afternoon’s speeches have been interesting. Jim Eadie was absolutely right, as were Jamie McGrigor and the minister, to focus on the contribution of Mary’s Meals. I am sure that anyone who has had any direct involvement with Mary’s Meals realises how such a small contribution to an individual child can have such a huge effect. As we sit here in the relative comfort of Scotland, we cannot understand it. Only if we actually see it being demonstrated in Malawi, where one mug of porridge at lunch time can make the difference between a child being able to attend or not attend school, can we appreciate how huge an impact a small contribution can have. We have much to thank Mary’s Meals for, given its contribution to Malawi and to the reputation of Scotland as a generous, forward-thinking country. My colleague Kezia Dugdale correctly highlighted the efforts and the contribution of those who work backstage in our theatres to help us to enjoy the performances that we go to. They are often forgotten, and at a time of cutbacks they are also often the first people who find themselves having to look for other employment. As an avid reader, I was interested in what Kezia Dugdale said about the crime novels of Edinburgh in particular and Scotland in general. Edinburgh was awarded the accolade of city of literature partly because of its reputation for crime novels, but also because of J K Rowling, Alexander McCall Smith and others. That accolade was awarded by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization without any discussion, and it is one of which the city of Edinburgh should be proud. Aileen McLeod made an interesting speech on the issues around representation in the EU and Europe more generally. Given her political viewpoint, I understand her argument. I do not necessarily subscribe to it—I do not think that she would expect me to—but I mention that, on one occasion when I visited Brussels with a delegation, it was pointed out that the Scottish Government had a little bit to learn. The example that was given to us was the engagement on the part of the Welsh Assembly, which involved Welsh ministers and Assembly members visiting Brussels together to make their contribution and represent a comprehensive view of what the Welsh Assembly and the Welsh Assembly Government thought should be happening. The Scottish Government should think about that and take forward a similar initiative. Derek Mackay should make no apologies for being parochial—there might be things that he should apologise for, but being parochial is not one of them. However, I do not look forward to taking part in the debate that is bound to take place next year on his motion on the anniversary of the “snail in the bottle” case. I am joking: I studied it at college many years ago and realise how important it is. It would be a fascinating debate to take part in. I, too, am a fan of Sandy Stoddart. I once had a long, interesting and enjoyable conversation with him about his idea for a statue of Ossian to be carved on one of Scotland’s premier mountains. I did not think that that would be a good issue to take up with Patrick Harvie and his colleagues, and I think that even Mr Stoddart realised that the proposal should be parked for the present. Jenny Marra is right to say that there is a warmth about Scotland that is reflected around the world. I think that people recognise us as the outgoing, generous country that we are and always have been. That is not necessarily anything new, but it should be remarked upon. I know that fair trade is of interest and concern to many members. I want Scotland to become a fair-trade nation just as badly as anyone else, but I have always believed that it is the journey to fair-trade nation status that matters. It is the number of cities, towns, colleges, universities, churches and individuals we take with us on that journey that is important, not the accolade itself. I ask the minister—I am sorry, the cabinet secretary; I apologise for that once again—to say whether the Government has taken on board the points that were raised by the European and External Relations Committee in the previous session about the importance of the Government considering and lobbying for human rights in its dealings with other countries. I know that there was some success in that work with China, which I applaud and appreciate, but it would be helpful to hear a little more about that, because it concerns many members. This afternoon’s debate has been interesting and comprehensive and has ranged across what is a very broad portfolio. I look forward to debating the issues many more times in the next five years.

The minister has amplified my point. Some councils and council leaders are enthusiastic about culture and sport, which is often tagged along with it, but people should not have to rely on the enthusiasm of an individual or some individuals within a local authority. People look to us to level playing field for them.

I thank the minister for her good wishes. I hope that she will not mind my saying that it is good to see culture back at the Cabinet table. It has languished a little in the past number of years. I am pleased to open this debate on broadcasting and the digital network for Scottish Labour. As the minister said, our dialogue and debate are timely given that much of Scotland is moving over from analogue to digital. I am sure that I am not the only one in the chamber this afternoon who has unexpectedly lost channels along the way. So far, I have managed to retrieve them, and I hope that that is the case for everyone else, too. Technology is moving quickly. The opportunities before us are many, and it is right that we reflect on them at the beginning of this parliamentary session. Speaking as someone who is old enough—just, I hasten to add—to remember the advent of BBC 2 and a time when the top prize in a game show could be the much-sought-after colour television, I find that it is sometimes hard to keep up with the changes that are happening and with the technology that we now use. I suspect that in the near future—in fact, it may already have happened—the television in the corner of the sitting room will become a thing of the past. Of course, it is already possible to watch television on one’s MP3 player or phone, and broadcasters will be quick to try to capture the market in personalised television, in which people can choose to watch what they want, when they want, on the device of their choosing. As I have said, we are almost there now with the advent of the BBC iPlayer and its equivalent on other channels, but it is not just television that is affected—radio is, too. One advantage of a digital network is that it can work across the various platforms that exist. It is important that we do not become too fixated with television, important though it is. In its report, the Scottish digital network panel quoted Scottish Enterprise, which stated in 2009 that the introduction of the Scottish digital network, combined with the envisaged increase in network production in Scotland, could result in a doubling in the number of people who work in the sector in Scotland. That would, of course, be a very welcome achievement. We must use the skills that already exist, but it is also vital that we train people in new skills and new technologies. Scottish Labour’s amendment seeks to highlight that necessary part of the discussion. Indeed, the digital network panel itself recognised that there was a skills gap and shortage in the sector. My colleague David Stewart will talk in more detail about broadband, but we all know that good, reliable broadband access is vital to encourage economic growth and to improve digital inclusion across the country. The work done by Highlands and Islands Enterprise in securing £10 million from the UK Government to improve the broadband infrastructure and its speed is worthy of note, and I know that the Government supports the idea of other local communities and local authorities applying for some of the money that the UK Government has available. However, I wonder whether the minister could outline what shape she believes that Scottish Government support should take. Similarly, could she provide the salient points and timeline that will ensure that the Scottish Government’s target of everyone having access to superfast broadband by 2020 will be achieved?

Given the publication of the strategy in March, I was going to ask the minister what steps had been taken thereafter to make it a reality, so that intervention was helpful. As others have said—Ruth Davidson mentioned this in her intervention—we know that broadband take-up is low in Scotland. In my home city, it is lower even than the Scottish average. It seems to me that we have a chicken-and-egg situation. People will not be tempted to receive their programming from broadband if it is as slow, weak and unreliable as mine often is, but without a critical mass of users we will not get the quality content that people want. If we are ambitious for broadcasting in Scotland, as I believe that we all are, we must produce good-quality material, and the Government, through its agencies, must support those producers who share that ambition. In its submission to the Scottish digital network panel, Creative Scotland stated: “Our key message is that a digital network could be transformational—for the cultural sector and for the engagement of audiences, but the key will be investing in content.” I am sure that none of us would disagree with that. That investment must be targeted not only at the bigger companies, but also at the smaller ones, which must be supported. We have a breadth of talent in our creative industries but it all needs support to help it to thrive and develop. Scottish Labour supports the idea of a Scottish digital network, but we strongly believe that quality should be the driving force of the network and we do not believe that it should be introduced at the expense of existing channels. Any strategy for the network has a delicate balance to achieve if it is to be successful. The Scottish digital network panel also seemed to talk only of Scottish content and the opportunities to promote that content around the world. I sincerely hope that that was not what it was suggesting. Our culture and our people benefit from and are stronger because of their exposure to other countries over the years. Surely, we want to ensure that we have access to what other countries have to offer. The joy and the success of events such as the Edinburgh international festival exist in the coming together of cultures from around the world and the opportunity that we are given not only to see new performances by our own companies, but to experience the very best that the world has to offer. I believe that a digital network should be no different. I am delighted that BBC Scotland has now exceeded its own interim target for production in Scotland, but I am even happier that much of that production has been good-quality drama and interesting and insightful documentary programmes that have attracted audiences both in Scotland and throughout the UK. I am sure that many of those programmes will go on to be sold abroad, too. However, although the BBC has made significant progress, it still has work to do to meet the 8.6 per cent target that the Scottish Broadcasting Commission suggested and, unfortunately, other broadcasters do not seem to be making the progress that the BBC has made, which is a bit disappointing. As someone who was there at the beginning, I am very pleased that BBC Alba is now on Freeview. I have also watched with pleasure the growth in the range of programming that that service now offers. When I watched RockNess the other weekend, I was particularly interested to see the way in which the broadcasters were able to switch languages and bring us in and out of the culture, which I thought was very clever. The minister talked about local TV, and I am interested in the point that she makes. I refer back to the draft culture (Scotland) bill, which became the Creative Scotland Bill. In England and Wales, local authorities can broadcast some limited information about the services that they offer and the work that they do. The original draft bill contained that provision for Scottish local authorities; unfortunately, it was then stripped out by one of the minister’s predecessors. I realise that that is not what the minister is talking about today, but that might have given us a foot in the door and made that part of the debate a little bit easier. Members might be interested to know that it looks as though Brad Pitt may make his next film in Glasgow and that the next Batman movie may also be filmed there. I am sure that the Presiding Officer is a big Batman fan. If those projects go ahead, they will provide a real boost for the city and will reward the good work that is being done by the city council and its partners in attracting such high-profile work to Glasgow. Other local authorities working with Scottish Screen and now with Creative Scotland have had similar successes. That is to be welcomed and supported because it brings money into our economy and further enhances our reputation as a tourism destination. Nevertheless, we could do more and I hope that Creative Scotland will prioritise that area. I look forward to the rest of the debate and to the speeches that colleagues around the chamber will make. I confirm Scottish Labour’s support for a Scottish digital network and our belief that it should offer content of the highest quality and that its establishment should not be at the expense of existing channels. We must invest in the skills and training that will allow Scotland to be a destination of choice for programme makers. I move amendment S4M-00308.2, to leave out “, particularly” and insert: “and the need to invest in skills and training to maximise opportunities for the industry and”.

I gently suggest to Clare Adamson that much of that has to do with editorial practices in programming situations. For example, if she casts her mind back to the success of the Commonwealth games youth team several years ago, on the day when it came home with a huge haul of medals that had never been surpassed, “Good Morning Scotland” on BBC Radio Scotland covered the elephant polo championships.

The worry that many of us have is that some speeches, particularly from SNP back benchers, suggest that the content should be exclusively Scottish, for Scottish people.

I am pleased to speak in the debate and I welcome the opportunity that Bob Doris’s motion gives us. Returning members will recall that racism and sectarianism aroused great passion in a former member with whom I am well acquainted, and I share those concerns. I recall that member securing similar debates in 2004 and 2006. Let us hope that, one day, we will not be required to debate such issues any longer. For my part, I am proud to represent one of the most ethnically diverse constituencies in the country. One of the largest and most influential ethnic groups is the Irish community, which has played a central role in civic, religious and political life in Glasgow for generations. It is sad that there are people who have been slow and often unwilling to embrace diversity and who refuse to accept that we live in a multicultural Scotland. Attitudes that are often rooted in ignorance and misapprehension, such as homophobia, Islamophobia and sectarianism, manifest themselves in unacceptable patterns of behaviour. The events of recent months should leave no doubt in anyone’s mind that sectarianism is alive and well in modern Scotland. The sending of parcel bombs to Neil Lennon, Paul McBride QC and former member of the Scottish Parliament Trish Godman was utterly unacceptable and wholly unjustifiable. The people who were responsible for the outrages must be brought to justice and must feel the full force of the law. Their attitudes and actions have no place in Scottish society. The Scottish Government plans to introduce legislation to tackle sectarianism at football matches and on the internet. Perhaps as soon as next week, we will get the chance to debate and vote on the Government’s proposals. I share members’ concern about the timescale, but I genuinely hope that the measures in the bill will be sensible, practical and enforceable, and that the Parliament can reach a consensus. I gently point out that sectarianism is not just an issue for football; it is also an issue in wider society. The recent high-profile events have again turned attention to the issue, but it must be remembered that since 2003 more than 2,200 individuals have been convicted of religiously aggravated offences under section 74 of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2003. Indeed, individuals have been convicted in every procurator fiscal area in Scotland. That is an average of about 330 convictions per year. Each and every one of those offences had a victim and a perpetrator, and each and every offence was entirely unjustifiable. If we are to break the depressing cycle of threat, hatred and violence, we must look beyond the football terraces and invest in quality education projects in our schools, colleges and workplaces. Members might have read an editorial in Saturday’s edition of The Scotsman, in which it was argued: “Whatever we do in the courts and at sports stadiums, the longer-term work of educating the next generation has to remain the main goal.” We should all echo those sentiments. People are not born bigoted; they become exposed to bigotry and intolerance. Without early intervention there is a risk that another generation will be blighted by the bitterness of old battles and prejudices. During my time as Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport, I was proud to make a small contribution to the first-ever Government action plan to tackle sectarianism. Education initiatives were at the heart of the programme, and the measures that were put in place have borne considerable fruit in recent years, most notably with the building of shared campuses and the twinning of schools. The Keppoch campus in my constituency, which officially opened in February 2007, is a genuine success story and has provided a first-class school building and a multifaith backdrop that supports pupils’ education. Such success has been replicated throughout the country. The aforementioned Scotsman editorial highlighted the shared campus that is used by Broomhouse primary school and St Joseph’s primary school in Edinburgh, where “Children who once abused each other across the school fence have been drawn together through, among other things, their love of sport and games.” I would be interested to learn from the minister whether the Scottish Futures Trust has had discussions with local authorities about building on that success and establishing more shared campuses in Scotland. Will the minister also comment on whether the twinning projects, which cost a mere £100,000 to put in place and were so successful in bringing together young people of all faiths and none to work on shared projects and learn about one another, are likely to be replicated? If we do not tackle the problem now, we run the risk of making what Jack McConnell described as “Scotland’s secret shame” a public shame. If we are to break the cycle, we must work together and address the problem wherever it manifests itself.

I, too, welcome Nicola Sturgeon to her new extended portfolio and the concentration on sport that Shona Robison is now being allowed to have. I am sure that she will very much enjoy that portfolio. I also congratulate Michael Matheson on his elevation to the ministerial benches. As a Partick Thistle supporter, I particularly like to see other such supporters being recognised. However, I wonder whether we are doing Mr Matheson any favours by continually mentioning his footballing allegiances, given that his constituency is in Falkirk. Perhaps we can draw a line under such comments. This debate offers the Parliament an early opportunity to discuss policy areas that are vital to Scotland’s future. In her excellent speech, my colleague Jackie Baillie outlined our concerns and ideas about the health and care services that we will all, at some time, have to rely on. I want to concentrate on the importance of our cities, and in that respect I make no apologies for concentrating on my home city of Glasgow. At a time when Scotland’s youth unemployment rate is more than double the average unemployment rate, and given that the number of 16 to 24-year-olds claiming jobseekers allowance for six months or more has risen by 126 per cent over the two years from November 2008 to November 2010, we need a coherent strategy for economic growth. Central to any such strategy are our cities, especially the greater Glasgow conurbation. If the economy of Glasgow and west-central Scotland flourishes, all of Scotland will benefit. To have any realistic prospect of success in creating an overarching, coherent strategy for growth, the Government at Holyrood, regardless of its political complexion, needs to work in partnership with local government. The needs and requirements of any city are complex. In that, Glasgow is no different from any other major city around the world. Glasgow needs infrastructure that can help it to create employment and to deliver growth, and it needs that infrastructure to be resilient. In recent years, Glasgow has made a tremendous effort to become a tourism destination of real value, and it has succeeded in that regard. The work of previous Labour Administrations in initiating work on the M77 and—I say to Mr Mason—the M74 helped enormously, as did the route development fund, which was also a driver in Glasgow’s success. However, the Glasgow airport rail link and Glasgow crossrail were complementary to those schemes. Their cancellation was a mistake—a missed opportunity for Glasgow and Scotland. I regret those SNP decisions, because I genuinely believe them to be mistakes that all of us will come to regret.

I am not in the game of playing one project off against another. A more interesting question that the member might like to consider is why almost all SNP members—certainly those who represented or aspired to represent Glasgow—were supporters of crossrail and GARL until the moment when the pen was put through the relevant line in the budget. That is an interesting question to which I have never received a satisfactory answer. However, given that there is little likelihood of a rethink on the issue in the next five years, there is probably little point in my dwelling on it further at this time. I commend two infrastructure initiatives on which there seems to be common ground. I hope that the benefits of those initiatives will guarantee sustained central Government support for them. The modernisation of Glasgow’s subway meets one essential of Glasgow City Council’s city plan 2: the need to reduce travel by car. I notice that the SNP manifesto specifically echoed Labour’s promise of “significant investment” in that regard. That is the right thing to do. Modernisation will result in increased patronage and deliver more than £280 million-worth of economic benefits and a further £47 million in wider economic benefits to the region. I hope that substantial Government investment will allow the root-and-branch revamp of the system that Strathclyde partnership for transport has argued for and which is desperately needed. I also hope that the Government will look again at the idea of a rolling programme of regeneration moneys being made available to our local town centres. I know that the money that has been invested in Maryhill burgh halls will make a real difference to Maryhill, but I also know how much the money that Possilpark bid for would have achieved and how disappointed local people and traders were that it did not materialise. I hope that we can revisit that fund, for the sake of the many local town centres across Scotland that would benefit from it. Glasgow has long understood the transformational value of sport and culture, and the added value that both bring to tourism. The city understands sport, and the city council has worked long and hard to make Glasgow a world-class venue. Its success in securing the Commonwealth games will allow it to build a lasting legacy for years to come—not just in infrastructure. We also have a strong cultural heritage in Glasgow. The city has produced many world-renowned artists over the years, not by accident but because it is a city that recognises that art raises the spirits and allows people a glimpse of another world. For an outward-looking city, that is important. A proper cities strategy is vital to economic recovery and to the building of a better Scotland. As a city that still lags far behind in terms of life expectancy and has all the other indicators that suggest that poverty is still too endemic, we cannot afford to wait. We must unite across the chamber to address this issue. I very much look forward to hearing the ideas that the cabinet secretary brings forward in her new role.

I rise to support the amendment in the name of my colleague Dr Richard Simpson and, in doing so, I congratulate Humza Yousaf on his maiden speech, which was an extremely thoughtful contribution to the debate—I hope that that does not get him into trouble on his own benches. It is my belief and the Labour Party’s conviction that sport is central to the wellbeing and vitality of our nation. The health and social benefits to be gained from active lifestyles are enormous; Government’s job is to ensure that opportunities for everyone to participate in sport are readily available. Government must also do better in getting across the message that sport matters. Sport matters for so many reasons. At the highest level, it can be a force that unites and inspires the nation. The success of our elite spokespeople—sorry, sportspeople—can and does galvanise our population; our spokespeople do not do that very often. In communities, sport can be a beacon, bringing people together and breaking down barriers in the pursuit of improved health and wellbeing, as well as in social activities. It can transform the lives of individuals across all ages, areas and social groups. Sport and physical activity improve health, strengthen communities, reduce inequalities, underpin educational attainment and support lifelong learning. That is why Scottish Labour will support radical action to develop and deliver a national plan for sport. Labour agrees that we must use the 2012 Olympics—and, more important, the 2014 Commonwealth games in Glasgow—as a launch pad for a sporting vision that will enrich our entire nation. That is why we worked so hard in government to win the games and why we will continue to strongly support them in opposition. The Commonwealth games are key to a healthier, more active Scotland. We must employ the period in the run-up to the games to emphasise the urgent need for Scotland to become more active. Nearly 2,500 people die prematurely each year in this country simply because they are inactive. That is a distressing statistic. Scottish Labour believes that a new attitude to sport and physical activity can change that appalling situation for the better. Such a change would represent the most significant legacy that the games can offer. It might not be immediate, but it will be lasting. Another disturbing fact is that 150,000 Scottish children are now classed as obese. I firmly believe that, through sport and the Commonwealth legacy, we can ensure that the current generation of schoolchildren is not condemned to a life of obesity and illness. Sport can help to reverse those damning trends, but only if we parliamentarians recognise its importance and place it at the forefront of our national agenda. It is my view and that of Scottish Labour that activity in schools is absolutely vital to the establishment of a lifetime of healthy living. We need to renew and reinvigorate the two-hour target of quality PE in our schools. Admittedly some progress has been made, but it is still the case that only 55 per cent of primary schools are meeting that target, while levels remain even lower in secondary schools. As a Parliament, we need to do more. We can do that by championing physical activity in schools so that it is no longer thought of as some extra or peripheral subject.

I am delighted to hear Mrs MacDonald say that and I agree entirely. I have a funny feeling that we debated that very matter a couple of years ago in a members’ business debate—

Mrs MacDonald had a slightly different attitude to the matter then, so I am delighted that she has come round to my way of thinking for a change. We need to work together with all the interested parties to implement a best practice programme and to encourage schools to adopt creative, modern approaches to engaging our young people. That will mean embracing a wide range of activities. Physical activity does not have to mean solely a diet of exercises in the gym, but can include cheerleading or dance, which are particularly good ways of encouraging young women to be active. We know that inactivity is a particular problem with young women: up to the age of 12, they are as active as young men, but at the age of 12, their activity level falls to one that men do not reach until they are 40. Central to that approach will be the active schools co-ordinators. We need to see their numbers grow to meet the two-hour PE or activity target. Active schools co-ordinators help to create opportunities to exercise. One way that they do that is by working with individuals and organisations outside school to help link young people with sports clubs in the community so that their activity does not end when they leave school. I realise that I am running out of time rather more quickly than I thought, so I will move towards the end of my speech. As we all know, swimming at a young age can be a catalyst for long-term activity. It is a sound starting point from which pathways into other sports branch off. Scottish Labour’s idea of a Commonwealth swimming fund has merit. Such a fund would ensure that every primary pupil in the country was entitled to free school swimming lessons, paving the way for a lifetime of activity. I will take up the consensual approach of the minister and Mr Yousaf with my second suggestion, which is that sport in schools should be fun. If children enjoy activities, they will catch the sporting bug and be active for life. To encourage that, the Government should consider introducing a Commonwealth legacy schools programme. Across Scotland, primary pupils would work towards Commonwealth legacy status by pushing for common sporting goals. I will not go into the examples that I might have given otherwise, but I will say that children would lead the grass-roots revolution in the same way as in many of our communities they now lead in environmental issues through the eco-schools programme. We would welcome the opportunity to discuss those ideas with the minister in more detail. Scottish Labour believes in sport as a vehicle for positive change that can enrich our country and improve lives. Sport is for everyone, from the young baby learning to swim to our athletes winning gold medals, and from the supporter who owns part of her football club to the pensioner who takes part in the sole mates walking groups in my constituency. The reality is that 2014 provides our nation with a golden opportunity. We must strive for the prize because in the fight against ill health and obesity losing just cannot be contemplated.

7. To ask the Scottish Executive what its priorities are for tackling antisocial behaviour in communities. (S3O-13417)

Does the minister agree that Labour’s antisocial behaviour legislation has made a difference to people’s everyday lives across Scotland? Does he also agree that Labour’s new five-point plan on the issue is an important step forward in combating the scourge of antisocial behaviour? Will he join me in congratulating the community and agencies of Possilpark on their positive response to the dispersal order in the area, which has reduced disorder by 80 per cent in the period in which it has operated?

I, too, have been lobbied by many organisations, both within and outside my constituency. For the avoidance of doubt, I put my mind to the point that Patrick Harvie raised. In my view, in addition to the points that Pauline McNeill made and which Robert Brown amplified, amendment 1 would ensure that my constituents—many of whom are students—are no longer required to live in rooms in which there is no natural light because of subdivision and would ensure that they have sanitary facilities that work and that do not cause environmental and social problems for their neighbours. Amendment 1 is about more than convenience or inconvenience; it is about the safety and wellbeing of those who live in HMOs and those who live in the wider environment round about. I therefore support amendment 1.

Although the bill is one of the last that we shall consider in this session of the Parliament, its gestation has been fairly long. Most of its provisions were originally contained within the most recent Housing (Scotland) Bill and, therefore, have perhaps received more than their fair share of scrutiny. Nevertheless, the bill that we will pass today contains provisions that will help to strengthen existing legislation on landlord registration and houses in multiple occupation. It also attempts to offer some protection to people who may live in overcrowded conditions in the private rented sector. I do not have time to discuss all the bill’s provisions, so I will concentrate on the two that are of most interest to my constituents: landlord registration and the licensing of houses in multiple occupation. We all recognise the need to protect people from unscrupulous landlords, but it is also necessary to do that without putting undue pressure on the decent landlords who provide good-quality accommodation, register their properties as required and fulfil their obligations. The bill broadly delivers on that aim, which is welcome. However, I am not sure that an increase in the level of fine that can be given for offences under the legislation will have the deterrent effect for which the minister hopes. I and others made that point during the passage of the bill and I would be grateful if the minister would indicate whether he has had an opportunity to discuss with the law officers how the courts could be persuaded to take breaches of the legislation seriously, to impose fines that we think are proper on those who are convicted and, thereby, to provide a real deterrent. The Parliament passed HMO legislation in an earlier session because it recognised that young people and vulnerable people needed protection from unscrupulous landlords who exposed them to unsafe and sometimes downright dangerous situations. The issue came to a head when two young students died tragically in a fire in my constituency because they could not escape through the barred windows of the basement flat that they were renting. HMO legislation has helped to make conditions safer for people who rent, but the time has come for us to look at the bigger picture and consider the effect that multiple occupation has on the fabric of properties and on the communities where those properties are located. It is in no one’s interest for entire areas of our towns and cities to be swamped by properties that are rented out in this way. We must surely all desire vibrant, diverse communities that people want to live in. I hope that a strategy for young people’s housing will be developed and that those issues will be considered when that is done. For those reasons, I very much welcome the amendments in the names of Pauline McNeill and Ted Brocklebank. I congratulate the minister on his Damascene conversion. It reminded me that, many years ago, a former colleague of mine said that Alex Neil could cause a fight in an empty house. I am happy that Mr Neil did not live up to that description this afternoon and that he showed that he has many qualities that are perhaps more desirable to the rest of us. The amendments that Pauline McNeill and Ted Brocklebank lodged are important, because they address the central issue of inappropriate conversions that damage the fabric of buildings, cause nuisance—and, often, inconvenience—to neighbours and often mean that young people and vulnerable people live in properties whose standards would in all other circumstances be deemed intolerable. My only worry about Ted Brocklebank’s amendment 15 is that it leaves much of the responsibility with local authorities. However, on balance, it is probably best to allow local authorities that flexibility, so I accept the rationale that is at play. Questions still remain in my mind about the bill’s efficacy. Will it deliver the deterrent effect that it promises? Does it put in place the right measures to deal with overcrowding, without imposing a greater burden on social landlords? Does it go far enough in controlling HMOs appropriately? I suppose that time will tell. In the meantime, I thank all those who have been involved in the bill’s passage—particularly the witnesses, whose evidence genuinely helped to shape the bill.

Does the minister accept that the issue is not just the location of the judgment but the courts having an understanding of the effects that behaviour can have on a wider community? I cite the example that I have raised before of people who have been convicted of drug dealing—it may be impossible to secure an eviction even though there has been a conviction. Does the minister agree with that summary?

Like other members, I congratulate my colleague Des McNulty on securing the debate. As his motion makes clear, it is 70 years since Clydebank was bombed. As time wears on, the number who experienced that first hand diminishes, and it falls to our generation to ensure that those horrific events are not forgotten and that the memories of them are passed on to the next generation. As Des McNulty said, Clydebank was the target because of its industrial strength and its position on the Clyde. As often happens in war, not all the Luftwaffe’s bombs fell on target. The suburb of Knightswood took a direct hit and 40 people were killed when Bankhead school, which was being used as a civil defence station, was hit. Of course, I want to speak of the effect on my constituency. Several landmines—because landmines they were—fell in what is now Maryhill constituency. Bill Aitken mentioned one. Another fell in Crosbie Street, close to where I live, and demolished a tenement building. Another fell in what were then open fields west of Duncruin Street. Another hit a tenement building at 32 to 36 Kilmun Street and demolished it. One blast wrecked St Mary’s primary school. Properties in neighbouring streets sustained heavy damage. Seven people from two families—the Scotts and the Simpsons—died in Kilmun Street on 14 March 1941. They included boys of six, seven and nine years old. It is thought that the death toll would have been even higher if it had not been for the practice of creating strutted closes. Props were put into the mouths of closes for people to shelter under when air-raid warnings went off. Many buildings in the area had that additional support, which for many made a difference to whether they collapsed. It is fortunate that Glasgow City Council’s archive for the events of the evening of 14 March and the evening before it is extensive. The records show that more than 1,000 telephone calls were made to the Air Raid Precautions station on the night of 14 March, and every one of those records has been preserved, as has been the warden’s report of that night. Like many wartime records, it is surprisingly matter of fact about actions that were anything but. I will quote a short section that demonstrates that. The warden said: “On reaching post F11 at Lennox Street and Maryhill Road, I found the people rushing from the scene. These were put into shelters in the Tramway Depot at Celtic Street. The wardens at this point were splendid attending to injured and taking the lead in the matter of rescue. I noticed that the ‘homeless’ would be in the way to any work being done. So I ‘borrowed’ one of the trams and with one of my wardens we drove the homeless to the rest centre at Eastpark School ... We had five carloads before we put the car back to its ‘stable’. It was quite an interesting journey from Maryhill to Bilsland Drive. At some points I had to get out and remove shrapnel that clogged the rails. Our job over.” Several years ago, as the Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport, I was asked to unveil a painting by the artist Ian Fleming that the Scottish national portrait gallery had recently acquired. The painting shows Kilmun Street after the bomb hit, when the rescue and recovery work was taking place. Ian Fleming had been stationed as a police war reserve sergeant in Maryhill at the time. What struck me most was that his painting could have been of any one of hundreds of streets in Glasgow, in Clydebank of course, in London or in Coventry at that time. Des McNulty has done us all a service in helping us to understand events that few of us experienced. It is right that we record in the chamber the great suffering and the enormous human endeavour that took place 70 years ago.

I understand and agree with Donaldson’s thoughts on continuing professional development. We all want our teachers to be actively involved in such a process. However, I am also concerned that we should not mix up the idea of selecting the right people with the need to have the particular bent towards academia. I was struck by the comment that universities and the GTCS will work “to reconceptualise and develop the traditional BEd degree”. Can Ms Constance shed some light on what is planned for the BEd degree?

As you rightly identified, Presiding Officer, group 1 is about minor amendments. Amendment 1 is a drafting amendment that ensures that section 3(2)(e) covers land maintenance companies.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Amendment 3 is a minor drafting amendment to correct a cross-reference in section 5(1), while amendment 12 corrects a grammatical error in section 9(2)(b). Amendments 14, 18 and 19 are drafting amendments to ensure consistency with other amendments made to the bill at stage 2. Manuscript amendments 31, 32, 33 and 16A all remove the words: “without the Scottish ministers being required to enter the applicant in the register”, as they are unnecessary within the individual subsections referred to in the amendments. In each subsection, the conclusion of the appeal is the relevant point, regardless of its outcome. Amendment 34 is a manuscript amendment that amends section 12(6)(b) and provides consistency in the definition of when an appeal has been concluded at sections 12(3)(b) and 12(6)(a)(ii). Amendment 16B is a manuscript amendment that amends amendment 16, which is in group 2 and which inserts a section on property factor registered numbers. Amendment 16B provides a definition of when an appeal is concluded under subsection (5)(b) of the section that amendment 16 inserts. I move amendment 1.

All these amendments concern the issue of a number to identify a property factor who is registered. Amendment 2 amends section 4(4) of the bill to ensure that a factor’s previous compliance with the requirements to include the registration number in documents or communications is a relevant consideration when ministers are deciding whether a factor should be reregistered. Amendment 10 amends section 8(2) to ensure that a factor’s failure to include their registration number in documents or communications is also a relevant consideration when ministers are deciding whether a factor should be removed from the register. Amendment 16 inserts a new section after section 12, providing for the allocation of a register number to each registered property factor. A registered factor will be under a duty to take all reasonable steps to ensure that the number is included in documents or other communications with home owners. Non-compliance with that duty will be a criminal offence. Amendment 25 amends section 26(2) to provide that ministers’ functions to make regulations in respect of the property factor registration numbers cannot be delegated. I move amendment 2.

Amendment 4 amends section 7(2) to clarify the factor’s continuing duty to provide updated information as soon as practicable after a change occurs to the information provided in the application for registration under sections 3(2)(a) to (d). Examples of such details are the factor’s name, business address, company status and the name of the senior officer. That specifically excludes information about updates to the full portfolio list of managed properties as provided under section 3(2)(e), which is subject to what I hope is a more proportionate duty by virtue of amendment 5. Amendment 5 inserts new section 7(2A), which provides for a new duty to provide information about updates to the portfolio list of managed properties under section 3(2)(e) on an annual basis and no later than three months after the end of each financial year. Moreover, in the event that there has been no change to that information, the factor will still be required to confirm that that is the case. Amendments 6, 7 and 9 are consequential to amendment 5. Amendment 8 inserts new section 7(5)(a) so that providing false details in relation to both portfolio updates and other updates under section 7 is an offence. That provides consistency with section 3(6). I move amendment 4.

Amendment 11, which amends section 9(2), clarifies that a factor will not be able to recover any costs that are incurred in respect of work that is instructed after the date of their removal from the register and that they will not be able to recover any charges that relate to a period after that date. Amendment 13 amends section 9(2)(c) and is consequential to amendment 11. It restricts notices of potential liability for costs under a tenement management scheme to those arising before the date of removal from the register. I move amendment 11.

Amendment 15 deals with the application of offence provisions under section 12 in relation to corporate bodies. Although the amendment is technical in nature, it is important to clarify in the bill how those offence provisions should apply to corporate bodies, which are, after all, likely to account for most—if not all—property factors. I move amendment 15.

The amendments in this group were suggested by the Subordinate Legislation Committee. Amendment 17 amends section 13(3), recognising the legal effect of the code of conduct by requiring the order-making power in section 13 to be subject to affirmative procedure. Amendment 24 is an amendment to section 26(1) and recognises the significance of the power in section 26 to delegate functions under the bill by making the delegated power subject to affirmative procedure also. Amendment 26 is an amendment to section 27(3) and is consequential to amendment 24. I move amendment 17.

Amendment 20 amends section 21(1) to clarify that any appeals to the sheriff under section 21 would be by summary application. The amendment will ensure consistency with appeals under section 11(8). Amendment 21 amends section 21(1) to clarify that appeals to the sheriff under section 21 are in relation to decisions that are taken by the president of the panel rather than the panel itself. Amendment 22 amends section 21(2) so that the periods in which appeals may be made is 21 days rather than 14 days. Again, that will provide consistency with section 11(2). I move amendment 20.

Amendment 23 removes section 25A. The Government’s intention is to use the power under section 26A to make ancillary provision to cover matters such as the appointment of new factors following deregistration and to make provision generally for the interaction of the bill with the Title Conditions (Scotland) Act 2003. I support that intention. Amendments 27 and 29 are consequential to amendment 28, and amendment 28 contains further amendments to section 28, to remove unnecessary definitions of “homeowner” and “land”. On the definition of homeowner, the amendment will result in a cross-reference to the existing definition in section 10(5), which covers all types of property factors who fall within the definition in section 2(1). The removal of the definition of land is consequential to the amended definition of homeowner. I move amendment 23.

Amendment 30 will amend section 29(2) to provide that the bill, other than part 3, should commence generally on 1 October 2012 or such earlier date as the Scottish ministers may by order appoint. By virtue of section 29(2A), as inserted at stage 2, part 3 of the bill will commence on the day after the day on which the bill receives royal assent. I move amendment 30.

If members pass the bill at 5 o’clock, we will put rogue factors on notice. This legislature will have told them that the clock is ticking and that they must change if they want to continue to operate. The bill that we are considering recognises the plight of people who have suffered at the hands of unscrupulous factors. Those people have been identified during the consultation on the bill and recognised by the Office of Fair Trading in its report “Property managers in Scotland: A market study”, and such people have come to our surgeries. In short, we are talking about people who have looked to Parliament for help, because it can be found nowhere else. It has often been put to me that rogue factors are a problem only in Glasgow and the west of Scotland, but that is not the case, and nor is the problem confined to tenemental properties. Rogue factors are a problem throughout Scotland and—if my postbag is anything to go by—the problem is growing.

I thank Ken Macintosh for his kind words, and I can give him that assurance. I will deal with that matter in more detail a little later. To be clear, the definition of a property factor that is contained in the bill includes housing associations and local authorities. It also includes land management companies. As I have said, I will say a little bit more about them later. I have long been convinced that we need a regulatory framework as opposed to a voluntary accreditation scheme, and I felt for a long time that I was fighting a losing battle in trying to persuade others that legislation was needed. Therefore, I am genuinely delighted that the Scottish Government has come around to that point of view and is now so supportive of the bill. I am also grateful to the members of the Local Government and Communities Committee, who listened to the evidence with great care and whose stage 1 report concluded that legislation was required. Consequently, the bill will require all factors to be registered. Part 1 of the bill relates to registration. It provides for the establishment of a register, the procedures for registration, removal from the register and the enforcement of the requirement to register and, importantly, it provides for a code of conduct for property factors. Part 2 creates a form of dispute resolution that will task the existing private rented housing panel with the job of dealing with complaints from home owners who believe that their factor has not honoured their contract or has not complied with the factors code of conduct. In certain circumstances, it will also be possible for factors to be deregistered, but only after a thorough appeals process has either been exhausted or waived. Part 3 of the bill includes miscellaneous and general provisions. A little while ago, I indicated to Ken Macintosh and members in the chamber that I would return to the issue of land management companies. I am pleased that we have been able to include land management companies in the definition of property factors and that consequently, many provisions in the bill will also apply in situations in which a land management company has been sold land but also has an agreement that allows that company to charge adjacent owners for the maintenance of common parts. So that I could respond to comments that were made in the stage 1 report, I lodged amendments that would have given more rights to owners who were in such situations. The committee was not minded to support those amendments and, in retrospect, that was the right decision. This is an extremely complicated area of the law. More discussion is undoubtedly required, and more consideration needs to be given to that situation, and to the situation that might arise, so that we can ensure that any remedy does not also have unintended consequences. I welcome the Government’s decision to consult on the issue and I look forward to reading the responses. My only remaining disappointment—it is a small one—concerns the commencement date. I understand and accept that work requires to be done to make the bill’s provisions effective and I am pleased that the Government has conceded the principle of a commencement date appearing on the face of the bill. However, I sincerely hope that whichever party or parties form the next Government will find it to be possible to introduce the bill’s provisions before 1 October 2012. In my closing speech this afternoon, I hope to have time to thank the many people who have helped to get the Property Factors (Scotland) Bill to this point. Meanwhile, I commend it to the Parliament. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Property Factors (Scotland) Bill be passed.

It is four years since my colleague Gordon Jackson first signalled his intention to introduce a bill to regulate the factoring industry. Unfortunately, he was not returned to Parliament in 2007. However, as someone who was supportive of his policy intentions, I was pleased to be able to take up the issue. What I was not prepared for was that my office would be inundated with calls and e-mails from people looking for help because of problems that they were experiencing with their factors. I would be the first to say, as others said in the debate, that not all factors are bad or uncaring. Most factors are assiduous and often continue to try to help maintain properties even after that has stopped being profitable for them. Being a factor is not an easy job. Jim Tolson and Alex Johnstone were quite right to identify the intransigence that occurs with both homeowners and factors. I hope that this debate can help to take that issue forward. I say to Bob Doris that I, too, hope that the bill will not lead to people somehow being encouraged not to pay their factoring bill. In fact, the homeowner housing panel will not be obliged to take up a case if it does not feel that it is relevant. That shows that we had thought of that element. I believe that the bill will help to root out the rascals in the industry and give it the opportunity to show that most factors do, indeed, work to high standards. I hope that, in time, the bill will help to improve the image of the industry; David McLetchie made that point. I am grateful to colleagues who have spoken in an interesting, if short, debate. I agree with Malcolm Chisholm’s intentions and comments around the use of the word “minimum”, but I very much hope that minimum does not mean weak. I, too, will want to ensure that that is not the case. Robert Brown’s point about the amount of legislation that now exists in this area was entirely valid. I have said before in the chamber that the time has come to consider consolidating much of that legislation. Perhaps that work will be done in the new parliamentary session. I must thank a great many people for their input to the bill. I thank the clerks and members of the Local Government and Communities Committee for their careful consideration of the bill; the staff of the non-executive bills unit, particularly Frances Bell from the legislation team; and Consumer Focus Scotland for its advice. I also thank the Minister for Housing and Communities, Alex Neil, and his officials for their co-operation and assistance, and their invaluable help in framing the stage 3 amendments. I thank the staff in my constituency office, particularly Chris Kelly, and all my staff, who have become very knowledgeable about the factoring industry in the past few years; I think that they will breathe a huge sigh of relief this evening. I thank the Evening Times and the Glasgow Herald, whose first-class investigative journalism helped to demonstrate why the bill is needed. Last but certainly not least, I thank Mike Dailly, of Govan Law Centre, who not only supported me through discussions on the finer points of Scots law but supports in the courts, almost daily, the victims of some of the most unscrupulous people that I have ever come across. In previous debates I have given harrowing examples of situations in which my constituents have found themselves. I do not intend to do that now, other than to say that the bill will not come soon enough for a constituent of mine, who has had an inhibition notice attached to her property because of a relatively small debt. I hope that the bill ensures that in future there will be fewer people in her situation and that people will have somewhere to go to have their problem resolved. Those people will know that the Scottish Parliament made that possible.

Perhaps Stuart McMillan would have been happier if the Labour Government at Westminster had allowed the Scottish banks to go to the wall and the country to suffer the consequences. Much of the debate has been about the Coalfields Regeneration Trust. I have not had much contact with the trust—the last pit in Maryhill closed in about 1963, so I do not remember it—but I am familiar with its work and the fact that the loss of jobs and economic drivers in the coalfield communities echoes what happened in communities such as mine when heavy industry, on which Glasgow depended, disappeared, creating problems such as the ones Duncan McNeil identified. Last year, the minister visited Maryhill burgh halls in my constituency. The building once housed local government and civic justice and was the social hub of the district. A project will bring the main civic building of the area back to life. It is a true regeneration project that is funded by a large range of organisations, including the town centre regeneration fund. When the halls reopen later this year, 20 stained glass panels that were removed when it lay unused will be returned to their rightful place. The panels are important artistically, but they are also a graphic link to our industrial past as they feature 20 trades that were carried out by the men and women of Maryhill in the 1870s. If we undertake some basic research about the panels, we find that they have something else in common: all the trades operated within yards of the Forth and Clyde canal. The canal was a vital part of the infrastructure that supported Glasgow at that time and Maryhill was at the heart of it. It is entirely appropriate therefore that the Forth and Clyde canal will be at the centre of the transformational area that is planned for Maryhill. The plan includes some 400 new homes, shops and restaurants. We have heard rumours that there might even be a hotel, which some local wags have suggested might be called the Maryhilton. The housing will be a mix of private and social rented properties and it will be located adjacent to the canal locks. It is hoped that new green space areas will be established and that a Glasgow paddle sports centre can be established further along the canal at Speirs Wharf, making the entire area and canal corridor a focus for water sports. Some social housing has already been built and occupied in an area known as the Botany. I sincerely hope that Maryhill does not have to wait as long as the residents of the Botany had to wait for their new houses. The Ruchill area of my constituency owes its existence to the new industries that sprang up along the canal, but as those industries disappeared so too did the jobs for local people. The last big employer was Ruchill hospital, but it, too, closed in 1998. However, that challenge was seen as an opportunity—an opportunity to build new, quality housing on the extensive hospital grounds. Unfortunately, Scottish Enterprise, which owns the land, has not shown the leadership that is needed to take forward that ambitious scheme. The boom years of property development have come and gone, and still the site lies empty. As others have said, regeneration is not just about building new houses and facilities; it is also about making good places that have an identity—something distinctive that marks them out from other areas. In the case of Ruchill, it was some of the hospital buildings, standing tall in the skyline, that provided that distinctiveness. Scottish Enterprise argued that, for the site to be marketable, it was necessary to demolish parts of the former hospital. It was allowed to do so on the basis that it would protect the remaining buildings until a buyer was found, but it has now decided that almost all the remaining buildings should go too, partly because of its neglect of those buildings, which will now be expensive to secure. I strongly object to that proposal, particularly as it affects buildings that Historic Scotland has listed at category A or B. I have said so, and I will continue to say so. Maryhill burgh halls was fortunate enough to secure funding from the town centre regeneration fund, but Possilpark was not. Despite the fact that Glasgow City Council, the local regeneration agency and the local housing association presented an excellent, innovative proposal for the regeneration of Saracen Street to complement the new housing and new school that have already been built and the Saracen Exchange project, which will create a new business premises in the area, the proposal was turned down, but I am delighted that those agencies have enough faith in their proposal to want to continue to take it forward on their own. Unlike the Scottish Government, those local agencies understand the imperative behind the initiative. They know that Possilpark is a vibrant community with great people and that those people should be supported, so I look forward to seeing their hard work come to fruition. Across my constituency there are a number of vacant brownfield sites that are ripe for development, but many have lain empty for far too long. That is recognised in the city plan, and the possibility exists that at least one of those sites will be used for a large-scale retail development and for housing at a later date, but we need more. We need a signal to be sent out by the Parliament and the Government that we cannot wait around for the economy to improve. We must seize the initiative and begin regeneration projects that will kick-start the economic recovery so that our communities can reap the benefits when that recovery comes. The Government inherited a good legacy of work by the previous Scottish Executive and by Glasgow City Council and our housing associations to build new homes, new schools and new jobs. I hope that the funding that Alex Neil referred to has the desired effect, but just because the minister announces money twice does not mean to say that he can spend it twice, and I am afraid that the launching of a consultation document in the SNP Government’s dying days is not much of a legacy for the next Government.

I gently point out to the member that money to regenerate our town centres was in our last manifesto.

How much funding has been set aside for 2011-12 to contribute to fastlink? Is that funding the entirety of the Government’s contribution?

Like my colleagues, I have been to many election counts in my time. I have attended just three as a candidate but many more as a Labour Party activist and full-time official. In my time, I have experienced some close calls, recounts and counts that were delayed because of the problem of getting all the ballot boxes in from rural communities. I have also witnessed elections in which the votes were cast on the Thursday, verified on the Friday and not counted until the Sunday. Such delays are unsatisfactory and I sincerely hope that the returning officers will think again about introducing them for the votes cast and decisions made by the electorate in May this year. I had never experienced a situation like the one that followed the Scottish Parliament and local government elections in 2007. The local government count was always going to begin on the Friday morning, but I do not think that it was ever envisaged that we would still be counting constituency votes at 4 am on Friday in Glasgow and abandoning counts in other areas at 6 am. As we know, the Gould report was commissioned as a result of the debacle. The debate that we are having today is a direct result of Ron Gould’s inquiry, and it picks up on some of his recommendations. The minister alluded to previous legislation on the issue that was passed by the Parliament. The bill that we are considering at stage 1 today provides for the establishment of an electoral management board for Scotland to oversee and co-ordinate local government elections in Scotland, and it extends the remit of the Electoral Commission to include local government elections in Scotland. As we have heard, the discussions in the Local Government and Communities Committee were largely consensual, and we agreed that the establishment of the electoral management board is a positive step. However, we were also of the view that the United Kingdom Government should consider the possibility that the board should also have oversight of the elections to the House of Commons and the European Parliament and of referenda. We welcomed the comments of the Secretary of State for Scotland and the Minister for Parliamentary Business, who were both positive about the board’s involvement in elections to the Scottish Parliament. As others have said, the committee was also of the view that the board might play a part in elections to, for example, the crofting commission. Imbuing any body with a power of direction is often controversial, but I think that in this case it is both warranted and useful as it will allow the board to ensure consistency across Scotland and help it to deal with unforeseen events. However, I genuinely hope that, more often than not, a consensual approach will be adopted in the relationship between the board and individual returning officers. The Local Government and Communities Committee welcomed the minister’s commitment to consider whether there should be a way of petitioning the board or its convener when a grievance arises as a result of a direction issued by the convener. I heard the minister address the issue today, and I am sure that the committee will happily listen to and think seriously about the points that he made. Given the level of responsibility that the board will have and its role in our democracy, I believe that it is important that it produces an annual report that is laid before Parliament, and I am pleased that such a provision is included in the bill. Expanding the remit of the Electoral Commission will help to promote good practice and—just as important—consistency across Scotland. The debate has been consensual, and I look forward to the stage 2 discussions on the bill. I am sure that the dialogue with the minister will continue to be consensual and that all the efforts to improve the administration of elections will be positive. That can only be a good thing for everyone.

I, too, have a slight feeling of déjà vu as I rise to speak this afternoon, as we have discussed a number of the provisions of the bill on a previous occasion. I argue that issues relating to houses in multiple occupancy, private letting or overcrowding deserve the attention of this chamber and require us to put in place sensible and practical regimes that work for the people who live in such properties and for people in the wider community. We already have a system of landlord registration, but we would all accept that it could work better. The committee heard from local authorities where the system of registration is clearly working better than it is in other areas. Some of that seemed to be down to the level of resource that individual local authorities felt able to devote to registration. However, there was evidence to suggest that some local authorities—many, in fact—felt that there was little point in pursuing unregistered landlords because of the time that it takes to get a case to court and the fact that where convictions have been secured, the fine that the court imposes is minimal. I appreciate that although the minister had proposed an increase in the level of fine to £20,000, he has now decided that £50,000 is more appropriate. However, the fact remains that unless the courts are willing to use the new limit, the deterrent effect will be minimal. The same is true of the fines that are proposed for offences in relation to HMOs. The justice system needs to give more weight to housing issues, including the problem of evicting convicted drug dealers. I welcome the idea of a specialist housing court or tribunal, although it is clear that that will now be for a future Administration to develop. I welcome the expansion of the list of offences to be declared by applicants for registration. Many, although by no means all, of those who rent privately are vulnerable people. They can be young and living away from home for the first time, or new to our country with limited language skills. The minister and I have debated, in the chamber and in committee, the need for a landlord registration number or mark to be used in publicity material. I genuinely believe that such an identifier will be very useful indeed. The minister said that we had a very robust discussion at committee, and that the provision was one of the controversial elements of the bill, but I do not think that it is controversial. It is common sense and something that we all care about, and we just need to have a bit of a discussion about how to get it right. I and other colleagues have raised the issue of HMOs in the chamber many times. I do not have time today to detail the problems that many of the communities in my constituency suffer as a result of an overconcentration of HMOs—Pauline McNeill has already done a good job in that regard. Suffice it to say that the measures in the bill that will improve the interface between HMO licensing and planning are very welcome. The minister might want to say something about how that relates to building control, for the reasons that Pauline McNeill outlined. Rooms and individual facilities are literally cut in half, sometimes with no access to natural light or with that access divided right down the middle of a room. I appreciate that the problem is complex: if it was easy, it would have been solved a long time ago, but it requires that competing demands be balanced. We must have a thorough investigation that considers the difficulties that are faced by communities, the needs of those who rent and the ways in which the situation can be improved. It should also consider specifically the needs of young people in the housing market. Such an investigation is now overdue, particularly given the current financial situation and the changes in benefits, which mean that many more people will be seeking other types of accommodation. I very much hope that whoever is standing in the minister’s place after the forthcoming election will commission such research and take its findings seriously. We need to ensure that our accommodation is safe, and that people are part of balanced communities in which it is pleasant to live—as Anne McLaughlin said—and safe for those who live in properties that are occupied by more than one family or individual. We must ensure that that is the case not only for the few, but for everyone. As a Glaswegian, I am acutely aware of the problems that are experienced in the Govanhill area of the city, and I expect that my colleague Frank McAveety will address those in detail. However, I have some concerns that those issues may not be resolved by the bill, and questions remain—which I feel obliged to raise—regarding the overcrowding provisions in the bill. For example, will a legal requirement to reduce overcrowding in the private rented sector amount to much if there is no additional provision of alternative accommodation and housing for those who are living in overcrowded conditions? Will the burden fall on the social rented sector, and if so, can we be assured that it has the capacity to cope? Without answers to those questions and those assurances, a legal requirement to reduce overcrowding will—at least in my opinion—amount to very little. I am afraid that the bill does not do much to address substandard accommodation, which also blights the Govanhill area. Anne McLaughlin rightly referred to the sums of money that Miss Sturgeon made available, but there has to be a balanced package in the area that takes account of the problems that are experienced by people living in Govanhill—newcomers and people who have lived there for longer periods—and gets things right. The problem will move into other areas, because Govanhill simply cannot cope. The bill seeks to tackle significant problems, but I am not yet convinced that it will do that. Unfortunately, we will be able to judge that only at a later stage. However, I hope that it can, and for that reason, I am happy to support it at stage 1.

Will the minister clarify that he will ensure that no anomaly will be created, given that section 5 referrals under the homelessness legislation, where overcrowding exists, already result in people who are in that situation being considered to be homeless? Will the bill dovetail with that rather than create an additional problem?

I very much welcome the content and tone of the debate. I will try to respond as best I can to the issues that members have  raised. The debate has demonstrated why there is a need for legislation. It is important that we proceed with the bill and press on to stage 2. I suppose that I would say that, wouldn't I? However, the evidence bears that out. Members have made some very interesting points and a number of themes have been picked up. I was interested in the points that were made by Duncan McNeil, Sandra White, Mary Mulligan and—I am sorry; I was going to mention Sandra White again. I will no doubt come back to her. They all mentioned the issues of detail on the invoices and bills that are sent out, and hidden commission. It is important that there is openness and transparency on such matters. Sometimes, bills that people query are justified, but unless dialogue is possible, through which a resident can query a bill and be given an answer, they will think that it is excessive to have to pay 20 per cent commission to their factor for their building's insurance. That may well be excessive, but only the factor can explain that to them. At the moment, people do not know that that happens, so no explanation is given. It is extremely important that transparency and openness are built in.

I would not dispute that. I have heard a variety of figures mentioned. I have also heard about what, in the trade, are loosely called gentlemen's agreements, whereby the factor's brother-in-law paints the close and the transaction is kept in the family. That is the bad side of factoring, but there are very many good factors who work well with the people for whom they are contracted to work. I am extremely interested in switching, to which it is important to devote some of my time. There is a need for people to understand what the current rules say. Most people have the right to switch, whether through their title deeds, the Tenements (Scotland) Act 2004 or some other legislation. The problem that we encounter is that switching requires a majority of the eligible people to attend a meeting, and that can be difficult to achieve, because some of them might be absentee landlords, might not be interested, might be on holiday, might be in hospital or might be prevented from getting to the meeting by the weather. It can therefore be quite difficult to change factor, even when people in a property or development feel that that is the right thing to do. However, we must be extremely careful if we want to consider changing how people can switch. What could be put in place of a majority? It would have to be a minority. When a small number of people in a development come together, they  might have a good shared agenda, but sometimes they might not have such a good shared agenda, in which case problems could come to the surface—the very problems that we are trying to resolve by means of the bill. I take Robert Brown's point about sheltered housing complexes. As he mentioned, he has had an interest in Stonelaw Court, which I have visited. In fact, the committee heard evidence from Ms Murray of Stonelaw Court on the difficulties that residents have had. I think that it is unacceptable that their lifts, their car parking spaces and the flat for the warden can form part of the consideration of what makes a majority, which allows the person who developed the property in the first place to have a controlling interest. That needs to be resolved. However, if we want to go into switching—I am happy to do so—we must be careful about it, because we do not want to create problems that are similar to those that we are trying to resolve. I am delighted to have the minister's support, which he had indicated to me privately, and I welcome the dialogue with him. His support perhaps went to the extreme last week, when he lodged the motion to agree to my bill at stage 1 in his name, with support from Ms Sturgeon. However, I found out that that was an inadvertent move by the Government and not a deliberate ploy. Anyway, that support is welcome, in whatever form it comes. Mr Neil described what he called three challenges, one of which related to the definition of a property manager. I am not sure—I will check it out—that the definition that I have provided does not cover the circumstances that he outlined; I think that it does. However, if it does not, I am happy to consider the matter further. An important point relates to the interface between title conditions, the definition and deregistration, which I might talk about in a little more detail. I heard what the minister said about the costs of a panel versus an ombudsman for the dispute resolution mechanism, but we must think about other issues, too. Mr McLetchie was correct to suggest that the home owner housing panel is perhaps underutilised and that expanding its work—perhaps without an increase in costs—might be sensible. We must consider what we are trying to achieve and whether an ombudsman system would achieve it for us. I have sincere doubts about that. Whatever mechanism we put in place must be independent of property managers and must be seen to be independent. I am not sure whether the ombudsman service that the minister mentioned would fit those criteria, at least in the eyes of people who have problems.  I am slightly taken aback by the minister's determination about ombudsmen, given that he told the committee in connection with another matter that his view was that having a court or a tribunal to deal with housing issues might be the way to go. That is my bill's direction of travel; it does not take us back—as I see it—to an ombudsman system. I hope that I have covered several of the issues that members have raised. I am conscious of the time. I am grateful to all those who gave evidence to the committee. I listened to what they said with much interest. The Parliament has shown today that we all collectively listened to the issues that the witnesses raised and those that our constituents brought to us. I look forward to working with the committee and the Government to ensure that the bill in its final form is robust and resilient, provides a more transparent system for home owners, and safeguards home owners and the good factors who work in Scotland from the very few bad factors who take advantage of our constituents. We in the Parliament have raised the problem's profile; now we need to raise the standard of the worst factors to the level of good factors. The bill will be part of that process.

I am pleased that we are debating the Local Government and Communities Committee's stage 1 report on the Property Factors (Scotland) Bill, and I would like to thank the committee for its careful consideration of the bill. I also thank the committee clerks and the staff of the Scottish Parliament's non-Executive bills unit for their professionalism and sage advice; my constituency office staff, who have all developed a fair degree of expertise on the issue over the past few years; Mike Dailly of Govan Law Centre, not only for his help in getting us to this point but for championing in the courts those who have found themselves at the mercy of unscrupulous property factors; and the Evening Times and The Herald , whose campaigning work on the issue has given many people the courage to challenge bad factors and offer their experiences as evidence of the need for legislation. I will spend most of my time addressing issues that were raised by the committee in its report. Before I do that, however, it is right to reflect on the reasons why legislation is necessary. On previous occasions, I have highlighted the situations that have been faced by my constituents, but I make no apology for doing so again, because the situation has not changed and will not change until the Parliament passes legislation that prevents rogue factors from operating as they currently do. I have spoken before of Mr and Mrs A, who were being sued by their factor, and of Mr B, whose initial debt was grossly inflated by the addition of administration fees and charges for letters that were sent to him regarding his debt. Today, I will tell members about a constituent of mine who has had major problems with their factor, whose name, for the record, is Walker Sandford Property Management. Walker Sandford wrote off £10,760 in charges, consisting of monthly compound interest, weekly reminder letters costing £15 plus VAT, and an assortment of legal fees. The original bill was for £536, but the sum quickly mushroomed to several  thousand pounds. Walker Sandford commenced an action for payment of the debt at Glasgow sheriff court. The action was defended by Govan Law Centre on behalf of my constituent, and the action was dropped when Walker Sandford agreed that the actual debt was only £536. However, after dismissal of the action, Walker Sandford continued to add compound interest and charges to the earlier disputed bill. Interest charges in excess of £300 were added to the bill every month. Govan Law Centre applied for civil legal aid to enable my constituent to bring an action for declarator and interdict in the Court of Session. However, before that could be completed, Walker Sandford wrote off the entire bill of £10,760. That is just one case, and one particularly bad factor, but there are many more cases. Only last week, a constituent came to see me on behalf of the residents of the development in which she lives. Two years after changing factor because of problems with the original one, they find that the problems are even greater than they were. I know, too, from inquiries that I have received, that this is not just a Glasgow or west of Scotland problem and that there are difficulties across the country. People are looking to us to do what Parliaments do and provide them with legislation that will provide a remedy and safeguards. I sincerely believe that we need to have an accreditation scheme that is underpinned by legislation, and I am pleased that the committee has agreed that a voluntary scheme will not work. That concept underpins everything else that the bill aims to do, so it is important that we establish that principle. Members of the committee were rightly concerned that we should be clear about who will be covered by the bill, so I emphasise that land maintenance companies are covered. I deliberately worded the bill to say that the definition includes "a person who owns and manages or maintains land which is available for use by the owners of any adjoining or neighbouring residential properties (but only where the owners of those properties are required by the terms of the title deeds relating to the properties to pay for the cost of the management or maintenance of that land)." That makes it very clear who is covered. On the point about the information that property managers are to supply for the purposes of registration, I understand the committee's concerns about the disclosure of a company's property portfolio. The point of that requirement is to ensure that those who are factored by a company can be notified that their factor has been deregistered in the unlikely event that that occurs. If we do not include that provision, they may be left in the dark and unable to make alternative  arrangements. However, the committee is right to suggest that the database should be updated only on a yearly basis, rather than immediately a change occurs. I will seek to clarify that provision at stage 2. I propose that the information should remain confidential and should not be published. One of the most debated points in the committee's report is deregistration, which I accept is the thorniest issue that we must grapple with. Deregistration must be the ultimate sanction and, given the other provisions in the bill, I view it as a last resort. The measure will be used only when a property factor exhibits a sustained failure to provide an appropriate service, when the home owner housing committee recommends to ministers that deregistration is justified and after the factor has been afforded the opportunity to make representations. I recognise that factors are concerned that the provision might prevent them from recouping moneys that are fairly due to them. That is certainly not my intention, and I will review and amend the provision if necessary. I would expect that ministers would serve notice of their intention to deregister a factor in order to provide home owners with the opportunity to select a new factor prior to the deregistration taking effect. I accept, and am acutely aware, that land maintenance companies are an added complication in that regard. Members will be aware that work has been on-going in that area, not least among some of the organisations that have lobbied us and given evidence to the committee. I am planning—and have started—to work with those organisations to lodge amendments at stage 2 that I hope will address what is a particularly difficult but very interesting and concerning element of the property factor system. On enforcement, I expect that, as with any criminal activity, non-compliance could be reported to the police and action could be taken in the usual way. Again, I will review that element of the bill and amend it if necessary. In order to make the system as transparent as possible, I intend to lodge an amendment that will replicate the system that the Government proposes for landlord registration, whereby a registration number or symbol—I tell the Minister for Housing and Communities that we can have that debate any time he likes—is used to identify those companies that have successfully registered. The committee report seeks more detail on the code of conduct. I emphasise that I do not intend to reinvent the wheel in that regard. Since March 2009, the Scottish Government has been working in partnership with the property management  industry and other key stakeholders through its working group. The working group has developed and consulted on core standards for a voluntary accreditation scheme. Those standards cover issues such as communication and consultation, financial obligations, debt recovery and insurance, contractors and repairs and complaints resolution. Many positive responses and suggestions came from the recent consultation, not least one of the most common suggestions, which is that accreditation should be compulsory. I believe that that body of work ensures that the Government is well placed to fulfil the requirements of my bill and that it can prepare a code of conduct for introduction when statutory regulation comes into force. There has also been discussion about the mechanism for dispute resolution. We all agree that there needs to be such a mechanism. Where I differ from the minister and the Property Managers Association Scotland is on what that mechanism should be. I believe that the existing home owner housing panel is best placed to deal with the complexity of the cases that will arise. I have provided the Presiding Officer with a detailed account of the likely costs, which I am pleased he has accepted and which I am sure can be shared with the committee. I hope that I have addressed most of the issues that are raised in the committee's report. If I have missed any, I will try to address them in my closing speech. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Property Factors (Scotland) Bill.

To ask the Scottish Executive what priority it gives to early years education. (S3O-12117)

The minister will be aware of the concordat pledge that, by August 2010, local authorities will provide 15 hours a week of free early years education for three and four-year-olds. The minister might also be aware that Glasgow City Council delivered on that pledge in August 2009, which was a full year early. That council now provides more than 880 such places for two-year-olds, and they are either free or at minimal cost. The council is also working towards providing all those places free and towards extending the provision. Can the minister update the Parliament on progress by Scotland's other local authorities on implementation of that pledge on early years education?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met representatives of Strathclyde partnership for transport. (S3O-11824)

The cabinet secretary will be aware of widespread concern that, like the Glasgow airport rail link prior to its cancellation, the fastlink project has been kicked into the long grass of Transport Scotland. Will the cabinet secretary assure the chamber that the Government remains committed to fastlink; confirm that that commitment is for the project described in SPT's on-line business case, not for some kind of glorified bus lane; and advise the chamber of the value of the Government's support  to allow SPT to pursue match funding and ensure that a scheme can be delivered in time for the 2014 Commonwealth games?

Will the minister give way?

When we came into the chamber, it was to consider a bill that, if passed, would have legislated in the areas of social rented housing and the private sector. However, the bill that we will pass into law tonight deals with only the social rented sector, as the minister has withdrawn all the elements that affect the private sector. Others have commented on that aspect of today's proceedings, and we all agree that this is a unique, if not somewhat unsatisfactory, situation. I am grateful to the minister for hearing my plea at stage 2 to recognise the different sizes and compositions of housing associations—an important issue for housing associations throughout Scotland. In this short debate, I want to concentrate on two areas in which I still seek reassurance from the minister. The first relates to the transfer of assets from housing associations and the second to the circumstances in which the pre-eviction protocol comes into effect.  At stage 2 I moved an amendment that, if passed, would have introduced an additional test before the regulator could direct the transfer of a housing association's assets. The minister, and indeed most of the committee, did not agree with me that that was necessary or that such a check or balance was required, despite the fact that we see them in other areas. It now seems that the regulator will be judge, jury and executioner when it comes to a decision to transfer the assets of a housing association. If the same provision applied in local government, it would mean that the Accounts Commission would have the power to exercise draconian powers against a local authority without recourse to the minister. I do not believe that that would be right for local government, and I do not believe that it is right for housing associations either. The set-up does not recognise the responsibilities that housing associations have to their tenants and communities, and I seek the minister's assurance, in spite of his earlier comments, that it will not lead to a policy of mergers and restructuring. Next we come to pre-eviction protocols. The minister indicated in advance of stage 2 that he was minded to move an amendment that harmonised the pre-eviction protocol for those tenants in the social housing sector who might face eviction for rent arrears. The minister assured me that that would apply only to cases in which rent arrears, not antisocial behaviour or drug dealing, was the issue, which is something that I have pursued for some time. The minister's assurance that that was the case was very welcome, as was his on-the-record response to a committee colleague at stage 2, in which he said: "we have drafted the provisions extremely carefully to ensure that people who are being convicted for antisocial behaviour cannot hide behind the pre-action protocol for rent arrears."—[ Official Report, Local Government and Communities Committee , 6 October 2010; c 3576.] My concern here is about the wording of the Government's stage 2 amendment, which says that provisions come into play "on the ground that rent lawfully due from the tenant has not been paid ... or on grounds including that ground". In other words, rent arrears might not be the only consideration at that stage. Schedule 2 to the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001, which lists the other grounds, runs to some five pages. One of those grounds is "using the house or allowing it to be used for immoral or illegal purposes". Another is acting in a manner, which "in relation to an action or course of conduct, means causing or likely to cause alarm, distress, nuisance or annoyance".  To my mind, that most definitely covers antisocial behaviour. I would be grateful if the minister could provide clarification. After hearing Alex Johnstone's speech, I almost ripped mine up and wrote a new one, but I decided not to. However, I would just say this: Alex Johnstone and David McLetchie are right that the right to buy is all about ideology; it is about the Conservatives' ideology. For many members, the issue is how we best serve our constituents, and we do not serve them well by continuing with an unfettered right to buy. I close by thanking the clerks to the committee and the Parliament's legislation clerks, who were of great help to me in preparing manuscript amendments, which, unfortunately, did not comply with the regulations.

Will the member give way?

The amendments that have been made to the bill are wholly inappropriate in dealing with locally based housing associations. Value and weight are put on those housing associations by their tenants and those in nearby communities, who often want to be looked after and cared for by them. It is a matter of their independence. The fact that those associations are locally based is one of their great assets. What is currently in the bill is too vague. The only real protection on offer for housing associations is the fact that the regulator's decision can be challenged through appeals to Parliament and a judicial review. That is not appropriate. My amendments, particularly amendment 47, would achieve clearer statutory provision and would avoid that. The minister mentioned that RSLs might be concerned about my amendments. If he thinks that, he might have consulted them before lodging his amendments, but he and his officials patently failed to do that. The Glasgow and West of Scotland Forum of Housing Associations consulted its members. Sixty of those who were consulted in the short period of a week were against the provisions as they stand. I will press amendment 45.

The purpose of my series of amendments in the group is to remove from the bill a number of provisions that would give the Scottish Housing Regulator significant new powers to set governance and financial targets for housing associations. In introducing his amendments at stage 2, the minister suggested that the new sections would add "to the lower-level powers that are available to the regulator to address performance issues among RSLs" and  "to the range of regulatory tools that the regulator can use to promote improvement in the management of RSLs."—[ Official Report , Local Government and Communities Committee , 22 September 2010; c 3457.] I believe that the powers are simply unnecessary. Section 14 already gives the regulator open-ended powers to address concerns about governance or financial performance. Section 36 allows it to publish standards for the financial management and governance of registered social landlords. Section 52 gives it wide-ranging powers to require an RSL to submit a performance improvement plan if the regulator is concerned about financial management or governance, and section 53 gives it wide-ranging powers to issue an enforcement notice if it is concerned about an RSL's financial management or governance. The powers that I have described are in addition to the higher-level intervention powers in sections 55, 57, 59 and 62. I want the bill to have teeth where it needs them to deal with poor performance or risk. Indeed, my amendment 47 makes that clear. However, including in the bill a general power to set targets is not the way to do it. I move amendment 45.

Will the cabinet secretary undertake to maintain the principle of free admission to the national museum and to the national galleries of Scotland?

To ask the Scottish Executive how many newly qualified teachers not employed at the beginning of the new school year it expects will find employment in the course of the remainder of the school year. (S3O-11728)

The cabinet secretary has alluded to the fact that this week he has apologised on record for the high number of teachers who are unable to find jobs, while blaming local authorities and universities. However, in August he wrote to me stating that the situation had arisen as a result of his Government's workforce planning for teachers and that it was necessary to ensure that sufficient teachers remain available throughout the school year. Given that he seems to be claiming that he planned that so many newly qualified teachers would be unable to find work, will he now take full responsibility for the situation, apologise to unemployed teachers and mean it this time?

Given the minister's enthusiasm for mediation and arbitration, will he indicate whether his Government is whole-heartedly behind my Property Factors (Scotland) Bill, which I hope would give people such as the lady he mentioned the opportunity to settle her difficulties more accessibly and comfortably than by going to court?

To ask the Scottish Executive when the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing last met the chief executive of NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde and what issues were discussed. (S3O-11411)

The cabinet secretary is aware of changes to community health and care partnerships in Glasgow to create a citywide partnership and three area partnerships. Some communities in the north Glasgow CHCP, such as Milton and Possilpark, will merge with communities in the east Glasgow CHCP. She is also aware that many of those communities rate poorly in the Scottish index of multiple deprivation—indeed, 10 of the 20 worst zones are in the area. Will she therefore assure me that she will make the case to NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde for distributing that funding to the new area CHCPs on the basis of need rather than population?

I offer my congratulations to Bill Butler on securing the debate, and to the Evening Times on its initiative. Perhaps more important is that I also praise the efforts of the many thousands of Glaswegians who have taken up the challenge and are trying to increase their activity levels for the sake of their health and that of their families and communities. As others have said, Glasgow and her citizens have languished at the bottom of health league tables for too long. As a result of many Scottish Parliament policies under successive Governments, more Glaswegians live in warm, affordable houses and have access to good health facilities, as Sandra White said. However, the health problems of the city will take perhaps another generation or two to wipe out. Campaigns such as Glas-goals provide the encouragement that the city needs, and help to bolster a feeling of pride as the city participates in a collective workout. At the weekend, as we heard, 612 people waltzed, jived and salsaed into the record books. There are also many examples of individuals and small groups getting involved and having fun. In my constituency, northern sole mates offers walks and jogging several times a week and is popular with all ages. When healthy north Glasgow announced its first 5k event in 2006, people wondered how many would turn up. Five years later, the event is a fixture for the communities in the north of the city, with 2,900 people participating this year. It is a pleasure to see mums and dads with buggies, people in fancy  dress and even the occasional MP and MSP, not to mention a certain Evening Times reporter, taking part. I have to admit that the reporter finished somewhat ahead of the politicians. For many years I campaigned for sports facilities in my constituency, along with my colleague Ann McKechin. I am delighted that Glasgow City Council has responded by providing new pitches and a gym at John Paul academy, followed by a gym and dance facility in the new St Monica's primary school campus in Milton. In April, a new sports complex opened in Maryhill, at a cost of some £9 million. That is a lot of money, but the complex is an investment and within four months of opening it had been used and enjoyed by 30,000 people. Not everyone wants to go to a gym or a pool, so it is good to see the Forth and Clyde canal's banks being increasingly used for fishing, cycling and walking. Just today, an application was made for permission to develop a paddle sports centre with a white-water course and canoe polo pitches at one of the canal basins. I might be an enthusiast for the canal, but I am not sure that I will take advantage of those facilities. If anyone is in doubt about the vibrancy of the communities of Maryhill, they need look no further than the online and aptly named Maryhill activity directory, which is the brainchild of Jim Hamilton and is an invaluable local resource. Pages and pages are devoted to sport and other physical activity. The directory is a mine of helpful information. Glas-goals is helping to build the legacy of the Commonwealth games, which will be a games for all of Glasgow and all of Scotland. The campaign is imaginative and positive in outlook. It acknowledges that sport is not for everyone, but that activity should be. The minister will be aware that the activity levels of young women and girls present a particular problem. Girls are as active as their male peers when they are 10, but by the time they are 11 or 12 their activity levels have often dropped to a level that men do not reach until they are 40. It is vital that we recognise, as the campaign does, the power of dance and drama for young women who would not otherwise be involved. The Commonwealth games will offer a host of opportunities to everyone in the city. I very much hope that we take advantage of those opportunities, because if we do we will reap the kind of benefits that Barcelona got from the Olympic games that it hosted so successfully. I congratulate the Evening Times and everyone who has taken part in the campaign. Given the cross-party consensus in the debate, I wonder  whether we need a cross-party group on Glas-goals.

Like other members, I welcome the opportunity to debate housing in the chamber, although it seems to be slightly odd—as others have said—to be doing so at a point when the only thing that is clear about the Government's strategy for housing is that it does not have one. The Government has built some new houses, which are very welcome, and it has taken forward some ideas that I would agree with—not least because, as Mary Mulligan pointed out, many of those are based on Labour ideas. However, to call the Government's actions on housing a strategy is to stretch the definition somewhat. In addition, we must recognise that the building of many new houses has been possible only because the Labour Government at Westminster agreed that there could be accelerated spending of £120 million. Moreover, we know that last year witnessed the building of the lowest number of houses for 10 years. In the past 13 years, my constituency has witnessed a fundamental change in the quality of its housing. From time to time I, like others, have had occasion to criticise the Glasgow Housing Association, but I recognise that the GHA has been responsible for much of the modernisation that has taken place in the past few years and that it is making a real difference to our communities. The same is true of the many community-based housing associations in my area. The work of the housing associations has been especially  important—at a time when housing was not being built by local government—in helping to stabilise communities by building excellent new homes and engaging in a range of wider action programmes throughout Maryhill and other areas. Those projects have helped to keep older people in their own homes comfortably and safely and have provided jobs and apprenticeships for young people, giving them a real stake in their community and an opportunity to make their own lives. They include self-build projects, which have given local people the incentive to continue to make their homes in the area. Talking of achievements, I am sure that Parliament would like to join me in recording my congratulations to North Glasgow Housing Association, which is the first housing association in Scotland to achieve the prestigious new customer service excellence standard. That is an achievement, indeed. I was surprised to read recently that the minister had told the housing association movement that it had a tough time ahead. The housing association movement knows how to deal with hard times. It has demonstrated that it can adapt and change to cope with changing situations. Let us face it—the Government has already challenged housing associations in a most unhelpful way by cutting HAG. The irony is that that has been done at a time when the Government should be strengthening and supporting housing associations, and encouraging them to build more houses, not only to allow Scotland to meet its commitments under homelessness legislation—which, I am truly sad to say, is looking increasingly unlikely—but because we need to recognise that housing associations and local councils—

If I were a member of a Government, I would make the argument for money for whatever was in my portfolio, but it must be said that housing is so fundamental to the lives of members of our communities that it must be one of the very top priorities of any Government. If this Government does not want to make housing a priority, it should stand aside and make way for one that does. Housing associations and local councils are the only people who are building houses right now, and we need to maintain the skills that the construction industry will need as it comes out of recession. Another challenge is coming the way of all registered social landlords in the next few years, and on this point I very much agree with Sandra  White and Malcolm Chisholm. If the coalition Government succeeds in making its planned changes to the housing benefit system, it is likely that fewer people will be able to take up private lets, with the result that more people will depend on RSLs for their housing. There has already been a fall of more than 1,200 in the number of new starts in the social housing sector in the first two quarters of this year, and we need to equip all our RSLs to make them fleet of foot and able to act quickly if those cuts go ahead. On the subject of the Con-Dem coalition, I hope that the minister will give us assurance—I have no doubt that he will—on tenancies, because I am greatly concerned about the measures on tenancies that the coalition is putting in place south of the border, and I hope that we do not see similar moves in Scotland. I have a particular concern about the lack of sheltered housing for our older citizens. As people live longer, the demand is obviously rising. Many more people than ever now live beyond 75 and, indeed, 80, and their needs must be met. I read what the "Housing: Fresh Thinking, New Ideas" document had to say, but I was not comforted by what it contained, none of which was fresh. I know that we are talking about a complex and difficult area, but sometimes it is necessary to look at the evidence, make a decision and implement what one thinks is best. In addition, we need to be able to test whether money that was intended for housing support services is being spent where it is most needed. At the moment, we cannot do that. As Malcolm Chisholm did, I urge the minister to examine how data are collected. In summary, the SNP Government's actions to date on housing sometimes seem to have been driven more by its need to announce legislation than by an understanding of what needs to be done, backed up with a plan on how to do it. That is particularly apparent in the attempts to tighten up on rogue landlords. The measures to do that should have formed a discrete piece of legislation instead of being split into two legislative halves, the second of which will be really tight for time, given that it has not yet been introduced. The Government may not yet have a clear strategy, but it is clear that the incoming Government will have to take up housing as a priority and will probably have to introduce a housing consolidation bill as a matter of urgency. In that respect, the present Government will not leave much of a legacy. However, I genuinely hope that the minister will be able to persuade the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth that funding for housing should be a top priority in the SNP's budget. If he does that, he will have my support.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it considers that the use of Tasers by police officers in the execution of their duties is legal. (S3O-11163)

I appreciate the minister's point, but I am sure that he is aware of the view of a number of human rights groups and solicitors who specialise in the field that both the use and possession of Tasers are legally dubious. Has the Government taken legal advice in that regard? If so, would the minister make it available to members? Further, has the Government instructed any research to be carried out in respect of disturbing reports of a link between use of those guns and nearly 300 deaths in Canada and America? If it has not, will the minister commit to do so?

To ask the Scottish Executive when ministers last met the chief executive of NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde and what issues were discussed. (S3O-11042)

I welcome the target that the minister has set of a 50 per cent reduction in hospital-acquired infection rates among the over-65s. In her discussions with Mr Calderwood, did she say how she expects NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde to implement the new initiative to reduce infection rates, given the planned loss of some 1,200 staff across the board area and the loss of 500 cleaning hours at Glasgow royal infirmary alone?

Will the minister take an intervention?

In doing that, will the minister take account of my other point that letting agents need an easy way to check that a landlord is registered, as do those who are looking to rent a property? Might it be possible to have some kind of trademark or branding?

I, too, thank the clerks, the Scottish Parliament information centre and the witnesses who participated in our evidence-gathering sessions on the bill. As Mary Mulligan said, Scottish Labour welcomes many of the bill's provisions. However, we believe that work will need to be done at stage 2 to make the bill truly fit for purpose. Many of the areas that it covers will also feature in the private sector housing bill that is to be introduced in the Parliament later in the session. We are not yet 100 per cent sure where the private sector housing bill will take us and how the two bills will link together, which makes proper consideration of the Housing (Scotland) Bill challenging. However, we are considering that bill today, and most of my remarks will necessarily be about it. Before I focus on the bill's specific provisions, I have to say that the bill is no substitute for more and better homes and that the Government's decision to cut the housing association grant again is a real blow. In its stage 1 report, the committee was keen to make the point, as Duncan McNeil has done, that, although there has been reasonably extensive consultation with stakeholders, the Government has relied on those who represent tenants rather than attempted to speak to tenants themselves. That is not a criticism of the Scottish National Party Government in particular; I suspect that it has followed the pattern that has been laid out. I accept that tenants organisations are important, but I know that the most successful homes that have been built in my constituency are those in which the tenants have had a real say. I suspect that that holds true for housing legislation as much as it does for house design. A Scottish housing regulator will be established under the bill. That has been broadly welcomed, but several witnesses suggested that the regulator should be tasked with promoting the interests of those who are homeless or might become homeless—that should be one of his or her objectives. They suggested that those who were previously deemed to have been homeless and had succeeded to a tenancy should receive assessment and support that are appropriate to their needs. I say to the minister that far too many people re-present as homeless because they have been unable to sustain a tenancy. I whole-heartedly agree that that vicious circle needs to be  brought to an end but add my voice to the voices of people who argue that the regulator must recognise the role that housing associations play in community regeneration. Many housing associations undertake that important role, and they should be supported in doing so. Many witnesses were concerned that the change in the criteria for the registration of social landlords could be detrimental to smaller and community-based housing associations. It is important that the minister and the Government demonstrate their support for such organisations, particularly given the recent grant cut. The bill aims to strengthen the provisions of the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004 that apply to landlord registration, which is welcome, as members have said. The implementation of landlord registration schemes has been patchy throughout Scotland, with few landlords being refused admission to the list and little done to enforce the provisions, which exist to protect people from unscrupulous landlords. The Government proposes that the penalty for acting as an unregistered landlord should increase, and the committee has agreed with that. If that acts as a deterrent, that will be a good thing, but I have a nagging doubt that it does not really matter whether the fine is £5,000 or £20,000 because, if registration is not enforced, the fine is irrelevant. Enforcement is the key. We must find a way of identifying registered landlords. Perhaps we need to give them a trademark, such as that used by plumbers and other professionals. However, the bottom line is that local authorities must be supported and encouraged to use the law when they have cause to do so and to share information with other agencies, for example in relation to housing benefit, so that they can pursue rogue landlords. I share the committee's view that there should be a duty on letting agents to advise landlords that they are required to be registered. However, I believe that we should go further and should consider making it an offence for a letting agency to market properties when it knows that the landlord cannot demonstrate registration. I ask the minister to respond to that in his closing speech. The bill looks to strengthen existing legislation on houses in multiple occupation. I thank Jean Charsley of Hillhead community council for her most informed evidence to the committee. It is important that we get the legislation on the issue right. We must address the gaps that exist between planning law, landlord registration and HMO licensing, because the damage that is being done to many of our communities by unfettered HMOs is impossible to overstate.  In several areas of Glasgow, we have flats—it tends to be flats—in which hallways have been made into kitchens and cupboards have become bathrooms. The services for those alterations do not conform to the normal stacking arrangements in such tenemental properties, which can create dreadful problems for the people who live below. I accept that it is difficult to legislate on the issue and that a balance must be struck between those who have a long-term stake in a community and those who are looking for affordable housing close to a university or college, but we will build up longer-term problems in those communities if we do not act now. The bill will help local authorities to control the HMOs in their area better, but I very much hope that, as part of the proposed private sector housing bill that is to follow, the minister will consider the definition of a property and conclude that the sharing of services is not the only consideration that should be taken into account. I look forward to seeing that new bill when it is introduced. I hope that, between the two bills, we can do the right things.

I point out to the minister that I did mention that I found the subway interesting as a child.

I add my congratulations to Pauline McNeill on securing the debate and on bringing this important subject to the chamber. Those of us who remember the subway before its modernisation in the late 1970s will recall its distinctive smell—an earthy tang that was unique to the subway—and the shoogle that occurred on every journey because the seat backs were connected to the sides of the carriage while the rest of the seat was connected to the floor. Given that the sides of the carriage moved semi-independently from the floors, passengers were rocked backwards and forwards, sometimes in a fairly violent way. For children, that was part of the excitement, as was descending into an underground world that seemed—and was—dank and dark. Most of the carriages that were introduced in 1896 were still in use when the subway—or the underground, as I still think of it—was closed for renovation in 1977. Until then, smoking was allowed in the rear coach. It is little wonder that a journey on the underground felt like a trip back in time to Victorian Glasgow. The modernisation of the subway in the 1970s was important, because it introduced brighter and more modern stations and trains, and it brought in safer working practices. The installation of tracks to the depot at Broomloan Road ended the need to remove trains from the tracks by crane, which ensured that the lengthy delays that had often occurred when trains broke down became a thing of the past. Glasgow's subway is a great way to get around the city—the 14 million journeys that are made every year are testament to that—but there are problems. To someone who lives or works outwith the area of the subway, it is of limited use. Although park and ride seems like a great idea, the lack of a joined-up plan from the local authority and SPT means that controlled parking has been introduced around some of the subway stations in order to control commuter parking, with little account being taken of the needs of those who live in the vicinity of the stations. People who have disabilities or mobility problems must check ahead to ensure that they will be able to access the stations, because some do not have disabled access. The constraints of the system mean that wheelchairs and certain types of pram cannot be carried, which is a real throwback to the 19th century. The physical geography of the city makes it expensive and difficult to extend the  underground's reach and the combination of hard rock and old mine workings makes for an interesting engineering challenge. As Pauline McNeill said, the width of the tunnels, at only 11ft, makes it difficult to operate additional trains. The gauge width of 4ft also limits the capacity of the system. Many of the stations are still the original model, often in built-up areas. That, too, contributes to the problem of making alterations that would allow everyone who wishes to use the subway to do so. As Pauline McNeill said, another problem that must be capable of resolution is that of Sunday operating times. I hope that future modernisation will address that issue. If the Glasgow subway is to continue to be a major part of Glasgow's story and is not to be consigned to its history, major investment by the Scottish Government will be needed to secure its future. Make no mistake—without the subway, there would be gridlock across Glasgow city centre, which would, inevitably, spill over into surrounding road systems. That would be bad for business and bad for our environment. SPT estimates that maintaining the current system would result in costs of £220 million in capital investment and £320 million in increasing maintenance and operating costs. Modernisation would involve a larger capital cost—in the region of £290 million—but a reduced maintenance cost of £100 million.

Given the recent announcement that the year of homecoming will be repeated in 2014, will the minister consider the opportunity of celebrating with the rest of the world the United Nations international year of co-operatives in 2012?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Iain Smith is correct to say that Mr Swinney was sitting next to Mr Mather and to express surprise about the fact that he could not correct this error. However, it is also true that Mr Swinney prompted Mr Mather on a number of answers that he gave this afternoon.  One wonders why he could not have prompted him on that one, too.

The minister has quite rightly outlined a number of the achievements of VisitScotland during the years of Mr Riddle's leadership. In the light of those achievements, does he believe that Mr Riddle is being treated fairly and appropriately? Given that he is the minister who is responsible for the sponsoring department that looks after VisitScotland, I think that that is information that he can share with the Parliament. I reiterate the call that has been made by my colleagues and ask for the third time, for the avoidance of doubt, whether Mr Swinney had a conversation with Dr Cantlay on Sunday.

To ask the Scottish Executive what additional resources it provides to Glasgow City  Council to recognise the pressures placed on it by the number of children and young people with English as an additional language enrolled in Glasgow educational establishments. (S3O-10645)

The minister will be aware that deprivation is one category that COSLA and the Government have recognised as relevant to the formation of budgets for local authorities. However, many of the migrants from the European accession countries are unable to qualify for certain benefits and therefore do not show up in the deprivation statistics that apply to the city. Given that Glasgow City Council employs some 130 of the 203 teachers who are specially qualified in the subject, and given that the cost to Glasgow is of supporting not just those young people but their families by providing interpreters for school events and other meetings, will the minister consider the issue in light of the fact that Glasgow's settlement this year is not the one that most of us would wish it to be?

Violence in the workplace is never acceptable and there can be no excuse for physical and verbal assaults on workers. Every day, working people face a range of challenges; avoiding unwarranted attack should not be one of them. However, in today's Scotland, the troubling reality is that a number of our fellow citizens face threats, verbal abuse and actual assault every working day. In his powerful opening speech, Hugh Henry detailed the stark reality that too many of our constituents have to confront as they go about their work. As we have heard, the Scottish crime and justice survey 2008-09 found that, of those adults who had jobs involving contact with the public, 35 per cent had experienced either verbal or physical abuse and 7 per cent had experienced physical abuse. The previous Scottish Executive worked on the issue in partnership with my former colleagues in the STUC, and the initial secondment of Linda Shanahan, an STUC general council member, led to the publication of the strategy document "Protecting Public Service Workers: When the customer isn't right". I am pleased that that partnership has survived the change in Government and continues to this day. As we have heard, the trade union movement is to be congratulated on its work, which includes the trade union Community's high-profile campaign to protect workers in the betting industry and, as members have mentioned, USDAW's freedom from fear campaign, which has been a powerful voice for the shop workers whom the union represents. The STUC has produced a toolkit on managing violence and aggression in the workplace, for use by local authorities. Hugh Henry and other colleagues ably demonstrated the commitment of other trade unions on the issue. The STUC feels that it has a responsibility to play its part in delivering a safer society in Scotland. The participation of the congress and the work of the Scottish centre for healthy working lives shows that the commitment is not only to workers who are members of a trade union, but to all workers. My experience of the support that the STUC gave to the families of those who were killed in the disaster at the Stockline Plastics factory, which was a non-unionised workplace, is testament to that commitment. However, the resources and campaigns will be used and supported only by responsible employers. Far too many workers who serve the public will continue to be exposed to verbal and physical abuse during the course of their work. That is particularly true for those who do not have the back-up of union representation. That is why I  support Hugh Henry's bill proposal. Without legislation, some employers will not take their responsibilities seriously, but no matter how good an employer is, circumstances will arise from time to time that no amount of good practice can prevent, so there must also be a deterrent. Unison has provided figures that show that, in 2007-08, the number of assaults on health workers fell by more than 1,000 from the previous year. As we have heard, many health workers are covered by the 2005 act. It has been suggested that that welcome decline in the number of assaults can be attributed to the threat of tougher penalties, as prescribed in the 2005 act. At the same time, the increase in the number of convictions under the 2005 act from 54 to 200 between 2005-06 and 2006-07 suggests that the legislation is having an effect. Research indicates that, compared with the UK average, shop workers in Scotland feel more threatened and are attacked more often. I do not know the precise reason for that, but I suspect that a complicated mosaic of issues comes together to lead to such a situation. We as legislators must join with the trade unions to offer our support to workers and to provide the legislative underpinning that will deter those who would threaten workers' safety. We must also provide an appropriate judicial remedy when the deterrent is not enough. The Parliament often promotes the value of post-legislative scrutiny and of learning from our mistakes and successes. The post-legislative scrutiny of the 2005 act demonstrates its success. The time is right to offer similar protection to other workers who engage with the public face to face. I am pleased that Hugh Henry is giving Parliament an opportunity to do that. I look forward to voting for the motion today and, in the weeks to come, to voting for the proposed workers (aggravated offences) bill. I hope that the Government and the Parliament more generally will support that bill when it comes before us.

I thank Christine Grahame, as others have done, for all the work involved in bringing the bill to Parliament after she took it over from Alex Neil. I also thank the clerks to the Local Government and Communities Committee for their help and advice, and all those who gave evidence and spoke with such passion about dogs and the importance of training and proper care. The Dangerous Dogs Act 1991 was introduced in reaction to a number of extremely serious incidents. Unfortunately, serious and indeed fatal dog attacks have continued to take place since the act came into force. The previous legislation identified several breeds that were to be defined as dangerous in law. However, my contention—and that of the bill and Christine Grahame—is that any dog can be dangerous if it is not cared for properly, not trained properly and not socialised with people and other dogs. The bill's emphasis on the deed and not the breed is welcome. I hope that my amendment 1 will assist in the delivery of the policy behind the bill. However, we will have to be vigilant in monitoring the implementation of the legislation. There is uncertainty about the number of dangerous dogs in Scotland, so it is difficult properly to judge the accuracy of the bill's financial memorandum, particularly the cost that will accrue to local government. What we do know, though, is that in 2006-07—the most recent year for which there are records—there were some 623 offences under the 1991 act. It is therefore important that local authorities move quickly to employ wardens and properly resource and train them. I took cognisance of what COSLA said about cost, but the cost of not taking action could be even higher in terms of the use of the national health service, the police and other authorities. It will be interesting to see how that goes forward. Another welcome aspect of the bill is the fact that it will be an offence to allow a dog to be dangerously out of control anywhere, even in a private place. I listened carefully to Christine Grahame when she recounted her experience of campaigning, and of the barking dog at the window. In my experience, however—Ms  Grahame may also have experienced this—it is not the barking dogs that we have to be aware of but the silent ones that sit behind the letter box. If we are lucky, we feel their breath at the moment we withdraw our fingers from the letter box. While there are occasionally injuries among our campaign teams, other stories are not frivolous or funny. The Communication Workers Union's written submission detailed an attack on one of its members—a postman with 30 years' experience—as he went about his duties. As he walked up a garden path in Glasgow, two Japanese Akita dogs ran from the back garden of the house, through an insecure fence, and attacked him as he made his way to the front door. Despite the very serious injuries he sustained, Strathclyde Police were unable to prosecute, because the attack happened on private property. Although the bill will not prevent such incidents, I hope that it will at least ensure that action can be taken against the dog owner. I do not have a dog. My job and that of my husband involves us being out of the house for long periods, which would not lead to sensible dog ownership. However, I have often felt that, for the sake of the dog and that of the surrounding community, it is the owner who needs training, not the dog. The effect on the community ranges from the kind of serious attack on that postman to the incredible nuisance these days of dog fouling on our streets, which we see as we are out campaigning. I hope that we never get to the stage at which a bill has to come before Parliament that seeks to license or train dog owners. I very much look forward to seeing the guidance from the minister, which I am sure will be comprehensive. It is important that Parliament, which takes a great interest in these matters, has the opportunity to scrutinise such information. Again, I sincerely thank Christine Grahame and Alex Neil for bringing this important issue to Parliament and for giving some reassurance to people who fear dogs or who, because of the nature of their work, have to experience dogs—good and bad—as they go about their business.

I am grateful to the minister for allowing me to intervene. Will he bring that guidance to Parliament for consideration prior to issuing it to local authorities?

To ask the Scottish Executive what has been achieved as a result of the recent ministerial visits to the United States of America. (S3O-10180)

Although there may not have been a great deal of originality in this afternoon's questions, at least they are topical. This is not the place to rebut assertions by the Government, but I reflect on the sense of déjà vu that I have had in listening to the minister's "varied" responses, especially her response to Aileen Campbell's question. Given that the Parliament has awaited the delivery and publication of the North America plan for three years, I ask the minister in all seriousness whether it would not be better for the Executive to reflect on and to put effort into that plan, to ensure that its activities in North America are co-ordinated with it, than to try to rewrite it as a result of a week-long visit.

The bill promotes the idea that a dog should not be judged on its breed and that a dog's behaviour and its owner's actions should inform any action against it. At stage 1, the Local Government and Communities Committee and all those from whom we took evidence agreed with that presumption. However, in the definition of an out-of-control dog, a dog's breed characteristics have crept back in. Ms Grahame has proposed a two-part test. The first part is whether the dog is kept under control effectively and the second part is a test of reasonableness—of whether the person who complains is justified. Those tests are sufficient, so referring to a dog's size and power is unnecessary. As we have gone about campaigning over the years, I am sure that we have all met dogs that have given us cause for concern. I am equally sure that many of them were smaller dogs. How do we define a dog's size and power? Does that mean the size and power of, say, a Dobermann, which might concern me—I mean no disrespect to Dobermanns and their owners—or of a Jack Russell, which might concern a five-year-old? I lodged amendment 1 to deal with a point that the committee agreed unanimously in its stage 1 report and to make the rationale behind the bill consistent in its delivery and—I hope—more workable in its execution. I move amendment 1.

I am grateful for Christine Grahame's clarification, but I point out that the bill gives consideration to the size and power of the dog, so it would be part of the reasonableness test. I contend that, if dog control officers will have  to make a judgment on whether the size and power is an issue, we might have to specify the matter more clearly if it is to be helpful to them. Ms Grahame indicates that the size and power of a dog may be taken into account. However, I am afraid that, when we frame legislation, we cannot use the word "may"; it will be taken into account. Any owner should, of course, have control of their animal. Any owner who cares about that animal and takes their responsibility seriously will do that but, at the end of the day, the size and power of the animal is not the question. As the bill has been at pains to say, the question is the behaviour and the deed.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to secure manufacturing jobs and investment in Glasgow. (S3O-10070)

The cabinet secretary will recall that, during the debate in the chamber on Diageo on 17 September 2009, he made clear commitments to the communities and workers affected by that company's decision to close its plants. To follow up on those commitments, can he advise members how many meetings of the task force have taken place since September, what discussions have taken place between the minister and Diageo on the regeneration of the sites at Port Dundas and Kilmarnock, what the Scottish Government has secured from Diageo by way of a legacy for those communities, and what training or employment opportunities the Scottish Government has secured for Diageo workers?

The report of the serious organised crime mapping project that was produced last year concludes that 4,066 people, representing 367 serious organised crime groups, are impacting on Scotland today. It notes that 40 per cent of such groups impact on the Strathclyde Police area and that 77 per cent of violent incidents occur in Strathclyde. Those are truly alarming statistics. For those of us who live and work in the north and north-east of Glasgow, it sometimes feels as if all the problems of Strathclyde are concentrated in our communities. Fortunately, most people only read about and never experience the brutal reality that underpins the business empires of the criminal underworld. Nevertheless, many of our  constituents experience the awful consequences that the trade in drugs visits on their communities. Some may be trying desperately to help a family member with an addiction, or living in fear that their teenage son or daughter may get involved with the wrong crowd. Perhaps they watch in horror as cars and taxis pull up outside a neighbour's house at all hours of the day and night but are too afraid to do anything about such disturbing activity. The irony is that those law-abiding citizens are the key to any long-term solution, because they know who the local drug dealers are and can provide vital information—the missing piece of the jigsaw that would help the police to make the important arrest and to close down the criminal operation. Perhaps fear is not the only obstacle. There is evidence that many people think that, even if they pass on information to the police or an elected representative, little will happen. That can lead to a corrosive cynicism that is in no one's interests. As members of Parliament, we must help to find a way of demonstrating that such information is valued and of reassuring people in our communities that it will be used effectively. That does not mean directing or divulging information about police operations—it means finding ways and means of providing reassurance to our constituents that their co-operation is valued and that their involvement is central to the fight against serious and organised crime. In the past, I have written to the cabinet secretary about the problems that social landlords encounter in securing the eviction of drug dealers. As matters stand, the housing provider must wait for a conviction before proceeding to eviction. The case for eviction often takes many months to get to court. When it does, the fact that the drug dealer has not committed any offences since they were convicted has, on occasion, been cited by the sheriff as a reason not to evict. We must be able to streamline the system to make it easier to evict convicted drug dealers. If we do not, communities will see that as another example of the system letting them down—and they will be right. The drug dealer on the street is the small fry—often an addict—and is being exploited by the so-called Mr Bigs of the criminal underworld, about whom we read every day. Although few of them live in my constituency, many of them operate there and make money out of the misery of people who were once their neighbours. When the proceeds of crime legislation was passed, all of us hoped that it would help to deter criminals and make it harder for them to operate. Although it has made some difference, in reality criminals have simply employed better lawyers and better accountants to help them to avoid being caught, and have diversified into more seemingly  legitimate businesses to help them to do so. The agencies that are working to defeat them must have the best technology, the best forensic accountants and the best support that is available from the Crown Office if they are even to keep up. At the beginning of my speech, I mentioned that a disproportionate amount of serious and organised crime occurs in Strathclyde, especially in communities in Glasgow. I want to know whether that means that the major proportion of money that is allocated from proceeds of crime confiscations is reinvested in those communities, which are most directly affected by serious and organised crime. If it is not, there needs to be a major Government rethink. I hope that the cabinet secretary will address that serious concern when he sums up. The relentless pursuit of those who bring misery and terror to innocent people in our constituencies is an approach on which we can all agree. No one could take issue with the objectives that are outlined in "Letting our Communities Flourish", but what is required now, more than ever, is an unswerving implementation of that type of co-ordinated and resourced approach in order to turn those fine words into successful action. The Scottish Government, the police and all elected members must listen to and work with communities to drive these crooks off our streets and into our jails.

On writing to authorities, Mr Doris, like me and other members, has taken up the issue of the Applerow Motors MOT station. Will he join me in congratulating the authorities on taking its licence away yesterday?

Will the member take an intervention?

I hope that my intervention is on cue; it is intended to be helpful to Ms Scanlon. I said that my bill will address the issue of land management. However, when Greenbelt Group is involved, the situation is different, because it owns the land. My bill will not address that issue, because we cannot usefully help in such situations.

I have listened carefully to the minister's comments and would welcome the Government moving towards the idea of legislating. Does the minister accept that the issue is not the property managers' image but their practice and the problems and difficulties that the people who contract them to work on their behalf experience?

It is some time since I had quite so long to speak. I will try to make the most of it. I am grateful to have this opportunity to discuss with colleagues a subject that troubles many of our constituents across the length and breadth of Scotland. I say troubles but, for some, the unsatisfactory management of their property is more than just troublesome. At best, it can cause great concern and, at worst, it can cause real financial hardship and distress. The purpose of factoring is to make life simpler for the individual owner and to make it easier for them to co-operate with their neighbours to have common repairs and maintenance carried out. The irony is that, for many, the reality is very different. I am sure that colleagues who take part in the debate this morning will tell the Parliament of the experiences of their constituents. It is clear to me that the Scottish Government's action in this area is well intentioned, but I hope that the debate will explain to the minister why legislation is necessary and convince him of the merits of legislating. I will set out what the legislation that I propose would achieve. Before I do so, however, I will talk about a few constituency cases that have passed across my desk. I have changed the names of the individuals, because the circumstances demand that I do so. Mr and Mrs A are being sued by their factor for almost £3,000. They have been sued several times over the last few years by the company, each time for several hundred pounds that is, ostensibly, due for administration charges, compound interest and legal fees. Their factors are, in my view, nothing more than debt farmers who grow vulnerable customer's debts on a weekly basis by applying excessive administration  charges, compound interest and expenses. In this case, decrees prevent the family from opening a bank account. Their elderly and frail parents were sued by the same company and were made bankrupt. The family had to find £5,000 to pay the factor, even though the bulk of the sums that were due were for not the original debt but for administration charges, compound interest and legal fees. Mr and Mrs B have the same factor. He has registered a notice of potential liability against them that prevents them from making a mortgage-to-rent application or from selling their property, because any purchaser would have to pay off the full debt. Mrs B owed the firm £4,500 in 2008 and, in spite of the fact that the factor no longer manages their property, it is now pursuing Mrs B for £12,000. Mr and Mrs B have tried hard to speak to their factor, but he simply will not listen. Their next-door neighbour is £2,500 in debt to the same factor, for an original bill of £600. I will talk about the practice of this particular factor in detail. The company sends out reminder letters about unpaid bills every week at a cost of £17.62, which means that debts grow by £70.48 every four weeks. The firm calls that sum "administration charges" and applies 33 per cent compound interest on it. The arrangement means that, over the space of a year, a £10 debt could grow, in theory, to as much as £1,200, with 52 letters at £17.62 each, plus interest of around £300. That is a mark-up of 12,000 per cent on the original sum owed. The factor can then sue the owner for bankruptcy. The experiences of these people are not unique, and, while their situations might sound extreme, the fact that they can exist in Scotland today surely demands our attention. In fact, it demands that we use the powers at our disposal to legislate. In 2007, my colleague, the then Labour MSP for Glasgow Govan, Gordon Jackson, indicated his intention to introduce legislation that would regulate the factoring industry. Unfortunately, Gordon was not returned to the Parliament and could not pursue the idea. Having had experience of cases in my constituency, I was pleased to take over responsibility for the work. The consultation that I undertook showed the scale of the problem, with 87 per cent of those who responded indicating support for legislation. That was borne out by a market study that was undertaken by the Office of Fair Trading, which found that almost one third of consumers thought their factor provided a poor service. More than half of all consumers had some complaint with that service and 67 per cent of those who had lodged a formal complaint said that they did not believe that it had been adequately resolved. Although my consultation and the OFT's study found similar problems, our  conclusions were different. The OFT believes that a voluntary scheme is required, while I am convinced that we need legislation to underpin the changes that must now be made. As we know, the Scottish Government has so far indicated that it also favours a voluntary scheme. It is my sincere hope that today's debate will persuade the minister that legislation is needed and will demonstrate that this Parliament backs that approach. My proposed bill will require all property managers to be accredited and to meet some minimum operating standards. Many of the problems that are faced by their clients are about the basics, such as the availability of accounts and difficulties with communication and receiving quotes for work. Having a simple minimum standard would iron out many issues before they develop into problems. Having passed such a test, the property manager would be required to register with a body authorised by the Scottish ministers that would also supervise the accreditation system. With regard to deciding which body should carry out that particular function, I suggest that Consumer Focus and the Property Managers Association Scotland should be statutory consultees. When disputes occur, there is little that an aggrieved owner can do, other than go to court to defend or raise a claim. Going to court can be very difficult for home owners, because many of the cases are under £3,000 in value, and no civil legal aid is available for home owners. The legal and factual complexity of disputes is often beyond the abilities of lay-representatives, and factors will often engage solicitors, making it a very one-sided contest. That is why my bill also proposes accessible and legally binding dispute resolution that will not require legal representation and will avoid the need to go to court and be exposed to court charges and legal expense. Such a system is already in place under the private rented housing committee for private sector tenants who have repair disputes with their landlords. I believe that that raft of measures would make a huge difference to home owners up and down the country. One of the problems that was identified by the ministerial working group was the financing of its proposals for voluntary accreditation. The group has recognised that a voluntary scheme is not a popular concept and that, if accreditation is to be financed by those seeking to be accredited, it might be difficult to accrue enough funding to enable it to work. A statutory scheme would not have that problem, as a registration fee would have to be paid by all factors. I would, however, want to ensure that that cost was not simply  passed on to the customer through higher management fees. There is one other group that I believe that this bill will help. I have outlined the bad practice of one particular factor, and we will no doubt hear of others, but there are also good factors who take their responsibilities seriously. They, too, encounter problems while carrying out their job. For many people, buying a home or a flat is a daunting experience, as there are many things to consider and a great deal of money to be spent. Money goes on the purchase, on legal and removal fees and on buying new furniture. Amid the sheer excitement of having one's own home, particularly if it is one's first home, arrangements must be made with the companies that supply the utilities to the property, friends must be told of one's new address and so on. The cost of factoring is sometimes overlooked in all of that, and can come as a bit of a shock. I hope that, by debating the issue, we are raising its profile and reminding solicitors and developers that they, too, have a role in advising clients of the extent of the liability that they will incur.

Yes. If a property management company operates in that way, the proposed legislation would cover that, too. In these days of buy to let, it can be difficult to persuade an absent owner—even if they can be found—of the need for communal repairs or maintenance. In Glasgow, relatively new properties have reached the point at which they have no factor, as companies understandably had to call it quits when the outstanding fees and communal utilities bills had gone unpaid for so long that the buildings were on the brink of having no communal lighting, lifts or pumped water supply. That situation was not of the factors' making—indeed, they lost out on thousands of pounds in income and debt. I therefore firmly believe that property managers would benefit from the proposed legislation, too. I know from talking to property factors that many of them recognise that their industry is not highly regarded, often because of the activities of a few unscrupulous characters. They, too, want to restore their industry's reputation and they would welcome the opportunity that a bill would afford.  As I draw to a close, I will thank several people. I realise that it is Oscar season, but I will try to cut the list down to just a few. I thank the non-executive bills unit for its advice and, I hope, for its on-going support. I also thank Mike Dailly of the Govan Law Centre for his unstinting support and for his hard work in the courts to support people who are being exploited by unscrupulous property managers. I also thank my constituency office colleagues Susan Smith and Isobel Tait, and particularly Chris Kelly, who has been so helpful to me in the work. My thanks also go to the Evening Times and The Herald , which heard of the problems that their readers were experiencing and, in true investigative style, decided not just to highlight the problem, but to lobby for change. We owe it to the factors who want change to support them with legislation but, more important, we owe it to Mr and Mrs A and Mr and Mrs B and all the others whom we will no doubt hear about to change the system and to enshrine that change in statute. There is clear support for such reform across the length and breadth of Scotland. I move, That the Parliament notes that the Office of Fair Trading market study into the property management market found that the market is not working well for consumers in Scotland; welcomes the recent cross-party support for proposals to require property factors to register and to make provision for an accessible form of dispute resolution between homeowners and property factors, and further welcomes this positive progress toward the introduction of legislation to ensure better accountability of property managers for their standards and the services that they provide.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to combat serious and organised crime in the west of Scotland. (S3O-9587)

The minister will be aware that a sheriff has overturned recent attempts to ban alleged criminals from operating in the security industry, and that a health board has, because it was obliged to do so by procurement rules, awarded a taxi contract to a company that had allegedly been involved in criminal activity. In addition, an MOT station in my constituency, which was the site of a drive-by shooting and is allegedly implicated in criminal acts, continues to operate because no one has the power to close it down. As criminals become better at beating the system, can the minister provide any reassurance to communities that those involved in diversifying their so-called business interests are not untouchable and that the Government is working with the police to find ways to outsmart those who wreak so much havoc in our communities?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it expects to respond to the report of Lord Cullen's "Review of Fatal Accident Inquiry Legislation". (S3O-9465)

The minister will be aware that lengthy delays in holding FAIs cause distress to the relatives of those who have died, and can also affect the quality of the evidence given, because memories fade and, in some cases, people die. Does the minister agree with Lord Cullen's recommendation that preliminary hearings could be held before a full inquiry, so that relatives' concerns could be considered, even though criminal proceedings might be pending in some circumstances?

As other members have indicated, Parliament and, more important, people who live in fear of debt and its consequences have waited too long for this bill. Even at this late stage, there are one or two worrying areas in which there is a lack of certainty that the bill can or will deliver what the Scottish Government promises. Parliament has been ahead of Government in this case. A year ago, parties represented in the Parliament—the Labour Party, the Liberal Democrats and the Greens—along with Ms MacDonald urged the Government to take action. Nevertheless, the bill is important. The work that the Local Government and Communities Committee has done has helped to clarify some, if not all, of the areas in which there were uncertainties. However, as a general rule, the Government should not come to a committee with legislation that is so unclear. There seems to have been a last-minute rush to address issues that might have been better dealt with in future legislation. I hope that the Government will learn from the experience and from the slight controversy that some of the proposed measures have provoked. I hope that the Government will keep a watching brief on who can be permitted to exercise a second recall. I was pleased that the Government lodged amendments at stage 2 that meant that a second recall of decree could take place, but I am concerned that one category of residents may have been missed. At stage 2, some members of the Local Government and Communities Committee realised that adult children living with their parents might be penalised if they did not have the same right. With more young people living at home, partly because of the particular economic situation that the bill seeks to recognise, it would seem sensible for them to have some protection under law. In spite of the Government's assertions, I am still not sure that the funding that is currently allocated will be sufficient to allow advice centres to bear the additional burdens that the bill will place on them. If we expect citizens advice and money advice centres to accept the additional work, to give it the priority that it deserves and to do so to the high standard that we and they would want, and if the Government believes that that is a key plank of its policy, surely we should take steps to ensure that the work is funded properly. I hope that ministers will monitor the situation and will act if there proves not to be enough money in circulation in  advice centres to provide the training, support and back-up that will undoubtedly be needed. At stage 2, the Local Government and Communities Committee rejected amendments from Mr McLetchie that sought to remove section 10 from the bill. Many members had a little sympathy for Mr McLetchie's argument; however, they were willing to give the bill their support because they thought that, on balance, ministers had a point, albeit one that should have been better developed and discussed. Mary Mulligan's stage 3 amendments on the issue of reasonableness make sense and ensure consistency in the tests that are used. In my view, the amendments themselves are entirely reasonable and build on stage 2 amendments that were discussed in committee. I am pleased that the chamber has agreed to the amendments today and that the Government saw fit to support them. I thank the committee clerks for their hard work and usual diligent approach to their tasks. In particular, I thank those who gave evidence to the committee. This was a technical bill and the evidence that we received was often conflicting. It was to the credit of those giving evidence that they were able to put their case in such a comprehensive manner. Finally, I thank Mr Neil for tempering his cheerful consensual approach in opening this morning with a little of his usual political bias. Anything else from Mr Neil would have been just too disconcerting at this time in the morning.

I was very interested in the minister's wish to roll out good practice. Is he aware of the 98 per cent reduction in exclusions that has occurred in the past 15 months in John Paul academy in my constituency? Will he join me in congratulating the headteacher, Vincent Docherty, his staff and, of course, the pupils, who have contributed to that reduction? Will he look for examples of good practice from that school to roll out more widely?

To ask the Scottish Executive what guidance it issues to national health service boards in respect of the cost of providing a nutritional diet to hospital in-patients. (S3O-9104)

I thank the minister for her answer, but surely the great disparity in costs, which range from around £6 a day in some health boards to up to £36 a day, cannot be accounted for purely by geography or overheads. Given the importance of good nutrition in the recovery process, will the minister undertake to review at an early opportunity the quality and cost of hospital food?

I add my thanks to those of others to the clerks and the Scottish Parliament information centre for getting us through stage 1 and taking us thus far. That there is a need for legislation to protect home owners in times of recession can be in no doubt. We do not have figures specific to Scotland but, as other members have mentioned, the Council of Mortgage Lenders predicts that 8,000 more people in the UK will have faced repossession in 2009 than in 2008. For more than a year now, Scottish Labour has been calling for action to protect Scottish home owners so that, if they encounter problems, they will have at least as much protection as people in similar situations in England and Wales. Like many independent commentators, we believe that that could have been achieved without new primary legislation, simply by introducing pre-action protocols and possibly by amending existing legislation. The Scottish Government found it necessary, however, to set up the  repossessions group—a sub-group of the debt action forum—the main recommendation of which was, indeed, pre-action protocols and the amendment of existing legislation. Nonetheless, the Government decided to introduce a distinct piece of proposed primary legislation. Our party was pleased that the Scottish Government had at last received the evidence that it clearly needed before it could act. We were willing to accept that, in order to expedite action, the Government would forgo the usual consultation. Unfortunately, the Scottish Government has rather played on our good will, and on the good will of the whole Parliament. The Government's bill is badly constructed and it links together two disparate sets of issues—and, in the process, it has created controversy, confusion and disagreement among those who work in this area. There are a number of outstanding issues regarding part 1. Some witnesses who gave evidence to the committee suggested that the provisions in section 1 relating to the voluntary surrender process might be overly bureaucratic and, consequently, that they might not be used by lenders. We await the minister's further consideration of the issue with interest. The committee concluded that the Government should seriously consider introducing an opportunity for a second recall of a decree, with the proviso that an entitled resident can persuade the court that the recall application is being made for a different reason from the first one. All committee members were concerned that lay representatives should be accredited. For that reason, we welcome the draft Scottish statutory instrument that introduces that safeguard. We are also concerned that lay representatives should have the appropriate training. Concerns remain that there might not be enough capacity in the advice centres to fulfil expectations. As Duncan McNeil said, the Scottish Government made available about £3 million for advice and representation, but that money was for only two years, and it was announced in November 2008, prior to the introduction of the bill. I hope that, in summing up, the minister will indicate that that money will be supplemented, if required, and that he will indicate how he sees the scheme of lay accreditation working in more detail. The committee was unsure whether the court system would have the necessary capacity and resources to perform the additional duties that the bill will bring. Reassurance from the minister on that issue would be welcome. In the time allotted to me, I cannot cover the committee's many concerns regarding part 2. However, it is worth noting just a few of them. Serious concerns have been raised with the  committee about the ability of the Accountant in Bankruptcy to fulfil its proposed new obligations. Given some of the inaccuracies in the paperwork that it supplied to the committee, that seems a justified concern. It is right that the minister has indicated a willingness to re-examine the proposal. I am sure that the committee will wish to discuss the issue with him as the bill progresses towards stage 3. Section 10 caused substantial disagreement, as members have heard. The disagreement among witnesses was quite widespread, but there was some consensus over the principle that a home with a limited amount of equity should be exempted from protected trust deeds. Committee members felt that such was the level of disagreement that we had to record the issue in our stage 1 report. The minister has agreed to report back, possibly today, on further discussions with the sector on how section 10 is intended to work in practice. Again, that is welcome. The Local Government and Communities Committee, the Finance Committee and the Subordinate Legislation Committee have all expressed concerns about part 2. I do not recall having previously received so many letters and e-mails arguing the detailed points of such a bill. That is disappointing. Even more disappointing is the fact that ministers could not offer enough reassurance to members on the issue, which involves not a controversial matter of principle but a measure on which a broad consensus should, and indeed could, be built. I am afraid that ministers have failed to satisfy either the sector or the committee. In my view, ministers have a big job to do if the bill is to be safely passed and protection thereafter given to those who have been made vulnerable by financial difficulties. I suspect that, if the committee had not been so clear about the need to offer protection to such people, we might well have rejected part 2 out of hand. I genuinely and sincerely hope that ministers will rise to the challenge by ensuring that they and their officials work with the committee and the sectors to ensure that the bill is in far better shape when it comes back to the Parliament at stage 3.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether the national dietary food standard is being met in relation to the provision of fresh fruit and vegetables to hospital in-patients. (S3O-8874)

I look forward to seeing the outcome of the review when it is published. The minister is concerned to ensure that the dietary standards are met. I am sure that she appreciates the difference between the provision of fruit and vegetables and the provision of fresh fruit and vegetables. What are her comments on that? Does she accept that many patients are reluctant to complain about food in hospital and simply rely on friends and family to supply them with fresh fruit during their hospital stay? What action can she take to ensure that patients are encouraged to complain when they are not provided with fresh fruit?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it plans in order to safeguard bus services across Scotland. (S3O-8775)

Does the minister agree that it is unacceptable that bus routes that provide many communities with their only convenient access to local services such as hospitals are being withdrawn? If he does agree with me, what specific action will his Government take to ensure that that practice does not continue?

In view of the apparent inability of commercial operators to provide stable bus networks in my constituency—and, given Ms Grahame's question, in regions throughout Scotland—will the Scottish Government consider granting powers to public transport authorities to resume directly operated bus services?

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth is making in his discussions with the Minister for Housing and Communities regarding the timescale for the completion of projects funded by the second round of the town centre regeneration fund. (S3O-8504)

The cabinet secretary and I had an exchange on the issue at a recent meeting of the Local Government and Communities Committee. At that time, I said that, given the late announcement of the fund, it would be helpful if such projects were given some leeway at the other end. Obviously the discussions that were to take place have not borne fruit in that respect. Given that projects such as the one in Possilpark in my constituency, and indeed all three projects that Glasgow City Council submitted, have been rejected on this occasion, despite meeting the criteria for the fund, does the Scottish Government accept or agree that the case has now been made for the continuation of the town centre regeneration fund, and that it should be reinstated to the budget?

I too congratulate Bill Butler—it is not something I am known to do, but I will on this occasion—on securing this vital debate and giving us all an opportunity to debate the Glasgow airport rail link. I will concentrate on the issue that I know best in connection with GARL: the successful 2014 Commonwealth games bid. The bid document that the previous Scottish Executive submitted to the Commonwealth Games Federation in 2007 clearly stated the many commitments that the Scottish Executive, Glasgow City Council and the Commonwealth Games Council for Scotland would make to support the bid to bring the games to Glasgow. One of the major infrastructure projects that was included in the document was, of course, the Glasgow airport rail link. It was there in black and white. Helpfully, so too was a letter from the parties in the Parliament that supported the bid, in all its detail and complexity. Ms Sturgeon, in her capacity as deputy leader of the SNP, signed that letter and seemed pleased to do so. Indeed, there was unanimous support across the parties that are still represented in the chamber.  It was not only the front bench of the SNP that understood the value of the Glasgow airport rail link; in the final stage debate in November 2006, Sandra White, an SNP backbencher, stated: "The benefits of the link are overwhelming, but one of its greatest benefits is that it will be a major feature in Glasgow's bid for the 2014 Commonwealth games. I believe that, with such an asset, we will win the bid."— [ Official Report , 29 November 2006; c 29844.]  Mrs White was right on that occasion—we won the bid, and our joined-up approach to transportation and the accessibility of all the venues in Glasgow was a key factor in that win. The SNP Government has not only reneged on a commitment to Glasgow, the west of Scotland and to tourism providers, travellers and businesses across Scotland; it has broken a solemn undertaking that was given to the Commonwealth Games Federation. As is the way with such organisations, the Commonwealth Games Federation has been diplomatic about the cancellation. It has, understandably, said little publicly, as it is a body that takes seriously its responsibility for the delivery of the games and the standards that are set, but as the person who was charged with the ministerial responsibility for Glasgow's bid in the previous Administration, I regret the cavalier decision of the SNP Government and sincerely hope that it will reconsider and not give the Commonwealth reason to believe that we are a nation that does not keep its word. The previous British host of the Commonwealth games was Manchester. It is a sad irony that a Scot can travel from Waverley station direct to Manchester airport but cannot travel directly to Glasgow airport. An editorial in yesterday's Evening Times quite rightly made the point that 17 Glasgow MSPs working together should be able to secure a better deal for Glasgow from this SNP Government. Those MSPs should also be able to persuade the Government that it must change its mind about GARL. Glasgow MSPs on this side of the chamber will try to do so. Unfortunately, tonight's debate would seem to indicate that, although we have the support of many of our colleagues, we will not have the support of those in the SNP. That is a fact that I genuinely regret, but is one that the people of Glasgow will remember—not just next Thursday, but for a long time to come.

To ask the Scottish Executive what criteria it used when deciding to remove the funding for the Glasgow airport rail link from its budget. (S3O-8133)

Why did the cabinet secretary previously tell the chamber that the cost of the Glasgow airport rail link was £397.5 million, when a significant element of that figure relates to the Paisley corridor renewal project, which, as I understand it, has not been cancelled? Furthermore, why, in answer to questions from my Labour colleague Charlie Gordon, have the cabinet secretary and the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change contradicted each other on the costs and savings associated with the project? Finally, why have Scottish Government officials already commenced cancellation procedures, which, by the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change's own admission, will have negative cost implications for the reinstatement of the project, given that its axing is, at this stage, only a proposal in the minority Government's draft budget?

The SNP's record on education has been abysmal. It has made promise after promise and has broken every one of them. It is right that we hold this incompetent SNP Administration to account, and education is an area in which its record of failure has been most evident. On 28 September, Ms Hyslop issued a press release that claimed that the Government and local authorities were "on track to lift 100,000 school pupils, by 2011, out of tired and crumbling school buildings". By 1 October, however, the Deputy First Minister was asserting that 100,000 children had already been lifted out of those conditions. She made no mention of partnership with the local authorities and no mention of the fact that Ms Hyslop thought that achieving that goal would take until 2011—in fact, she made no mention of Ms Hyslop whatever; it was just the Deputy First Minister indulging in the usual SNP bluster. Today, however, I notice that Ms Hyslop seems to have adopted Ms Sturgeon's mantra, but has been found wanting again. I have asked a question—I await an answer—seeking further information on how all those announcements relate to Glasgow. Let me assist Ms Sturgeon and Ms Hyslop by telling Parliament that not one school pupil in my constituency has been lifted out of a poor or bad school by this Government. Across Glasgow, the local authority has reduced its category C and D primary schools in the past year by taking very difficult decisions—decisions with which I did not agree.

Ms McLaughlin was clearly not listening to me. However, in answer to her, I will quote what the deputy leader of the SNP group in the council said when the announcement of the school closures was made:  "We understand it makes sense to pay for the education of children in good quality accommodation rather than heating half-empty classrooms." Anne McLaughlin should take the matter up with her own colleagues. As I said, I opposed those closures, and I called in this chamber for the SNP to support Glasgow to provide new schools in Wyndford and Cadder. However, it failed to do so. I asked the cabinet secretary in a debate what she could offer the children, parents and communities who were affected by the closures but, of course, she could offer nothing. Labour in Glasgow has rebuilt or refurbished every secondary school in the city, built 64 schools over 10 years—11 secondary and 53 new primary schools have been delivered as part of a phased programme that has seen new school campuses being built in my constituency in Possil Park and Milton, with another planned for Ruchill. On Ms Hyslop's new statistics that have been produced overnight, I can tell her categorically that the plans for the St Monica's campus in Milton, which opened to pupils in early spring, were originally taken forward by the previous Labour-Liberal Democrat Administration. She may not claim credit for that—we will not allow it. Pupils in those communities are learning in the most modern facilities thanks to their Labour council and the previous Labour-led Executive. Teachers in those schools are working in modern buildings with modern equipment, and the communities around those schools are using the campus facilities that have come with them. The facts speak for themselves: Labour delivers, while the SNP fails the schools test in Glasgow. The hypocrisy of the SNP is unbelievable. As we know, it promised to match Labour's school building programme "brick for brick" but has not done so. It campaigned against school closures in my constituency but offered no alternatives. It announced the construction of just 14 schools throughout the whole of Scotland, but not even one of those will be in Glasgow. The SNP Government is once again ripping off Glasgow. Glasgow is yet again being penalised by the Government. We are paying the price for working hard over previous years to provide the best possible education facilities for our young people, and the communities of my constituency and constituencies across Glasgow have been abandoned by the SNP. Does the Government not see that it is as a direct result of its policy failures that the latest phase of Glasgow's pre-12 strategy—the first under this SNP Government—is the first since devolution to offer not a single new school building in the city? That is a damning indictment of the  SNP's education policy, and is one that the cabinet secretary will not be allowed to forget. Fiona Hyslop has indicated that she expects to announce the first tranche of primary schools that are planned to be built under the school building programme by the end of the year. She has indicated that she hopes that every local authority in Scotland will benefit from the first phase of the programme. However, those aspirational comments are quite different from the headline on the Glasgow SNP website, which screams "SNP pledge new schools for Glasgow".

Thank you, Presiding Officer. We know, by the SNP's own recent admission, that that particular website is prone to "glitches" with "100s" of inaccuracies. Every party in the chamber would assert that it views education as a high priority, but after two and a half years in Government, the SNP has still to prove it.

To ask the Scottish Executive how the 2010-11 budget will assist local communities. (S3O-7914)

I have previously asked the Scottish Government to recognise through its budget the particular needs of the city and communities of Glasgow. It has failed to do so. This year, it proposes to rob the city of £120 million-worth of investment, and the much-needed jobs that would come with it, in order to pay for its pet projects such as the national conversation. Why does the Government continue to treat Glasgow and its communities unfairly? [ Interruption. ]

Why is Glasgow having to take the hit for the obsessions of this Scottish Administration?

Over the past year, many communities across Scotland have benefited from town centre regeneration funding, and many hope to benefit when the next tranche is announced in October. I notice from the budget that the cabinet secretary does not intend to continue the funding into the next financial year. Will he reconsider his decision, given that such funding has the potential to be extremely beneficial to many communities in Glasgow that will struggle as a result of some of his other decisions?

The minister is aware that there has been a voluntary scheme of factor registration in Scotland for many years and that it has singularly failed to make any difference whatsoever to the practices of some factors, who operate in a highly disreputable way and cause a great deal of hardship and concern to many in our society. Will she take what might be the final opportunity in the current session to legislate? If she will not, I will.

Today Port Dundas is best known for its distillery and bottling plant. However, in 1811, when the first distillery opened, the whisky industry was only part of a vibrant industrial scene. Port Dundas was built at the end of the 18 th century as a terminus of the Forth and Clyde canal, and until the Clyde was deepened in the mid-19 th century it was Glasgow's premier port. In 1825 alone, almost 100,000 tonnes of goods were brought into the city via Port Dundas and passengers were regularly transported along the canal from Port Dundas to far-distant locations such as Edinburgh. It is clear, therefore, that when Daniel McFarlane established his distillery at Port Dundas in 1811, it was already an important industrial port for Glasgow. Over the years, ownership of the distillery and the cooperage has changed many times and the buildings have been rebuilt, most notably in 1903 after a major fire, and renovated on several occasions to bring them up to date and make them fit for purpose. So when a new gas compressor was delivered to the distillery in June, it seemed that the process of upgrading was continuing in the present day. It also seemed to give truth to what the workforce was told last year, which was that there was still demand for the spirit that they produced. In fact, demand was increasing. As a result, the shock of the workers at the announcement of 1 July was very real. After all, they had been co-operating with Diageo and had negotiated a series of changes to their conditions to help to keep the company profitable. Given that it was not revealed to anyone in advance and indeed was made after the Parliament had adjourned for the summer recess, the announcement, which led to the mothballing of the gas compressor, really took the workers by surprise. We have rehearsed in the chamber the reasons why we believe Diageo to be wrong and why we believe that the closure of the Port Dundas and Kilmarnock plants should not go ahead. Indeed, Mr Swinney outlined those very reasons this morning. I want to concentrate on one particular issue that affects Port Dundas. We know that the demand for whisky is increasing; that markets such as India and China have huge potential for the sale of all spirit-based alcohol; and that Cameronbridge will not come on stream for another two years. What we do not know is why Diageo has rejected out of hand the  sensible suggestion made first by the trade unions and then by the task force that Port Dundas should be given a stay of execution until Cameronbridge is up and running. If the company is correct in its prediction that it needs about 175 million litres of spirit a year, the closure of Port Dundas at this time will leave it 30 million litres short until Cameronbridge opens. Of course, Port Dundas produces 40 million litres of spirit a year. If the Indian and Chinese markets develop as predicted, with India alone potentially looking for an additional six million cases of whisky per annum, Diageo might find itself unable to take advantage of that growth in the years ahead. Given the loyalty and commitment shown by the Port Dundas workforce over many years, the least that Diageo could have done was listen to the reasonable, valid arguments that were being made by the very people who have made the company the world leader that it is. When I met management officials in July to be told very clearly that Diageo would close Port Dundas—no ifs, no buts—I must admit that I was very surprised, given that the consultation period had just begun. I was therefore delighted when, a couple of weeks later, I heard senior officials from the company say clearly in an interview on the BBC that they were open to suggestions and that they would consider alternatives. However, given their reaction to the task force report, it appears that, when they spoke on the BBC, they were simply saying what they thought the television audience wanted to hear. As members have said, if Diageo presses ahead with the closure, it is important that the Scottish Government continues to work with the trade unions. I was pleased to hear Mr Swinney's remarks on that in his opening speech. It is also important that Mr Swinney tells us what the Scottish Government will do to ensure that Diageo meets its obligations to the workers and their communities. Diageo must not be allowed to shirk those obligations.

I am grateful to the cabinet secretary for that intervention. I hope that Diageo takes the issue as seriously as he does. I say to Derek Brownlee that the closures have a real cost. There is a cost to the local communities and to everyone who is involved at Diageo. There is also the onward cost to the Scottish Government and the two local authorities that are  involved, as they try to find alternative employment opportunities in the areas. I hope that that will be taken seriously and I hope that Mr Brownlee and his colleagues will consider that, too.

Questions must be asked about Diageo's commitment to Fife. It would be appalling if full-time posts with reasonable salaries were replaced by low-paid jobs on temporary or even day-to-day contracts. I hope that that will be taken seriously, too. Throughout the campaign, the workers have shown determination and dignity, which does them great credit. It has been an honour to support them thus far and, like Willie Coffey, I will continue to do so. Willie Coffey was right to talk about the history of Johnnie Walker. It is a proud history, as the histories of Kilmarnock and Port Dundas show.

It is right that the Parliament has the opportunity to show its opposition to Diageo's plans and I hope that we will do that at 5 o'clock today. However, is it not a shame that a company that is as big and successful as Diageo should be content to be remembered for ending the whisky industry in Kilmarnock and Port Dundas?

Does Mr Brown accept that the whole point of trying to get a stay of execution for Port Dundas is to allow and to help the workforce to move more easily into other employment or into training?

I thank Willie Coffey and congratulate him on securing the debate, which gives members the opportunity to express publicly their support for the Diageo workers, many of whom are with us in the public gallery this evening. There has been a distillery at Port Dundas for almost 200 years, but if Diageo has its way that proud history will come to an end and some 200 people will lose their jobs. Last week, we had the announcement of Diageo's profit for the year, of £2.02 billion. It was a drop from the previous year but, given the worldwide recession, it is a profit  margin that most companies would be proud of, but Diageo seems to have overlooked the very people who make its profits possible—its workforce. I praise the workforce at Port Dundas and Kilmarnock, and those at Leven, Shieldhall and Hurlford, too, for the determination and dignity that they have shown throughout the campaign to retain the jobs. I also praise them for their commitment to Diageo over many years—a commitment that has made the company the world leader that it is today. Why close the Port Dundas plant? I must say that the case is less than convincing and that the briefing that Diageo provided for MSPs does not make a compelling business case. Port Dundas sits in a prime position with easy access to the motorway network around Glasgow, which is not the case for all distilleries. It sits on a 22 acre site with room for expansion but, in recent years, investment in the site and the plant has been limited to a new computerised operational system and a £700,000 gas compressor, which was delivered in June but has now been mothballed. Diageo seems intent on using spirit from the North British Distillery Company here in Edinburgh, in which it has a half share. The other half is owned by the rival Edrington Group. Diageo currently takes approximately 17 million litres per annum from the North British distillery, but it plans to increase that. It seems to place its commitment to North British higher on its list of priorities than its commitment to its own plant at Port Dundas, which produces 40 million litres per annum and has the capacity to produce more. Diageo also wishes to move to a new distilling plant in Fife, but it assumes, first, that the plant will be up and running with no hitches and on time and, secondly, that the plant will never need to be shut down unexpectedly. Any prudent manager would surely ask, "Where is the back-up?" The answer from Diageo seems to be, "There isn't any." If we add in the industry predictions of rapid growth in demand for whisky from China and India in the coming years, it seems very strange that Diageo should wish to limit its potential for growth when all other distillers will be looking to expand their market share. Given the consequences of the proposals, it is regrettable that the company did not accept the workforce's sensible proposal—a point that Iain Gray has emphasised—that the consultation period should be extended beyond the statutory minimum. How much faith should we place in Diageo's consultation? Does it want to hear alternatives, or is the matter a done deal? When I put that question to management back in early July, I was told that the proposal was the company's final decision and was a done deal. As recently as last Friday, senior management at Port  Dundas had a meeting with the workforce at which the workers were told that closure was a done deal. Not only is that cynical during a consultation process, the fact that it happened in the absence of union representatives raises serious questions about the Diageo management's commitment to the consultation process and its willingness to consider other proposals seriously. Despite the limited time that there has been for scrutinising the Diageo business plan, other options are available. Despite the many months over which Diageo formulated its closure plans, the short period for the consultation has allowed other options to be identified. Now is the time for those options to be refined and put to Diageo. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth will no doubt have those in mind when he meets Diageo tomorrow. A lot rests on that dialogue, so the cabinet secretary has our best wishes as he prepares for that meeting. There is concern that the retention of jobs in Port Dundas and Kilmarnock might be to the detriment of jobs in Fife, but I do not believe that that is the case; we are fighting for the retention of high-quality, skilled, permanent jobs, not the out-sourced, short-term or temporary jobs that might be on offer. That is recognised by the unions and by the workforce in Diageo sites throughout Scotland and it is why I want to see alternative proposals that promote investment in the current jobs, both for existing workers and for future generations of Scotch whisky workers in Port Dundas and Kilmarnock and throughout the Diageo estate.

I want Diageo to show the same commitment to its workforce that its workers have shown to their employer. That its workforce is what has made Diageo such a success is recognised across the world. I sincerely hope that the support that has been shown to the workers by the public and by parliamentarians will make Diageo think again. I hope that Diageo will see the sense of retaining and investing in jobs in Port Dundas and in Kilmarnock. I wish the cabinet secretary well in his meeting tomorrow.

The cabinet secretary is aware of—indeed, he rehearsed today—the impact that the loss of the 200 jobs at Port Dundas would have in my constituency. I know that he is also aware that it would bring to an end almost 200 years of distilling on the site. I have two brief questions. First, will the Scottish Government bring forward a debate in parliamentary time on the Diageo proposals so that the Parliament can demonstrate its support for the workforce by means of a vote? Secondly, does the cabinet secretary believe that Diageo has made the case for the closure of the Port Dundas operation? If not, will he make it clear in his discussions with Diageo tomorrow that pre-empting the continuing consultation by advising workers as recently as last Friday that Port Dundas will definitely close is neither helpful nor appropriate?

In his statement last week and again today, the justice secretary said that he had ruled out a prisoner transfer request in respect of Mr al-Megrahi. However, at the time of the Libyan request for transfer, appeals were still pending, and, as the cabinet secretary must be aware, prisoner transfers may take place only when all other legal processes have been completed. Will he advise members how he could possibly rule out a prisoner transfer when no ruling was required of him and whether his officials have ever advised him that his admissions on this matter are incompetent?

It is a privilege to speak in this debate. Like others, I am delighted that Scotland will have robust climate change legislation following today's deliberations. Not being a member of the lead committee can make it difficult for someone with an interest in a bill to follow its progress closely. On this occasion, I am particularly indebted to my colleagues on the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee for keeping me and other members informed. I am also indebted to the many constituents of mine who have kept in touch with me along the way and who have ensured that I have known exactly what has been happening with the bill. None of us is immune from the effects of climate change, and I am sure that we have all encountered problems in our own constituencies that have been caused wholly or in part by climate change. The bill seems to strike just about the right balance between carrot and stick measures. It will require us to continue to monitor and debate the situation as we go forward with secondary legislation. I am pleased that the bill contains such a rigorous measure of reporting.  On emissions, the bill allows us to say to those who are meeting later in the year in Copenhagen to discuss climate change that they should be ambitious, particularly as technology is changing constantly. If they are not ambitious, they will fall behind. I was very much struck by a discussion between the minister and my colleague Sarah Boyack about how the climate change agenda feeds into so many others. I have an example of that from my constituency. Allied Vehicles constructs and makes electric cars. To me, those cars are for the future, yet they are also for today, as the company employs 300 people in construction work in an area of relatively high unemployment. The agenda is important and meets with many of our other objectives. The Malawians call it chilala—warming earth. No matter what we call it, the effects of climate change are felt most by people in the developing world, by those who are most vulnerable and by those who are least able to recover from them. In this country, we each produce on average about 9.4 tonnes of emissions per annum. The average Malawian produces only about 0.1 tonnes per annum. Yet it is our friends in Malawi who feel the effects of our actions first and most deeply. Those of us who have visited Malawi will have sampled chambo, the country's most popular fish dish. Because the watercourses are drying up, catches of chambo reduced from 2,000 metric tonnes in 1993 to 200 metric tonnes in 2003. At the same time, it is generally accepted that the yearly pattern of wind and rain in Malawi is changing. Most crucially, it is no longer consistent, which means that planting times cannot be synchronised with the weather. It is no wonder that Malawians think that the weather is muddled. They are right—it is. In Yemen, where there is no permanent river system, the Government is considering moving the capital city, because it foresees that it will not be able to sustain the population's water supply in a few years' time. In Burkina Faso, rainfall has fallen to between 400mm and 500mm a year, which represents a decline of almost 20 per cent. In many other parts of the world, local communities are taking action to adapt their lives and their communities to meet the challenges of climate change. Villagers in Bangladesh are moving their buildings—they are building up the height of the local schools so that they can survive heavier rainfall and provide shelter for entire villages if homes are lost to flooding. We must not lose sight of the fact that such activity is necessary because of our actions. I am interested to know how the Government plans to assist in that regard. In my opinion, that should not be done at the expense of other international  development work. We could end up in the same situation as those countries if we are not vigilant; we must use the situation that they are in as a warning to us. When the Parliament was created, Donald Dewar said that devolution was not an event but a means to an end, and that end was social justice. For that reason, because climate change is a social justice issue, I am delighted to support the bill.

To ask the Scottish Executive how many portions of fresh fruit and vegetables patients in hospitals operating a cook-chill system receive on a daily basis. (S3O-7430)

I agree with the minister that the system of catering in a hospital should not influence the number of portions of fresh fruit and vegetables that patients receive but, unfortunately, it seems that it does have such an influence on the ground. Regardless of the system that is in place in any particular hospital, can the minister advise what monitoring happens at ward level to ensure that the reality for patients who are unfortunately in hospital matches the aspiration that we would all have for them?

As we all know, the bill had its genesis in the problems that were encountered following the  combined elections in 2007. I am sure that none of us wants a repeat of that situation, not just because of the time that we all spent at counts becoming increasingly frustrated at the lack of progress, or even because of our concern—which was right—about the hours that returning officers' staff were required to work. Our main concern must be with what will maximise voter engagement and turnout. The elector must be at the heart of the decisions that we take. Like others, I am sceptical about the benefits of decoupling local government elections from Scottish Parliament elections. That is the right thing to do at this stage, but I fear a resulting decrease in turnout. I am willing to support the proposal to decouple in the sincere hope that it will work for turnout and will give a focus to local government. I am sure that we all want local government to have its day in the sun, as one member put it. However, as the recent European elections showed, national events throw elections off course. Just because we want to talk about the Parliament's issues or our council colleagues want to talk about the issues that affect their local authority areas, that does not mean that that is what the media will report or what electors will cast their votes on.

I do not have time—I am sorry, Ms MacDonald. The first step towards the goal of increasing turnout must be examining voter registration. The Local Government and Communities Committee heard about innovative ways of registering voters. For example, we heard of a local authority area in which 200 new voters were registered because of work that was done in secondary schools with young people who were attaining voting age. In my local authority area—Glasgow—students are registered automatically when they matriculate. In that context, the bill that is going through Westminster to introduce individual rather than household registration will be helpful. In recent years, we have expected much of electors. We have expected them to cope with more elections and we have introduced two new voting systems. Perhaps we must think even more about facilitating voting. I am pleased with what the minister has said today and to the committee about the work that he is progressing. However, the committee heard from witnesses that the system of information officers in polling stations in 2007 had mixed results—my experience bears that out. The majority view was that the idea was sound but that a bit more consistency would have made a difference. The view of most witnesses whom the committee questioned was that we  should continue with information officers at least until the election systems had bedded down, but that we had to provide better training for such officers and for voting booth staff and other polling station staff, because people often ask them questions and do not always approach information officers. I would be pleased if the minister and the Government developed that in conjunction with local government colleagues, but I acknowledge that a cost is associated with the measure. Similarly, costs will be associated with decoupling and with e-counting. Given that the local government elections in 2012 will take place on the same day as the London Assembly elections, the cost of e-counting will be a major consideration. I accept that in committee the minister said that he and his officials planned to get on with the project as soon as possible. I hope that he will be able to tell us what progress has been made on commissioning the e-counting system. I would also be grateful if he would advise us of whether he is beginning to have meaningful discussions with Scotland's local authorities about the many issues that were raised with the committee in relation to the loss of the economy of scale that applied to the previous combined elections. In spite of my slight reservations, I will support the bill at 5 o'clock.

Will the member give way?

In her statement, the cabinet secretary talked about a reduction in the number of pupils who are educated in category C or D schools by 2011. Normally, we would all welcome that, but my constituency will contribute to that falling number next week, when 467 pupils move out of category C and D schools and—for the first time since 1997—into other schools in the area rather than into new schools. Some of those existing schools are, frankly, in not much better condition. What will the cabinet secretary's announcement today do for  the pupils of St Agnes's, St Gregory's, Wyndford and Our Lady of the Assumption primaries in my constituency, all of which are to close next week?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I am sorry to interrupt the flow, and I apologise to Mr Doris for doing so, but I would not have done so had I not had to. The cabinet secretary accused me of suggesting that the children who are moving out of schools in my constituency are moving into schools that are in worse condition than the ones that they are leaving. That is not what I said. I said that, in some cases, the condition of the schools that they are moving into is not much better than that of the schools that they were in. For the parents and pupils involved, that is a very relevant difference.

I, too, congratulate Aileen Campbell on securing this important and highly topical debate. In the course of the debate, we have learned much about the economy and geography of Scotland. It is my intention that colleagues should be more familiar with my constituency, in the north of Glasgow, before I close. The motion rightly recognises the importance of town centres to the social and economic life of our communities. Although the term "town centre" is normally used in the context of a small town, it is necessary to acknowledge the importance of urban town centres to the life of urban communities and estates, many of which serve a substantial number of people. I am delighted that the minister recognised that when he laid out the guidance for the town centre regeneration fund. The importance of town centres in urban areas has been demonstrated by the fact that many hundreds of people in Maryhill and Possilpark have signed up to my petition and support the  claims that are being made for each of those areas. Maryhill has a town centre that formally runs from Queen Margaret Drive to the aqueduct—an ancient historic monument—on Maryhill Road. It has the traditional layout of tenement properties with shops on the ground floor, but it also has a shopping mall that is owned by Tesco and which has, frankly, seen better days. Almost five years ago, Tesco announced that it would carry out a complete renovation of the mall, but that work has still not begun. Indeed, only last week, in response to my latest letter to the company, Tesco wrote to me, making it clear that there is no start date for the project, never mind a completion date. Although Tesco's attitude is disappointing, it is pleasing that work continues apace to rejuvenate the canal side in Maryhill to return it to its rightful position as the Venice of the north. It is important to ensure that the work that is undertaken there is, as Cathy Jamieson rightly said, done in a co-ordinated way that respects the history of that important industrial area and recognises the significance of the architecture and design. In passing, I thank my constituent, Mr Doris, for adding his voice to mine in making the case for Maryhill. Possilpark is an area of great contrast. Millions of pounds have been spent on new housing and a new campus school in the area, which have greatly improved the living conditions for many of the people of the area, as well as their opportunities. However, the main street—the part that is seen by those passing through—has changed very little since its most depressed period in the 1980s. I know that Mrs Neil, if not Mr Neil, is familiar with that part of Glasgow and regards it with some affection. I therefore welcome the co-operation of North Glasgow Housing Association, Glasgow North Regeneration Agency and the chairs of the community planning partnership and the community health project, who have worked with me to prepare a case for Possilpark to put to Glasgow City Council. The council has indicated that it is likely to look favourably on the possibility of a bid on behalf of Possilpark being made in the autumn. I thank the Evening Times for promoting the case for Glasgow's town centres in its usual campaigning fashion. I know that the minister cannot comment on individual bids to the fund and that he has, quite correctly, established a process that keeps the decisions regarding funding at arm's length. Nevertheless, I am confident that the cases for Maryhill and Possilpark will be successful. Each case stands on its merits, and I look forward very much to being able to advise my constituents in  Maryhill and Possilpark of a successful outcome to their campaigns for those areas. I have previously urged the minister to continue the fund into future years, and I do so again tonight. As we have heard, there are many town centres that could benefit from such funding, and I look forward to making the case in future years for funding for other areas in my constituency.

I listened carefully to the cabinet secretary's response to Robert Brown, but he will be aware that, of the £196 million that has been allocated to Glasgow City Council for capital expenditure, more than £115 million is earmarked for projects such as the M74 extension and the White Cart flood prevention measures, whose capital spend is ring fenced. In the past 10 years, Glasgow City Council has built 53 primary schools and 11 secondary schools. Some of that was done with public-private partnerships, but the vast majority it was done with the council's own funds. The council no longer has those funds, and the Scottish Government is not offering any advance on them or a way out through the Scottish Futures Trust. What can the Government therefore offer the parents of pupils and the pupils whose schools are going to close at the end of June?

The minister is aware of my keen interest in the town centre regeneration fund, particularly given that it might affect Maryhill and Possilpark in my constituency. I realise that, at this point, the minister will not want to commit himself to particular projects that might or might not be funded. However, given the undoubted popularity of the fund, have the minister and his colleagues considered—at this admittedly early stage—the possibility of the fund being continued into future years?

Given that poor communities and poor countries will, as the cabinet secretary rightly identifies, suffer most from climate change, and given that  the average carbon footprint in the west is about 9.4 tonnes of emissions, compared with less than 0.1 tonnes in Malawi, does the cabinet secretary agree that we should be assisting the developing world with mitigation and adaptation measures, and that we should not need to dip into the international development budget, for example, in order to do so?

Will the member give way?

If the SNP Government has failed in one area, it is education, as the motion and some of the amendments make clear. Scotland's established teachers, our newly qualified teachers and our schoolchildren have been failed. Good and enthusiastic young teachers are unable to find anything other than supply posts and the few posts that are available often attract upwards of 300 applicants. Manifesto pledge after manifesto pledge has been broken, and parents, teachers and children have been let down. Let us not forget what the SNP manifesto said about new schools. The SNP said that it would match Labour's school building programme brick for brick. On Monday, I had the pleasure of visiting a new school in my constituency that was opened to pupils just last week. It is a replacement for two old schools and a nursery, and provides new community facilities, including a library, gym and other opportunities for people to gather together. That is the kind of school that every community wants and that every child and teacher deserves. It is only one of 11 secondary and 53 primary schools that Glasgow City Council has built in the past 10 years, at a cost of about £0.5 billion. However, that school is one of the last that the council will be able to build because, since 2007,  the money has dried up and the ability to borrow has disappeared.

Of the capital that the member talks about, £115 million is ring fenced to pay for measures such as the M74 extension and the White Cart Water flood prevention measures. Glasgow City Council was at least able to decide to build those 11 secondary schools using PPP, although it decided to use its own resources to build the 53 primary schools in the past 10 years. We do not need to take any lessons from Ms Hyslop. It is no secret that I have opposed proposed school closures in my constituency. I have done so because I do not believe that all the options have been explored or that all the arguments have been considered. However, I am in no doubt about the real culprit—it is the Government, which has overseen a reduction in capital spend on education in Glasgow of astronomical proportions. Let me put some of the figures on the record. In the past 10 years, Glasgow City Council has spent £550 million building new schools. This year and next, the council will spend £100 million to deliver new-build schools that were commissioned under the previous Labour-led Scottish Executive. The Wyndford and Cadder areas of my constituency would benefit hugely from new joint-campus schools, but it is their misfortune to be part of phase 5 of the on-going school review process and not part of a previous phase, because phase 5 is taking place when the SNP is in power in Scotland and when education strategy is in disarray. What does the minister have to offer the pupils and teachers in the schools in my constituency that look set to close in June? The Government stands accused of letting down the pupils, parents and teachers of Scotland. It is about time that the Government faced up to its responsibilities and did something to ensure that Scottish pupils and teachers work and operate in the best possible facilities.

Like other members, I welcome Mr. Neil to his new position. I look forward to a great deal of dialogue with him in the coming months and years. As is the case for many members, a great many of the people who come to my surgeries or who contact me do so because they have a problem relating to their housing. For many there is no easy solution, but over the past 10 years housing associations in my constituency have delivered excellent homes: homes with gardens, home with facilities for the disabled, homes that replaced tenements that had long since outlived their usefulness and, most important, homes that people wanted to live in and could take pride in.  For Alasdair Allan's information, the answer to the question posed by Mary Mulligan is that during the eight years of the Labour-Liberal Democrat Administration, 30,000 socially rented houses were built throughout Scotland.

I do not have enough time, but that is the fact and that is the figure. A number of those homes were in my constituency and have helped to create change, not just to the lives of individual families but to entire communities. We need housing associations to continue to build houses. In a time of financial crisis we need their input even more than we did previously. They understand the needs of local communities because they operate at a local level and are accountable to local people for their decisions. In my view, housing associations do not just build homes, they build communities. Therefore, I am disappointed that the Government seems to think that it knows better than local housing associations and that housing associations can be squeezed to do more for less. In the past year, as Mary Mulligan said, we saw the number of housing association completions fall in the first three quarters by 840 units. The final quarter of that year will have had to have been a bumper one to realise the minister's optimistic predictions. I sincerely hope that he is right, but I find it hard to understand how he could possibly be. I urge the Government to reinstate the full subsidy to local housing associations and to allow them to get on with what they do best—building houses. It is also time for the Government to drop the idea of the lead developer. Housing associations have made their views very clear: if they are given the resources, they can do the job. There are other ways of securing economies of scale—for example, Glasgow City Council is working with some of the housing associations in its area to achieve economies in procurement. That is being done without giving one individual association all the power and the responsibility that would come with being a lead developer. I welcome the recent progress that has been made on the issue of second-stage transfer in Glasgow, but that must be only the start of the process. More local housing organisations must move to the second stage as soon as it is feasible. Although many tenants have seen great improvements in the condition of their homes as a result of work by the GHA, improvement was only one element of the package. The other was about giving local people more control over the decisions  that affect their homes and communities. I draw the minister's attention in particular to the issues that Maryhill Housing Association has raised with him around the stock that is to be transferred to the association through second-stage transfer. The Scottish Government must make a greater effort to work closely with the GHA to support the local housing associations that have not yet been able to move towards second-stage transfer. As a member of the Co-operative Party, I want more GHA tenants who are willing and able to exercise real and direct control over their housing stock to be enabled to do so. The commitment of all the members of the housing association movement, and those who have taken an active role in their local housing associations, must be—and deserves to be—recognised by the Parliament. The Government too must recognise that commitment in acting to support them and resource their organisations appropriately. There are many challenges for those who wish to buy homes at the present time—the minister might like to comment on any progress that has been made in assisting those who do not have enough funds to secure a mortgage. He will remember that we discussed that issue at committee on 4 March, when he told us that on-going discussions on a range of issues were taking place with the Westminster Government but that he wanted to ensure that everybody in Scotland benefits from similar assistance to that which might become available under the new scheme. I will raise one final issue. At a time when money is tight for everyone, it is important that people are protected from the actions of unscrupulous factors, and it is our duty to do what we can as legislators to help them. The Office of Fair Trading recently reported on the issue and identified a problem about which people in Scotland contact me on a daily basis. The OFT recommended that there should be a scheme of self-regulation, but frankly that is not good enough: we have a system of self-regulation now, and it patently does not work. That is why I will bring forward draft legislation that will seek to establish a mandatory system of regulation and accreditation and will provide a system of easily accessible mediation so that homeowners can have a resolution to their problems without the expense of going to court. I hope that members from all parties, the minister and the Government will support that much-needed legislation when it comes before us.

To ask the Scottish Executive what recent meetings it has had with the chief constable of Strathclyde Police. (S3O-6385)

When the cabinet secretary meets the chief constable tomorrow and the issue of drugs comes up—as it no doubt will—will he discuss with the chief constable the problem that arises when landlords attempt to evict tenants because of a conviction for drug dealing? As the cabinet secretary will know, it can take six months to obtain a conviction for drug dealing but the landlord must then raise a separate action for eviction, which can take a further six months to come to court. That time lag causes understandable frustration and fear in communities. Will he undertake to meet me to discuss ways in which the eviction process can be  accelerated to help protect the constituency and communities that I represent?

I am sure that the minister is aware of the advice that is given to individuals who apply to the central heating programme. I am also sure that he is aware that many people who could be categorised as fuel poor or who have children already receive  central heating through schemes to which their local authority housing provider or other registered social landlords apply. How will RSLs and other housing providers in the social rented sector benefit through the new scheme?

Does the minister agree that local communities in urban areas such as Maryhill, Possilpark and Milton would also benefit from such investment? Will he ensure that the criteria that he sets reflect the ambition that those areas have for regeneration? Also, in the fullness of time, will he commit to making funds available to Glasgow to allow such schemes to go ahead?

I add my congratulations to those that have already been offered to Jackie Baillie. Her hard work and determination have brought the bill to this point. I regret that she is, for understandable reasons, unable to be here to lead today's debate. As we have heard, the bill is relatively small, but will make a significant difference to the lives of  people with disabilities. Of course, the bill should not be necessary. Most people respect bays that are clearly marked as being intended for citizens with disabilities, but the actions of a small minority of drivers who, often wilfully, disregard such bays have meant that the time has come when protection in law is necessary. I am sure that all members have been visited by constituents who have shared their experiences of these issues. A constituent of mine is often afraid to leave home, because he knows that a neighbour will park in the disabled bay if it is left empty. Another constituent challenged another driver at a supermarket, only to be told, "It's raining, so first come, first served." Such constituents are the people who need the protection that the bill will undoubtedly provide. This debate is not really about disability; it is about the prevention of an abuse. In the stage 1 debate, I raised the issue of the size of parking bays, which is of real concern because many disabled people must transfer to a wheelchair when they leave their cars and so need that little bit of extra space to transfer safely. That is one reason why bays for disabled people need to be protected. A system that makes bays enforceable will help to ensure that the spaces are of adequate size and are located appropriately. As we know, the bill will require local authorities to pursue the owners of private car parks and attempt to reach agreement with them about providing bays for disabled people. In case any private operator should think that that will present them with a major problem, let me outline the experience of one company: Asda, as we have heard, has had a scheme up and running for over a year now. The store in my constituency, like other Asda stores, has the system of enforcement in place. The manager at Asda in Maryhill tells me that, for the first few months, they had to spend extra time and effort explaining that the bays were designated and why, However, they now find that the scheme enforces itself. Many shoppers have complimented the store on its approach, and it has not yet had to enforce the bays with fines. Car park operators should follow Asda's approach and be proactive, rather than wait for their local authority to get in touch. That might even win them more customers. At stage 1, I also mentioned the consultation exercise that I conducted with the disability forum in my constituency. It has since had a name change, but it continues to do excellent work in the north of Glasgow. I am indebted to the forum for the insight that it has given me on this and many other subjects. It pointed out that it was one thing for us to pass legislation, but it asked how people were to find out about what it means for them. As the minister knows, I raised the idea of an  awareness-raising campaign by means of an amendment at stage 2. I was happy to withdraw the amendment, given the minister's assurance that a communication plan would be drawn up, so I would be grateful if, in closing, he would tell us what the Government is planning in that respect. I am sure he agrees that, as my local Asda store has shown, good information is key to making the legislation work. Also in the stage 1 debate, my colleague Mary Mulligan made the point that Parliament has as one of its central purposes the power and, indeed, the duty to legislate, although it is fair to say that we have been slightly legislation light in the past two years. One of Parliament's strengths is that members have the opportunity to introduce legislation that directly reflects their constituents' problems and experiences. The bill had its genesis in the experiences of Jackie Baillie's constituents in Dumbarton, but it will offer protection to citizens throughout Scotland—to other members' constituents and mine. For that, we owe Jackie Baillie and her staff our support for the bill, along with our thanks for it and for all the hard work that was involved. As David McLetchie correctly said, the bill will help to make Scotland a more inclusive country, which is surely one of Parliament's aims.

A number of colleagues are probably aware that I underwent surgery some months ago. Of course, I was aware of the debate around hospital-acquired infection, but I admit that that was the last thing on my mind as I cleared my desk and cancelled appointments. I wanted to get into hospital, have the surgery and recover as quickly as I could. It was only an e-mail exchange with a local general practitioner with whom I was working on a campaign that reminded me that avoiding infection was something else that I might have to contend with. The GP told me not to allow anyone—nurse or doctor—to examine me without first washing and gelling their hands and putting on gloves. She told me that they should change their aprons every time they approached a patient and every time  they left a patient, too. She gave me a comprehensive list of dos and don'ts. I remember wondering whether I would remember all those rules if I happened to be feeling particularly unwell. Would I have the courage to ask someone on whom I was relying for care to please wash their hands? I was fortunate, in that those who were caring for me were scrupulous in that and every other regard. However, on one occasion, I heard a young nurse reprimand a consultant who approached the patient in the bed next to me and told him in no uncertain terms that, although she was aware that the person was his patient, if he did not put gloves on he would not be examining any patient in that ward. The other patients in the ward resisted the temptation to applaud at that point. Should patients have to think like that, though? What of those patients who are too ill or too elderly, or who have problems communicating? Who will look out for them? My treatment contrasted sharply with that received by an elderly constituent of mine. The lady in question went into hospital for a relatively minor operation and, having been discharged and readmitted, and discharged and readmitted again, she was eventually diagnosed as being infected with Clostridium difficile. Her family informed me that, unfortunately, they were never told that she had a C diff infection, nor were they aware that any particular infection controls were being used. A close family friend, herself a health professional, once had occasion to complain about the way in which sharps were being disposed of by a doctor, as well as about the attitude of staff who were asked about the patient's progress. Unfortunately, the lady passed away. Some months later, because of the complaint that her family made, the death certificate is to be amended to show that Clostridium difficile was in fact a contributory factor. The family has received reassurance that the issues that they raised are being addressed in the hospital in question. In the meantime, however, a family has had to deal with anxiety for a wife and mother, and with a feeling of disbelief that our NHS could allow her to suffer in that way when she was vulnerable and afraid. I posed the question earlier: what of the patients who are too ill or too elderly to help themselves? How are they to be protected? Their first defence must be the hospital or other health care staff, but we must give those staff the resources to allow them to do their job. Staff need to have information about how infections are caught and spread, and about the different ways of dealing with them. They need to know about the latest infection control methods, and they need the confidence to challenge others when they fail to follow the rules.  As I am sure we all agree, much has been done in recent years to tackle health care acquired infections but, if we are really serious about it, we have to adopt the 15-point plan and be flexible in the years ahead. Only through having a comprehensive plan for prevention and treatment will we ever be able to tackle the problem properly. Reducing the number of cases of health care acquired infection needs to be our next big crusade. It should unite the chamber, not divide it. It should be tackled with the determination that previous generations brought to their efforts to control the spread of tuberculosis.

To ask the Scottish Executive what role the directorate for Europe, external affairs and culture has in the cultural programme that will accompany the Glasgow 2014 Commonwealth games and what progress has been made with that programme. (S3O-5404)

I am slightly disappointed that the minister did not follow up my question about the progress that has been made on the programme of cultural events that will accompany the sporting events in the Glasgow 2014 Commonwealth games. Perhaps she will do that next. Will she also confirm that Scotland will adopt the model proposed by the state of Victoria, which hosted the Melbourne games, and ensure that  access to all events in the cultural programme is free of charge to those who participate?

I welcome the opportunity to take part in this important debate. It is right and proper that the Scottish Parliament should express its view on the crisis in Gaza. We all know the genesis of the current Israeli attack on Gaza. Colleagues around the chamber have ably talked about the history of the region; I will not repeat what they have said. In the past few weeks, Israel has claimed that the attack is an attempt to weaken Hamas. Let us examine that claim. Hamas forms the elected Government of Palestine. That might not be my or the UK Government's choice—it is certainly not Israel's choice—but it is the Palestinians' choice. If anything is guaranteed to strengthen Hamas's position, it is the current series of attacks. In a radio interview at the weekend, the only Fatah MP left in Nablus—which was once so associated with Fatah that it was known as "Fatah City"—declared his view that Israel's attack would undoubtedly strengthen the hand and position of Hamas. The very nature of the Gaza strip means that an attack on Hamas is, of course, an attack on Palestinian men, women and children. Israel knows that. Israel's claims that it "makes every possible effort to avoid civilian casualties" surely stretch our credibility. It also knows that its actions in the months and years before the current incursion have weakened the Gaza strip's infrastructure, reduced fuel levels in the area and left hospitals struggling on back-up generators, many of which are already failing. Five UN health centres have closed because of the recent hostilities. If we add to that the lack of basic  medical supplies, we can only begin to imagine the plight of the injured—of whom there were some 2,700 by 6 January—and the despair of the medical and nursing staff who are trying to treat them. No one can have any doubts about the scale of the humanitarian tragedy that is unfolding before us. I welcome the Scottish Government's commitment to assist the humanitarian efforts. NGOs such as the UN and the Red Cross have important roles, and we must neither forget nor underestimate their work and the perils that they face in trying to deliver assistance. As has been mentioned, there was a three-hour break in hostilities yesterday to allow humanitarian aid to be delivered. That exercise, which was welcome, will be repeated today, but it is simply not enough. Agencies have reported that, during the brief lull, Gazans rushed on to the streets to buy essential supplies and check on friends and family members whom they had not been able to have contact with in recent days. The conflict can end only by means of a cease-fire. Hugh O'Donnell was right to say that a military solution will not work. It is vital that the international community puts pressure on Israel and Hamas to end all violence as soon as possible. In 1967, in the aftermath of the six-day war, the United Nations Security Council unanimously agreed resolution 242, which still stands. That resolution emphasised "the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by war and the need to work for a just and lasting peace in which every State in the area can live in security". Time does not allow me to read out the full resolution, but suffice it to say its terms have never been honoured. It is as relevant today as it was in 1967. There must be a viable Palestinian state and a secure Israel, and the resolution is the key to solving the problems of the middle east, which must remain the ultimate objective. Today, the Holyrood Parliament joins legislatures across the globe in calling for a cease-fire in the current crisis. The people of Gaza are calling out for such a cease-fire, and we must add our voice to theirs.

To ask the Scottish Executive what its priorities are for culture. (S3O-4976)

I note the importance that the minister has attached to creative Scotland. However, given that the public services reform bill is unlikely to take effect until the end of 2009, that the minister is on record as saying that legislation is not required to establish creative Scotland, and  that the Parliament has already given its approval for the establishment of the organisation—subject, of course, to adequate financial arrangements being in place—why does the Government not just get on with the job, establish creative Scotland and end the uncertainty that is faced by arts organisations across the country?

I add my thanks and congratulate Jackie Baillie both on introducing the bill and on the progress that it has made so far. Many of us will have had a feeling of déjà vu when Jackie Baillie described the cases that first got her interested in the issue. Many members will have shared my experience of having constituents come to their surgeries to tell about the difficulties that they or their families have had in using disabled parking bays. Sometimes those difficulties have occurred when they have been out shopping. However, as Jackie Baillie said, often they occur when they return home and attempt to park in the advisory parking bay outside their house only to find that it is occupied by someone who has no right to be there. Therefore, the bill is indeed welcome. I had the opportunity to discuss the bill proposal with users of the Possil and Milton Forum on Disability, which has a long name and an even longer track record of working with and enhancing the lives of disabled people in my constituency and across the north of the city of Glasgow. The meeting was well attended by people of varying ages and with a wide spectrum of disabilities. All of them were extremely supportive of Jackie Baillie's proposals and made a number of suggestions that they feel would help to make their daily lives a little bit easier as car users and people whose families help to transport them. The  group supports the inclusion in the proposed legislation of private car parks, especially at supermarkets, and wonders whether there could also be guidance or legislation that would set a minimum size for such parking bays wherever they are, so that wheelchair users could easily access their cars without having to seek assistance or to wait for another driver to depart. In addition—perhaps in conflict with my colleague Hugh Henry—the group suggested that there should be guidance on the number of disabled parking bays that a supermarket or store is required to provide. My constituents said that although supermarket car parks often have hundreds of parking spaces, the proportion that is allocated to disabled shoppers is sometimes inadequate. They are particularly concerned about that because they feel that the more unscrupulous retailers would use implementation of the legislation as a rationale for reducing the size of the disabled parking bays that they provide so that they do not take up more space. Of course, my constituents might be wrong about that. On a slightly more contentious note, my constituents also feel that the proposed £30 penalty for inappropriate parking is too little, and that a more appropriate fine would be £60. They suggest that the fine should increase every 21 days if it is not paid immediately, although that might be taking it too far. They agree that the money that is raised by fines that are issued by local authorities should be retained by local authorities and used to implement further work for disabled people. My constituents identified one more issue, although it might be a matter for the Government rather than for the bill. They said that a high-visibility advertising campaign should accompany the introduction of enforcement, so that from the outset, all drivers will be aware of the new rules and of how they apply to them. My constituents also take the view that in time, the measure would become self-policing, so the enforcement element would fall by the wayside. As members will have gathered, my constituents gave serious consideration to the consultation and the processes that are involved in a bill. Although some of their suggestions fall outwith the bill's scope, they are a fair representation of their views. I was interested to read about the costs and difficulties that some local authorities predict if the bill is passed. I am sure that more work will have to be done in connection with that evidence so that the bill can receive substantial and robust financial backing. I can speak only of my experience of my local authority in connection with traffic regulation orders, where the promotion of TROs—particularly for controlled parking zones—has been pursued with what can only be described as zeal. A great  deal of money has been spent on consultation of the local communities, some of which have rejected the proposals outright. As I said, that was in connection with metered parking bays. That argument probably needs to be continued, and I do not believe that using TROs for disabled parking would be any more expensive than helping to provide those us of who live in tenements in Glasgow with parking closer to our homes. I look forward to the bill's being passed, as it will improve the lives of many people, including the users of the Possil and Milton Forum on Disability, who look forward to it and to the protection that it will give them. Another important element of the bill is the clarity that it will bring: it will mean that a common approach will be taken throughout the country, and that those who claim ignorance will no longer be able to do so. The legislation will be clear, consistent and, above all else, enforceable.

I invite the minister to be clear today and confirm that she has dropped the lead developer model. Will she acknowledge that, particularly in the present financial climate, housing associations have a particularly valuable role to play? I welcome the focus on regeneration that she has indicated for the GHA, but will she acknowledge that housing associations other than the GHA are also often well placed to be partners in regeneration and will she encourage that role for them?

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress has been made in increasing police numbers in Strathclyde. (S3O-3845)

I thank the minister for his response, and I am sure that he will want to thank the community planning partnerships in Glasgow, which between them will contribute towards the cost of 100 of those officers. It is not all thanks to the Government, I am afraid. [ Interruption. ]

When new officers are being deployed in Strathclyde, will the minister consider the needs of the communities into which they are deployed? Will he look at the times at which they are deployed and, if necessary, address any issues with shift patterns, so that officers are on the beat when they are required, not at times of the day when there are fewer problems?

Will the minister give way?

On St Andrew's day in 2003, the then First Minister, Jack McConnell, made a much-lauded speech in which he set out the approach to culture that his coalition Government would take. He recognised the partnership that had to exist if culture was to flourish in our country and he acknowledged that culture should be placed firmly at the heart of government—that it should influence decisions and add value to all portfolios. He also made a plea to our country: "Let's agree first the importance and the centrality of cultural activity to all aspects of our lives, why it's important and how it can be used to revitalise us individually and as a national community.  Then let's see what structures are needed to make that happen". That was the approach that the previous Administration took. We can contrast that with the SNP Government's actions to strip from the bill everything about culture and aspiration and to leave only the bare bones of the cultural support mechanism for us to debate. I say to Rob Gibson that James Boyle is a remarkable man for whom I have much respect and who is entitled to his view, as are we all. However, if James criticised the previous Administration's bill, what must he think about the current bill, which adds nothing to the debate? All it does is remove issues.

I am afraid that I must repeat that the bill contains nothing new. All we have is a bill that has been denuded in the past year. Our ambition was and is to build on the United Nations definition of culture and to ensure that all citizens, particularly our young people, have the opportunity and the entitlement to access, enjoy, learn from and contribute to their culture, and to do so in a way that local communities think is right. However, the opportunity to which our nation could aspire just 15 months ago has been taken from it by a Government that has also reduced the money that is available to be spent on supporting and encouraging the arts, and which has instructed the Scottish Arts Council soon to cease its support for cultural co-ordinators. I say to Mr Gibson that cultural co-ordinators were part of a range of measures to help to balance local authority provision. The SNP Government is the first since devolution to accept a cut in funding for culture—so much for aspiration for our country. How will young people access the arts and culture? Will we leave it to chance? What of those who have talent but who never have the opportunity to put their talents to the test? It was hoped that what was described as an escalator approach would be taken, which would give young people the opportunity before, during and after school to develop their talents. However, the steps that underpinned that approach are gradually being removed. First, cultural co-ordinators were affected. Now, problems appear to have been identified in some areas—I accept that the evidence is anecdotal—with funding of the youth music initiative, because of the new way in which local government funding operates. If we lose those two valuable parts of the support for our young people to access culture, we will lose a  great deal. Any Government would be ashamed of that. As I have said, the Government has produced no new ideas in the past year. It has done nothing to show us that it cares about culture or to demonstrate a commitment to helping the arts to flourish. Many of the SNP's manifesto commitments have even been dropped along the way. I sincerely hope that the minister will, in closing, say that she will amend the bill at stage 2, that she will propose clear parameters within which creative Scotland will work, and that she will detail the relationships that creative Scotland should build with local authorities, universities, performing companies, the national collections and, of course, the voluntary sector. I hope that she will describe the steps that she is taking to ensure the continuation of the youth music initiative under the new agreement with local government, and that she will clarify once and for all creative Scotland's role in relation to the creative industries. I had hoped that the minister would do that in her speech, but I say with regret that she did not. I understand what she said about the creative industries, but will she say exactly what the creative industries forum's responsibilities will be? Who exactly will take that work forward? What does the word "advocacy" mean in that context? On 10 June, Highlands and Islands Enterprise wrote to me at the request of the minister. Its letter stated: "with HIE's Operating Plan now approved, we are currently in the process of allocating our sectoral budgets. For financial year 2008/09 we expect the budget allocated to our Creative Industries team to be similar to last year, c £600,000. Creative businesses will obviously still be eligible to apply for business support ... I would add that these figures relate to support for business, and do not include the support we provide for 'non-commercial' arts". If HIE thinks that it will receive the same budget this year, where will the funding changes be? As others have said, members who vote in favour of the bill will do so with real disappointment that there has been a missed opportunity, and with frustration, which we share with the cultural sector and the people of Scotland. I hope that the minister will address at stage 2 all the issues that I have raised and will not leave us in what seems to be the pickle of stage 1.

I, too, thank Bill Butler for securing the debate. In common with most if not all members in the chamber, I regard the national health service as one of the best and most important achievements of the United Kingdom and, indeed, of the Labour movement. Like most members, I have used the service—thankfully, not often. However, I know the difference that it has made to the lives of my friends and family, and to the lives of my constituents. I also had the privilege of working in the NHS for some 15 years. Despite all that, it was not my intention to speak in the debate. However, a chance conversation with Bill Butler last week changed my mind—in itself, an uncommon experience. I happened to mention that I remembered the 30 th anniversary of the NHS, an occasion that was celebrated in Gartnavel hospital, where I was working at the time, and throughout the NHS by a reduction in the cost of food in the NHS canteen to 1948 prices. That reminiscence prompted him to suggest that perhaps I would want to speak in the debate. For those who think that that was just an excuse to dispel the myth that he married a much younger woman, I have to say that it was not. In fact, the reminiscence got me thinking and made me decide that I should speak in the debate—not least because it was Mrs Thatcher's policies on the NHS in the 70s and 80s, and even into the 90s, that encouraged me to become involved in politics. I think that we should all celebrate this anniversary proudly because, prior to the inception of the NHS, the practice of medicine was conducted very differently, as we have heard. Many GPs had two entrances to their surgeries: one for patients with national health insurance—the panel patients; and one for private patients. Doctors could not call on advanced medical knowledge or effective drugs. Many doctors were, of course, unhappy with that situation and knew that often people who needed to be treated were not and that many who were treated could not afford the subsequent cost. Of course, many doctors regularly waived their fees. In spite of that, when Bevan introduced his bill in 1946, one former chairman of the BMA said:  "I have examined the Bill and it looks to me uncommonly like the first step, and a big one, to national socialism as practised in Germany. The medical service there was early put under the dictatorship of a 'medical fuhrer'. The Bill will establish the minister for health in that capacity." Fortunately, as we have heard, the BMA's views have moved on significantly. Bevan eventually won over the medical profession in spite of that vehement opposition and the NHS was established. Since then, life expectancy has increased by 10 years for men and women, and many of the illnesses that were most prevalent in 1948 have effectively been eradicated. While we laud the new medical technologies, we should remember that much of the NHS's success in the early years was built on the new antibiotics that became available and the opportunity that the service afforded to share good practice, provide economies of scale and institute the mass screenings of which David Whitton spoke. What will the NHS of 2048 look like? Just as our focus has moved significantly from the hospital to the community, the patient should and, I think, will become the main decision maker, with nursing and medical staff becoming our health advisers. In part, technology will move us in that direction, but so too will the demographics. We should all be proud of the NHS and, in particular, the staff who make it possible. They work day in and day out, often in jobs that are physically difficult and emotionally draining. In large numbers, they volunteer their services in places such as Malawi, where people are not as fortunate as we are. We should be resolute in our determination that the generations that follow us into this Parliament will also have an NHS to celebrate and be proud of.

The First Minister is aware of the efforts of the families of those who were killed and injured in the Stockline disaster to secure a public inquiry into the cause of the tragedy and the lessons to be learned from it. Is the First Minister aware that, despite representations having been made to his office and a meeting having been held with the Cabinet Secretary for Justice, the families have now been told that means testing will apply for those who want to be represented at the inquiry? Will he agree to look again at the joint ministerial determination that established the inquiry and ensure that those who are most affected by the tragedy can have equal access to representation, regardless of their means?

The minister will no doubt be aware of the very good work of the six creative industries offices around Scotland. Will she indicate which organisation—creative Scotland or the Scottish Enterprise network—they will report to, and which they will receive their funding from?

The First Minister will be aware that the official death toll in Burma stands at 32,000 and is likely to rise. Given not only that further cyclones are expected, as Aileen Campbell said, but that the start of the monsoon rains is imminent, it is likely that further damage will be done and further difficulties will be encountered with the transportation and distribution of relief. Given the existing difficulties with getting aid into Burma, does the First Minister agree that it is incumbent on him, the Government and all of us to add our voice to the Disasters Emergency Committee's call for people throughout Scotland and the United Kingdom to continue to contribute? Although the raising of £600,000 is indeed laudable, the amount that has been raised overall is only about a sixth of the money that was raised in similar circumstances following the tsunami.

Understandably, people are concerned about whether the money will go to the right causes, but, as I said, it is incumbent on all of us to encourage everyone we know to contribute. Does the First Minister agree?

Among other things, it is disappointing that so little of the Government's focus is on the wider issue of regeneration. "Firm Foundations" seems to lean heavily in favour of new-build housing and fails to  recognise the opportunities that exist for recycling existing stock. Some of that stock may be of poor quality or its size may no longer meet the requirements of today's households, but there are ways of changing that. Several of the housing associations in my constituency and other areas have regenerated communities by restructuring housing stock to provide a better range of house type, size and tenure. The Government does not seem to acknowledge that way forward, although it provides one answer to the problem of land supply that the Government correctly cites as an issue. Land supply is critical, but the minister must accept that many brownfield sites are expensive to regenerate, perhaps because they are undermined or contaminated. Remediation costs money. One idea that the minister might like to consider is having a specific funding mechanism to deal with the issue, especially for priority sites. Such a mechanism could help housing providers to unblock sites for development and reduce the cost burden on housing subsidy. It would also help to reduce the demand for land in the green belt to be released for house building.

I am quite familiar with the fund, because it was set up by the previous Executive, but it does not tackle all the problems that we face. For example, housing associations need to be able to access it, so that they can expand into brownfield sites. Bringing brownfield sites back into use is surely one of the most sustainable things that we can do. It was laudable that the Government took on the issue of energy efficiency in "Firm Foundations", but it did not set out a clear commitment on the housing sector's contribution to the economy's wider goal of an 80 per cent reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2050. Indeed, as we see from the consultation responses, there are fears that even the commitments that the Government has made will not be met, because they are incompatible with the Government's proposals for significant cost and subsidy reductions. We all share the aspiration of providing a tenure mix in neighbourhoods to help to retain residents within a community and to encourage the sustainability of communities in the longer term. However, housing associations in my constituency have told me that they find the tone of the chapter on social housing in "Firm Foundations" unduly  negative. They also said that no account has been taken of the diversity of provision or the many successes that the housing association movement and local authority sector have achieved. Over the years, the housing association movement has been innovative and has built an excellent track record of delivery. Why, then, is the Government determined to introduce competition and, possibly, a reduction in the number of organisations that can compete to deliver houses? In October last year, the Government made a statement on housing. I raised with the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing my concerns about the lead developer model. Again, I ask the Minister for Communities and Sport to think about how the proposal will affect the geographically based housing associations that have built up trust and confidence in an area and housing associations that deal with specific client groups, including those with particular needs. The wider actions of housing associations in my area have been extremely innovative. For example, Queens Cross Housing Association has built workshop units to help small businesses to get started. Mr Harvie and I have been the beneficiaries of that policy at various times. Maryhill Housing Association has supported local people in a successful self-build project, and North Glasgow Housing Association has built some of the best wheelchair-accessible housing that I have seen. Matters such as that are important. Given that around £14 million is spent annually in Glasgow alone on adapting existing houses for disabled people, surely it is more sensible for a proportion of new-build houses to be designed to be barrier free. On the Glasgow Housing Association, I am pleased that the cabinet secretary recognised the significance of the Mazars report and the fact that it requires to be transparently and independently scrutinised. I heard what the minister said this morning on the Housing Regulator, but that is not the right route to go down. The scrutiny process must be believable and trustworthy for everyone to have confidence in it. As we know, the Housing Regulator has signed off GHA's documents. I ask the minister to think again on that proposal. I also ask him to commit to establishing a clear process and a definitive timetable that will allow Glasgow to move forward and have the kind of community ownership that so many people in the city voted for and want to be part of. Surely the Government must realise that, although the housing policies of the Opposition may differ, we agree on at least three things: that housing is one of the most important issues that we must tackle; that the Government's approach is flawed; and that, collectively, we will continue to hold the Government to account.

I add my congratulations and thanks to those that have been offered to Elaine Smith for securing this important debate. Members are aware of the tragedy that occurred in my constituency in 2004, when employees of two companies—ICL Tech and ICL Plastics—died as a result of an explosion. As the trial heard, that explosion could have been avoided if £405 had been spent on replacing a corroded section of pipe. Indeed, if the pipe had been laid in accordance with regulations, it is unlikely that it would have corroded in the way it did. In my view, if the factory had been unionised, it is unlikely that the problem would have gone unnoticed for so long. Nine people died, 33 were injured—some very seriously—and 17, although not injured, were, in the words of the trial documents, placed at risk of death. One 82-year-old passer-by was injured by flying debris. When the case came to trial, more than three years after the event, the companies involved were fined £200,000 each. However, for the families involved, the trial was never going to be the end of the story. They knew that, for all the facts to come out, they needed a full judicial public inquiry. After meetings with the Lord Advocate, the First Minister and the Secretary of State for Work and Pensions, it was announced that there would be an inquiry that would allow all the facts of the case to be aired and, hopefully, all the lessons to be learned. The inquiry begins in nine short weeks and will be held in the place where the families gathered  while they waited to hear news of their loved ones. However, a new issue has arisen, of which I have made ministers aware. The Inquiries Act 2005 and the Inquiries (Scotland) Rules 2007 contain the statutory basis on which awards of expenses can be made for public inquiries. Of course, ministers have discretion to override the rules. In the case of Stockline, there is already a ministerial determination that has superseded and restricted some of the more general provisions in the rules and the 2005 act. The most important matters arising from that determination are as follows. First no legal expenses will be paid retrospectively; accordingly, fees will be paid only for work that is approved in advance. Secondly, everything that the families' counsel has done until now is free. The inquiry is only nine weeks away, and there is a huge amount of preparation to be undertaken, especially by counsel. The funding situation must be made clear well in advance of the hearing so that such preparation can take place. Further delays will seriously prejudice the families' case and the ability of their counsel to represent them properly at the inquiry. There is a suggestion that the families will be funded only if they qualify for legal aid. However, if funding is available only on that basis, families will be disfranchised in the inquiry. That position is untenable, because the families fought for the inquiry and are the most important people in the process. Will the minister ask her colleague, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice, to meet me, Ann McKechin, my Westminster colleague, and representatives of the families as a matter of urgency, so that we can make him aware of the issues that I have described and the strength of feeling that exists? Today we are commemorating international workers memorial day. In 10 days' time, we will commemorate the fourth anniversary of the Stockline disaster. Surely it is not too much to ask that those who were injured and the families of the workers who died should not be required to undergo means testing to allow them to be represented at the inquiry for which they fought.

When we pass the bill today, as I am sure we will, we will have passed another milestone on the journey to the Commonwealth games in Glasgow in 2014. The bill is, of course, a requirement of the Commonwealth Games Federation, and a commitment that was made in the bid document. It deals, as we have heard, with the technical issues around ambush marketing, land acquisition and ticket touting. I congratulate the Minister for Communities and Sport on the successful passage of the bill; it makes him one of a very small band within the current Executive who have actually had the experience of taking a piece of legislation through to completion. There have, of course, been many hurdles on the journey to this point, and we have been able to proceed at each stage only because of the strength of the partnership behind the bid: the Commonwealth Games Council for Scotland, Glasgow City Council and the Scottish Executive—or the Scottish Government, depending on which title one subscribes to. Although all the partners will continue to play a role in the future, the team that is led by Sir Robert Smith will obviously have the main responsibility for organising the games. The minister can perhaps advise us in his closing speech how Parliament will be kept informed of progress between now and 2014. Perhaps he can also outline the efforts that are being made to secure the private sector commitment to funding the games that is a requirement of the funding package. I have had the privilege of attending both a Commonwealth games and a Commonwealth youth games, and I have experienced the pride and pleasure of seeing Scottish athletes compete and win medals for their country. As other members have said, we know that athletes do better in front of a home crowd, and we can therefore expect our athletes to do even better in 2014 than their record-breaking colleagues in 2006.  However, the intention was always that the games would have a legacy: that the performance at elite level would be accompanied by an increase in participation in sport, particularly among our young people, and by an overall increase in physical activity among the general population. My colleague Frank McAveety mentioned that 90 per cent of the current spend on sport in Scotland comes from local authorities. In light of that, can the minister outline in detail how he will ensure that that spend continues and is targeted appropriately, given the current concordat with local government and its lack of focus so far on the sport and physical activity? I realise that that is a new initiative, but it would be helpful to hear something about it. The Melbourne Commonwealth games were described by many as the best yet. I cannot comment in that respect, because they were the only games that I have attended, but they certainly were a spectacle. The games, and the cultural spectacle that always accompanies a Commonwealth games, were spectacular; so, too, was the effort that the 12,000-plus volunteers put in around the city, working not just with those of us who were delegates at the games, but with tourists and with others who were in the games capital on business. Those volunteers made a significant contribution to the games, and I am sure that Glasgow's 15,000-plus volunteers will make an even bigger contribution, given our city's reputation for hospitality and friendliness. The Melbourne games also gave the young people of Australia new opportunities. Every school in Victoria state was twinned with a Commonwealth country, so that every single child in Victoria was rooting not just for Australia; but for another country. I had the pleasure and the privilege of meeting pupils from schools around the Bendigo and Ballarat areas in particular, which were twinned with Scotland. The children proudly flew the saltire as well as the Australian flag while the games were taking place. I am sure that, great though Melbourne's games were, the New Delhi games will be better, and Glasgow 2014 will be better still. I congratulate Louise Martin, the former chair of the Commonwealth Games Council for Scotland, who was involved at the very beginning, before the bid idea even became public. I also thank my two colleagues who are sitting on my right: Charlie Gordon, who, as leader of Glasgow City Council, announced Glasgow's desire to bid for the title; and, of course, Jack McConnell, whose commitment to and confidence in his country persuaded many that Glasgow could host the games.  During the time that the bid has been in the public eye, the staff and volunteers of many sports agencies, Government bodies and sports governing bodies have lobbied and worked hard when they could. I thank them, and of course the one million people who logged on to the website to back the bid. I am looking forward to 2014—the only thing that cannot come quickly enough for me is the day that the tickets go on sale.

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

In opening, as a precaution, I must declare an interest as I am a member of the cross-party group on golf. It is fair to say that we know that we have rattled their cages when Alex Neil starts to talk about unionist plots when all there is is a consensual committee report. His party's members could only disagree with the recommendations but did not have the gumption to put forward an alternative  view of the recommendations and evidence that we took. When the Local Government and Communities Committee decided to undertake its inquiry, I presumed that we would find merely that the SNP Government had been a little bit foolhardy or that its inexperience had led it to make some foolish but minor mistakes. I felt sure that there would be little of substance in its actions to criticise. The first evidence session, however, put paid to that idea, as it quickly became clear that that was not the case—something that gave me and other committee members pause for thought. The discrepancies in the evidence sessions were perhaps the most revealing aspects of the evidence that we received. For example, Alex Salmond said that, at his meeting with the Trump representatives, those representatives were unclear as to the routes ahead and the bulk of the meeting was taken up with Mr Salmond indicating his opinion of what he "detected about Aberdeenshire Council's wish to revisit the decision that the infrastructure services committee had made."—[ Official Report , Local Government and Communities Committee , 16 January 2008; c 512.] Mr Salmond also indicated that the Trump Organization was "uncertain about the process of appeals."—[ Official Report , Local Government and Communities Committee , 23 January 2008; c 552.] However, in his oral evidence to the committee, George Sorial, representing the Trump Organization, by contrast confirmed that the Trump Organization had been given a wide spectrum of advice on the issues that might arise. He said: "There was never any issue relating to our not understanding our options ... We were aware of the possibility of appealing from the outset."—[ Official Report , Local Government and Communities Committee , 6 February 2008; c 655, 656.] Mr Swinney advised the committee that he thought that the planning system was in danger of falling into disrepute because of the contradictory positions that were being adopted within Aberdeenshire Council. Yet, in a statement that was issued on 20 December, Mr Swinney stated: "The purpose of call in on this occasion is to provide enhanced scrutiny of a planning application which raises issues of national importance and has been the subject of widespread public interest." That, however, was further contradicted by the chief planner, who said in his evidence that he wanted to end the "uncertainty" that the situation had caused in the planning process. Who are we to believe? The First Minister described in great detail how he had taken a precautionary approach in all his  activities around the issue, yet he took advice on the protocol that he should follow from the chief planner, not from the permanent secretary—the one civil servant who might be expected to give authoritative advice on that issue. I want to correct a point that was made by an SNP member earlier. We did not investigate the actions of ministers in relation to the ministerial code because we do not, as a Parliament or as a committee, have that ability. The sole responsibility for ensuring that ministers adhere to the ministerial code rests with the First Minister. Perhaps the most damning evidence that the committee received was that of the chief planner, who admitted under questioning that the cabinet secretary made the final decision on the matter without a minute in front of him, with no paper trail—that appeared only after the decision had been made—with no legal advice and on the basis of two five-minute phone calls. The Government made much of the fact that this was an important development proposal—it is: no one would disagree with that. Surely, then, it was important enough to justify at least an advice note setting out the pros and cons of the arguments for call-in, yet it did not get even that. Indeed, on the day when the decision was made, on the afternoon of 4 December, the chief planner—who one might have expected to have been writing a definitive briefing for the cabinet secretary—managed, between 2.20 pm and 3.45 pm to have a meeting with Mr Sorial and his colleagues; to speak on the telephone with Ann Faulds, the solicitor acting for the Trump Organization; to call Aberdeenshire Council for an update; to reconvene the meeting with Mr Sorial; to call Mr Salmond to tell him that the meeting had taken place; to make the decision, following a discussion with his colleague, Mr Ferguson; to call Aberdeenshire Council again; and, finally, to call Mr Swinney to have the conversation that resulted in the call-in. All of that happened between 2.20 pm and 3.45 pm. That is how much concern and interest the Government showed regarding what was described as a "one in a million" application and decision. A lot of heat but not a lot of light has been generated by SNP members this afternoon. Many of us feel that problems have arisen for the planning system as a result of the activities of the SNP ministers. I say that more in sorrow than in anger. It would have behoved the SNP members of the committee to at least come forward with an alternative report if they could not sign up to the complete committee report. The fact that they did not do that suggests that they had no justification to give.

I declare an interest as a member of Historic Scotland. As others have said, our distinctive environment has been formed by centuries of activity by nature and by man. It has helped to make Scotland the nation it is. Whether we live in cities, towns or the countryside, the history of our nation is all around us. It is not just in our castles and great buildings; it is in the townscapes, the parks and even beneath the sea; it is in the field systems, the roads, the buildings we live in, the places where we worship and the everyday landmarks we pass by. Our historic environment shapes who we are and contributes to our sense of place. It is also a major driver of our economy, with some 83 per cent of visitors to our country visiting at least one historic site while they are here and with many citing our history as a reason for their visit. And of course, it is an educational tool that has helped to inspire our literature and art for centuries. Our built heritage is therefore important on a whole range of fronts. If it is lost or damaged, it cannot be replaced. As far back as 1882, it was recognised that to safeguard our built heritage it was necessary to legislate. Over the years, legislation has changed to fit the times, and rightly so. However, care has always been taken to ensure that, as with the planning system more generally, appropriate checks and balances are in place. The minister is quite right to want to see the correct balance between Historic Scotland and local government. Malcolm Chisholm mentioned the minister's response to suggestions in the HEACS report, and I want to mention one other suggestion. HEACS suggested that the Government should commission an independent survey of local authorities—a survey of their policies, staffing and resource levels for the care of the historic environment. That work is under way. Would it not therefore have been better to await the completion of that work—which I understand is due this year, although I am not aware whether it has yet been made public—before making the kind of suggestions indicated today? I would be grateful if the minister could give us some clarity on the resources to be allocated for that purpose within local authorities—or, indeed, to local authorities.  Perhaps the minister could expand on how she thinks the effectiveness of the pilots will be monitored. Are the single outcome agreements the right place for that? Personally, I do not think so, but the minister might have thought of an alternative. Rob Gibson laboured to find a way of working in the words "concordat" and "historic", so as not to offend Ted Brocklebank. However, I hope that I can go one better. I seem to remember launching a SHEP not all that long ago—well, it was a wee while ago now—that talked about concordats with Historic Scotland, Scottish Natural Heritage, the National Trust for Scotland and others. The use of the word "concordat" is perhaps even more historical than has been recognised. Two big issues face Historic Scotland. The first is the challenge of ensuring that, wherever possible, buildings are accessible to all who would like to visit them. Helen Eadie went into issue in some detail, covering all the points thoroughly. The second is to respond to the increasing demand from home owners for green energy through the use of solar panels, wind turbines and the like. Historic Scotland will have to turn its attention to that issue even more seriously in the coming days. I believe strongly that the reuse of buildings is one of the greenest things that we can do. I am always delighted when buildings, such as Maryhill burgh halls in my constituency, slowly begin to emerge from a moribund state to become a valuable resource within a community. Another example is the award-winning St Georges in the Field church, which now provides homes for some 16 families in my constituency. I used to live in it too—although I am not sure whether that is an interest that I have to declare. Chris Harvie has left the chamber, but he mentioned the devastation that took place in Glasgow. My constituency suffered, as did many others. However, being able to retain the two buildings that I mentioned, along with two Rennie Mackintosh buildings, has certainly given my constituency of Maryhill a sense of place and its people a sense of belonging. Historic Scotland needs to work with its partners to ensure that the skills needed for the preservation of historic buildings are maintained. I know that good work has been going on with the Scottish Lime Centre Trust. Those efforts are quite ironic, considering the actions of the Government in relation to modern apprenticeships. Iain Smith's amendment rightly mentions the involvement of local communities, which Willie Coffey also mentioned. I firmly believe that community planning has a strong role to play in that regard. I would like additional work to be done  in that area, but it is important that any such involvement must be informed. I see Historic Scotland in the role of an educator, in terms of interpreting the premises that we have, as Chris Harvie and Rob Gibson mentioned, and in the role of a body that can discuss historic buildings and our environment with the relevant communities. I pay tribute to Historic Scotland and its staff for the changes that have been made in recent years. I also pay tribute to the work of HEACS and other partners who have worked with Historic Scotland. We all take this issue seriously and it is of great interest to me to be able to be part of this debate.

To ask the Scottish Executive what savings have been accrued from the merger of the seven previously available funds into the fairer Scotland fund. (S3O-2926)

The minister has said that efficiency savings will accrue as a result of the change. Is he concerned, as I am, that uncertainty is arising as a result of the merger? People are on redundancy notice; they may or may not be made redundant. Funding streams have not yet flowed through to the very organisations that need them most. Will the minister consider the merger carefully and review it? Will he also consider the request that I made to him previously—to give regard to the special circumstances of Glasgow, in the same way as the Executive has hinted that it will give regard to Edinburgh? Will he consider setting up a separate fund to address Glasgow's particular needs?

I should begin by stating the obvious, which is that Fairtrade fortnight has come and gone. However, that is not a reason for not debating it this evening. We have the opportunity both to reflect on the success of those two weeks of celebration and to look to the future. There was a time, not so long ago, when Fairtrade conjured up the thought of not very good tea and not very good coffee, but nowadays more than 200 different Fairtrade products are available to us, and the quality is excellent. Across the country, towns and villages are following the example of Aberfeldy and Fairlie, which proudly proclaim their Fairtrade status. Cities are now getting in on the act too, with Glasgow achieving the accolade last year. East Renfrewshire became a Fairtrade local authority at the same time. Many schools have been so honoured too. Entire school communities have embraced the concept, including Hillhead high school in my colleague Pauline McNeill's constituency, and its feeder primaries Oakgrove primary school and Willowbank primary school in my constituency. There is no doubt in my mind that the announcement by Jack McConnell in March 2005 that the then Scottish Executive would take a lead on this issue and would work to support the idea of Scotland becoming one of the world's first Fairtrade nations has helped to support the commitment that many already had. Funding of the Scottish fair trade forum, and the appointment of its co-ordinator, Betsy Reed, have allowed it to go from strength to strength. I have no doubt that the dedication and leadership of John McAllion as the forum's first chair will also assist our country in achieving its ambition. It was good to celebrate Fairtrade fortnight with them and with others, but  achieving Fairtrade town, village or nation status is only a means to an end. It is an opportunity for us to demonstrate our commitment to the ideals of fair trade and to encourage others to understand them and embrace them. Of course, we do not just do that for the sake of it; we get involved in the Fairtrade movement because of the effect that it has on the producers. We know that this is an ill-divided world. If those of us who in relative terms have so much can pay a few more pence for goods here, the effect that we have can be disproportionate, especially on those who work so hard and so long to produce the goods that we enjoy. The Fairtrade premium that we pay helps to ensure that farmers and producers in other countries can have clean drinking water, health care and education for their children. However, it can go further than that. It also often allows farmers to have access to irrigation and seeds and fertilisers for the next season. If we, as wealthy citizens of a wealthy country, can afford to pay a little more for Fairtrade items, how much more could the countries of the developed world do? Rich countries set the rules governing trade—rules that mean poor countries lose out. They dump subsidised goods on developing nations, control and limit poor countries' share of the world markets by slapping high taxes on imported goods, and control patents in ways that mean that poor people cannot afford vital medicines. Over the past few years, the European countries and the African, Caribbean and Pacific—or ACP—countries have been negotiating trade agreements. Europe has insisted that those countries negotiate a far-reaching free trade agreement. However, by September of last year, it was obvious that it would not be possible to conclude a deal because the outstanding disagreements were so far reaching. Europe agreed to postpone talks until 2008, but only on some of the issues. It also insisted that most of the deal had to be done by December 2007 and that, if it was not, tariffs would be raised on exports, which would in effect close markets, put companies out of business and destroy jobs. It is no surprise to any of us that, under pressure, some countries involved felt that they had to deal. It is fair to say that they did so with a sense of anger. The 76 ACP countries have been put under immense pressure to conclude a deal. In December 2007, 35 of them concluded deals and 41 refused to do so. The ACP countries have asked political leaders around Europe to support the renegotiation of the worst part of the deal. So far, Europe has not responded. Indeed, we suspect that, during 2008, the European  Commission wants to get all ACP countries to sign those agreements, and to expand the contents of the deal, making them even more favourable to Europe and even less favourable to the poorer countries. We all have a vital role to play in promoting trade justice and fair labour practice in countries throughout the world. For us as individuals, it is about Fairtrade products, and making a point of taking the Fairtrade option where it exists. It is about encouraging Governments to play fair on trade. In the expectation that a large number of members might wish to speak this evening, I am deliberately keeping my remarks short. I recognise—as I am sure we all do—the contribution of everyone who works so hard all year round to support Fairtrade. We should also send greetings to those who work so hard to produce the Fairtrade goods that we enjoy. However, we must also renew our pressure on the European Union to agree fair deals with the developing world. Scotland's celebration of fair trade lasts for two weeks, but our campaign continues until real trade justice is achieved.

Will the member give way?

The recent budget addressed the extra demands that are being placed on the city of Edinburgh but, at the same time, the fairer Scotland fund delivered a real-terms cut in funding to the city of Glasgow, which is also faced with additional significant demands. Although the levels of poverty, deprivation and inequality have decreased in recent years, the problem is still significant. Will the Government commit to follow through on the precedent that was set in relation to Edinburgh and provide additional funding to Glasgow in recognition of that city's special circumstances and particular inequalities?

I share Sandra White's pleasure in being here to speak in today's stage 1 debate on the Glasgow Commonwealth Games Bill. Like Jamie McGrigor, I congratulate Sir Robert Smith on his appointment as chair of the 2014 organising committee. As Jamie McGrigor pointed out, Sir Robert is well known for his abilities in business. He worked closely with Lord Macfarlane to deliver the Kelvingrove project, an achievement of which anyone would be proud. As well as being a businessman and a patron of the arts, Sir Robert is a Partick Thistle fan—indeed, he is a season ticket holder—so he has ably demonstrated that his dedication to sport knows no bounds and that he has experience of taking minor setbacks in his stride. As we have heard, Scotland is required to introduce legislation to underline our commitment to the Commonwealth games and to put in place measures that will help to ensure the delivery of the games. Many of the functions laid down in the bill are specifically required by the Commonwealth Games Federation. It is safe for me to say, without being party political, that all members want the games to be the best, the greenest, the most sustainable and the most accessible that the Commonwealth has ever seen. When summing up the debate, will the minister explain how the needs of spectators with a disability will be met, given that there seems to be no statutory responsibility to consult with disability or mobility groups? The minister will recall that at the Local Government and Communities Committee I raised with him the issue of advertising at venues, about which some local authorities, in particular, have expressed concerns. I am grateful to him for the clarification that he has given about enforcement officers, which is genuinely welcome. I hope that he will discuss with MSPs the amendments that he plans to lodge at stage 2, so that he can gain our support for them. As we know and have heard, the 2014 games are hugely important for our country, not just in terms of sporting achievement but because they will boost our national economy. They will provide a showcase for Scotland internationally and will offer our citizens, young and old, great opportunities to be involved and to gain lasting  benefit from their involvement. However, we must remember that the games last only 11 days. If we get the games right, those 11 days will be memorable as a spectacle and as an experience, giving us the opportunity to enjoy a sporting event that is arguably second to none. I hope that there will also be a cultural programme for all of us to enjoy. Traditionally, culture has been an integral part of the Commonwealth games, but the Government has been a bit quiet on that aspect of the event. I would welcome more information about it in the weeks and months to come. The legacy of the 11 days of the games is vitally important, and we must start to build it now. Sandra White was correct to mention the 30-plus medals that were won in Melbourne in 2006, building on the success in 2002. We know that, traditionally, athletes compete better at home than they do abroad, so I hope that in 2014 we will have an even bigger haul of medals than we had in 2006. I hope, too, that we will also have a legacy that will allow our young people to become involved in sport and all of us to become more active and to take forward our sporting ambitions. It may appear from newspaper reports in the past few days that the First Minister believes that the legacy of the games should be paid for entirely from the national lottery, and that funds that are currently earmarked for the 2012 Olympics should be used for that purpose. I share some of his concerns about the use of the lottery money in question and have said so on the record, but the money should be redistributed back to all the good causes—it should not be used only to build a legacy from Glasgow 2014. Of course, we will need investment to provide a legacy, which we all recognise is important. Will the minister advise us what legacy the Government has already committed to providing? The Commonwealth Games Federation is alive to the criticism that many big sporting events do not deliver a legacy—members have mentioned that criticism. I would be surprised if the bid document did not oblige the Government to secure a legacy. If a promise has already been made, what provision is the Government making in its own budgets to secure that legacy? Should it not see any money that may come from the lottery in due course as a bonus over and above what has already been committed? I urge the minister to ensure that there is good co-operation with the London 2012 organising committee in order that the legacy of the Olympics can be part of the lead-up to 2014. We can learn much and hugely benefit from 2012. I hope that the transition from the Olympic games to the Commonwealth games is as seamless as possible. In that context, it would be helpful to know when a replacement for Julia Bracewell as chair of sportscotland and our representative on  the 2012 nations and regions group will be announced. In closing, I want to make a point that I have made before—I do not make it from a partisan point of view. The year 2014 will be a wonderful year for sport in Scotland—indeed, it will be a wonderful year for sport and for Scotland. We will host the Ryder cup in addition to the Commonwealth games. Will the minister consider making 2014 a year that is recognised as a year of sport in which we will redouble all our efforts to allow everyone in Scotland to take the opportunities that are afforded by such great events and by all the facilities that will be provided as a result of those events?

As other members have said, it is always a great pleasure and privilege to speak in this chamber on the subject of Malawi. My problem is usually trying to limit myself to my allotted time. Accordingly, I will focus on only one area that is of concern to me but which cuts across all the other strands of our co-operation agreements. We have heard about the many problems that the citizens of Malawi face every day, which those of us who have been to that amazing country have seen for ourselves. We have heard about the scourge of AIDS across the country, the lack of education for many, particularly girls, and the attempts to ensure that the democratic process is understood and participated in by all Malawians. However, let us consider for a moment the plight of Malawi's 60,000 deaf citizens. Malawi has only one deaf sign language interpreter, and she is in full-time education, which means that she must divide her time between her studies and interpretation. With only one sign language interpreter, how do those 60,000 deaf people cope? In practical terms, they cannot be fully involved in decision making about their treatment if they happen to be in need of health care. In education, it means that they are unlikely to be able to take advantage of any opportunities that are available to them. Further, we are aware of reports of individuals who have been wrongly imprisoned simply because they could not defend themselves and did not understand the process to which they were subject. The kind of work that is done by organisations such as Deaf Action is important. Since becoming involved in Malawi, Deaf Action has made good progress towards helping to increase the numbers of interpreters. However, the work has not stopped there. The organisation has also helped to raise awareness in Malawi of the needs of deaf people. Deaf Action has worked closely with the Malawi National Association of the Deaf. Together, they met national ministers. One of the Deaf Action  employees is deaf, and the experience of working with a deaf person and his interpreter was a positive experience for all concerned. I know from my own interaction with some of the Government ministers in Malawi that that was a first for them and they regarded it as quite a privilege. Accordingly, they volunteered to champion the work. Deaf Action was able, because of its connection with the Government here, to open doors that would otherwise have stayed closed. As a result of contacts that have been made for it, Deaf Action in Malawi has been able to apply to the high commissioner for support that will go directly to MNAD to enable it to continue its work. I understand from reports that I have had that Deaf Action regards its experience of meeting MNAD as humbling, not least because some 60 deaf people from all over Malawi travelled—at great personal cost, and using the limited infrastructure that Alasdair Morgan so vividly described—to come together with their Scottish counterparts. They gave a detailed explanation of their needs and difficulties, which enabled Deaf Action to draw up an appropriate training plan for Malawian interpreters. It is reassuring that people who have been recruited to train as interpreters come from every region of Malawi, and not just from around the areas that are close to the two major cities. I understand, too, that MNAD entered into a very democratic process in selecting those who would be trained, which is a good sign of grassroots democratic activity. The work of the deaf community in Malawi, with help from friends around the world, cuts across all areas of the co-operation agreement, and of course it chimes with the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, articles 9, 13 and 24 of which deal specifically with the rights of deaf people. I very much hope that the work will continue, so that as we strengthen the policy areas of health, education, civil society and the economy, we ensure that all Malawians can take advantage of those improvements and make their important contribution to the progress that is undoubtedly happening in Malawi.

I will be supporting the amendment in the name of  my colleague Margaret Curran. Of all issues, I particularly welcome the opportunity to debate poverty this afternoon. I do not think that there is a member in the chamber who would question the need for the Government to act decisively to tackle poverty in all its many manifestations. It must surely be one of the main duties of any progressive government to tackle inequality. George Bernard Shaw, a great writer and a good socialist, said: "The greatest of evils and the worst of crimes is poverty". Our task as elected representatives is to put in place the practical policies that directly address that evil. Of course, as other members have indicated—John Wilson just did so—poverty is a complex phenomenon. Its causes include a lack of access to good education and training opportunities, health inequalities, social fragmentation and isolation, substandard housing and poor access to transport links. There is also the familial and social disruption that drug and alcohol abuse cause. Those remain significant problems with which the Parliament must wrestle. Not to do so would be to accept the inevitability of a culture of low aspiration, which—to be frank—is unacceptable. Most objective observers would agree that the previous Labour-led Executives made significant progress in all those areas. Certainly, there was a conviction that much needed to be done to repair Scotland's social and economic fabric after the dark days of Thatcher and Major, when unemployment was used as a tool of economic management—a policy that proved disastrous for communities the length and breadth of our country, but particularly in our cities. I point out to Ms White that it affected people south of the border as well as people in Scotland. Members will recall that west central Scotland in particular suffered from high unemployment, tight expenditure constraints on local government and extremely limited provision for families, especially mothers. Many members will share my experience of having watched with despair as skilled craftsmen and craftswomen in my local area found themselves unemployed and—worse still—with little hope of ever working again. I am by no means claiming that we have solved all the complex and persistent problems that lead to people living in poverty, but I argue strongly that the policies that the two Executives deployed from 1999 to 2007 resulted in significant progress being made, for example in tackling the low achievement of our poorest-performing pupils, which prevents them from making a successful transition from school to work. Health inequalities were also addressed and measures were put in place to help people overcome the barriers to entering the  employment market. As a result of such measures, and of members of this Parliament and the previous Executives working in co-operation with colleagues at Westminster, more than 8,000 children were lifted out of relative poverty in Scotland after 1999. That is progress, but significant challenges still remain, especially if we are to play our part in achieving the UK Government's laudable objective of halving child poverty by 2010 and eradicating it by 2020. Given that the most effective way of lifting children out of poverty is to secure meaningful employment for their parents, the SNP Administration should continue to work with its ministerial counterparts at Westminster to help those who are furthest from the labour market to develop skills and secure the support that is needed to get them into work and sustain them in that employment. In its detailed briefing, the Child Poverty Action Group in Scotland acknowledges the efficacy of such an approach when it says: "Unprecedented Scottish & UK government commitments to eradicate child poverty by 2020, and policy action, have had an impact. The number of children in poverty has decreased over the last decade". I hope that the SNP Government considers such a commonsensical approach to be worth continuing and does not allow what sometimes seems to be an instinctive animosity towards Westminster to colour its judgement and influence its actions in this most important area of Government responsibility. The cabinet secretary referred to co-operation with Westminster, but I am only slightly reassured by that, because the Government's words are often contradicted by its actions. I will briefly raise the concerns that the Child Poverty Action Group in Scotland has voiced, which I believe to have substance. I hope that the minister will address them in his summing up. First, we have heard from members, particularly my colleague David Whitton, about the effect that the council tax freeze will have. In David Whitton's constituency, many people occupy houses in the upper three council tax bands. However, in my constituency, which borders David Whitton's, the contrary is likely to be true, given that the majority of people live in houses in much more modest council tax bands—indeed, quite a number live in houses in the bottom three bands. The Government is driving a council tax freeze, which will benefit those who live in houses in the top three bands most. However, poorer, more disadvantaged households will become ineligible for council tax benefit if their incomes rise a little and council tax stays the same. How will that help the very poorest of our citizens?  Secondly, given the significant additional discretion in spending that is proposed for local authorities, how will the SNP Administration ensure that the single outcome agreements clearly define expectations in relation to reducing child poverty and include mechanisms for measuring the impact of spending on child poverty levels? Those are serious concerns. People who are still trapped in poverty deserve a detailed response from the SNP ministerial team. I hope that we hear it today and again in the future.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress has been made in identifying efficiency savings in the budget. (S3O-2121)

Will the cabinet secretary assure me that the savings will be used not to balance the budget, but to expand front-line services, as happened under the previous Labour-Liberal Democrat Executive?

I draw the cabinet secretary's attention to the way in which the Scottish Arts Council and Scottish Screen are being merged to form a new organisation, creative Scotland. The process did not require either of the chairs of the two predecessor bodies to be sacked. The method is working well, and I recommend it to the cabinet secretary. Is he aware of that way of doing things?

To ask the Scottish Executive what its policy priorities are for 2008 for the health and well-being portfolio. (S3O-1889)

Through the chairmanship of their respective organisations, Julia Bracewell and Dougie Donnelly presided over Scotland's greatest ever medal haul at the 2006 Commonwealth games. They were also a key part of Scotland's success in securing the 2014 games for Glasgow. Can the minister explain how the SNP Government will repair the damage done to Scottish sport by her colleague the Minister for Communities and Sport? Can she explain to Parliament why—if, as is claimed today, Julia Bracewell and Dougie Donnelly were casualties of reorganisation and not victims of petty vindictiveness—the Minister for Communities and Sport did not make the announcement about them to Parliament last week as part of his statement? Can she confirm that there will be no more forced redundancies as a result of the minister's decision?

Will the member give way?

I thank the member for giving way and point out that it is not only the Liberal Democrats who failed to do much campaigning in certain constituencies. I wanted to intervene on the question of candidates such as Ms MacDonald—with or without a dog. Would it be better if parties or individuals who want to stand for election in the regional list had to pay a deposit, just as candidates in constituencies do?

I say to the minister in opening that some of us have a little difficulty in equating the words "abolition" and "retention", which somehow mean the same thing to him. I noticed in the minister's statement that he talked about how Labour members would be disappointed that sportscotland's HQ would go to Glasgow. Members on this side of the chamber, as well as other members, are very pleased with that announcement. It is strange and churlish of the minister to say that Labour members wanted to attack the Government on that decision and to allege that we were scaremongering. Given that the minister's stated view was that we should abolish sportscotland and that his Government does not believe in relocation, we were correct to be worried about the new location. The minister said in his statement that "the review"—as opposed to the consultation— "examined whether sportscotland's current functions continued to be necessary". Will the minister say which of the current functions are necessary, which will be retained and which new functions sportscotland will develop?

I hope that the member recognises that sportscotland and the previous Scottish Administration appreciated that very point, which was what was going to be different about the 2014 Commonwealth games. Take away sportscotland, and that is put in jeopardy.

On 9 November, Scotland celebrated when Mike Fennell, the president of the Commonwealth Games Federation, announced that Glasgow would host the 2014 Commonwealth games. Scotland was right to celebrate, because we all know that statistics show that host nations do better than others in the medal tally. We also know that host nations enjoy a boost in their international reputation and can enjoy a renewed feeling of self-confidence. However, if we as a nation are to reap the benefits and legacy of 2014, we will have to work hard and co-operatively over the next seven years. Our young people, in  particular, stand to benefit from the games and from all the opportunities that will be available to be involved. To be frank, I entered this morning's debate with a feeling more of sorrow than of anger. Sport gains most from a Commonwealth games, and sport must be our priority as we take the games forward. Today our question must be, how can we do that if the organisation that takes sport forward on behalf of the Government and which offers so many services to sports governing bodies is abolished or emasculated? Who will work with sports governing bodies to encourage them to aim higher? Who will ensure that there is support for our young people, who share our ambitions? At a time when we are united in our support for and encouragement of sport, it is particularly sad that we must have this debate. I welcome the fact that, as his amendment indicates, the minister has decided at long last that there will be a debate on the review that he has initiated, but that is too little, too late. We are debating the matter today; I would like the minister to indicate whether he will abide by the will of Parliament, as expressed today. Will he listen to what MSPs around the chamber say? Will he take that as our contribution to his internal review—the much-vaunted consultation to which none of us has had the opportunity to input? The Minister for Europe, External Affairs and Culture was quite right recently to reiterate her support for creative Scotland. However, there is a question that must be asked about that: what is the difference between the position of creative Scotland and that of sportscotland? Creative Scotland will support the arts in Scotland and those organisations that deliver on the ground. It will also support our cultural co-ordinators programme and the work of Government, and provide lottery funding on behalf of the lottery distributors. What does sportscotland do? It supports sports governing bodies, encourages participation in sport in our communities and distributes lottery funding. Why will we save creative Scotland but abolish sportscotland? Why is the Government's agenda skewed in that way? Why, when I asked the minister whether he had consulted the Commonwealth Games Council for Scotland, did he tell me that Louise Martin, the then chair of the council, was a member of the board of sportscotland? I have news for the minister—she is not. It is unacceptable that the council had to volunteer a response to the minister, instead of being asked to give its views. I am intrigued by the fact that, in response to a written question from me, the minister indicated that there had been consultation with the university of sport. As far as I am aware, the university of sport exists only in the Labour Party  manifesto and has not been delivered since May. I am delighted that the minister thinks that it is important enough to consult, but I wonder how he managed to do that, given that it does not exist. I will close, as I am conscious of the time. Before doing so, I draw the minister's attention to another Labour manifesto commitment—to designate 2014 as the year of sport, in recognition of our ambition for sport and of the opportunities that Scots and people internationally will have to enjoy sport that is hosted in this country. Will the minister designate 2014 as a year of sport and work as hard as we would have worked to make it a success? Finally, I say to the minister, as I had to say to the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism a few weeks ago, that he should resist the temptation to make change just because he can.

Will the member take an intervention?

To ask the Scottish Executive how many affordable houses it expects will be built during the current spending review period. (S3O-1528)

It is interesting that that answer is slightly different from the information Mr Maxwell gave during a meeting of the Local Government and Communities Committee, when he was reluctant to give any figure. I have to say that if we have to wait for the next spending review period for those houses, the problems that will arise during this spending review period will mean that we will have difficulty reaching the 2012 target. Can the minister define what he understands by the term "affordable housing"?

I am sure that Mr Tolson shares my disappointment in that answer. I had thought in previous weeks that I detected a softening of the minister's attitudes towards sportscotland. It sounded more like he was going to opt for a rebranding exercise, rather than abolish sportscotland completely. Such a desperate measure should be taken only after a full and fair consultation on the issue, rather than after the internal review that the Government is taking forward. Have bodies such as the Commonwealth Games Council for Scotland been consulted on the proposals?

It is important that everyone in the chamber understands that that target was not a Government target—it was an industry target that the Government pledged to support.

I was intrigued by the exchange between Mr Adam and Mr Gibson. Given that both gentlemen are right about the importance of culture to tourism and that sport is important—Mr Mather referred to the Ryder cup—I almost intervened to ask whether the Government would like to consider having a minister for tourism, culture and sport. Perhaps not. Scottish tourism has faced several major crises in recent years. The foot-and-mouth crisis affected tourism throughout the United Kingdom and, of course, the events of 9/11 affected tourism  throughout the world, but our tourism industry has bounced back from those setbacks and has grown in strength and confidence. In the first nine months of 2006, for example, the number of overnight visits to Scotland by overseas residents increased. The figure rose from 1.98 million in 2005 to 2.25 million in 2006. We are also leading the way with the number of visitors from Europe. In the first nine months of 2005, the number of such visitors rose by 13 per cent, compared with 8 per cent for the rest of the UK. Such increases did not happen overnight—the Government planned for and supported them. They were supported by the Government's plans for the country's infrastructure, the route development fund, which brought something like £100 million into the Scottish economy, and increased investment in marketing. VisitScotland's budget was doubled and EventScotland was created—that was important—to help boost opportunities to exploit niche markets, which Brian Adam rightly spoke about. It is therefore disappointing—in fact, it is plain sad—that the SNP, which claims to stand up for Scotland, has failed to recognise tourism's importance and potential. Consequently, it has failed to invest properly in an industry that is growing faster than the Scottish economy as a whole—its annual average growth rate is around 8 per cent. Marketing for VisitScotland and marketing budgets in VisitScotland are part of Government investment, and that investment is real investment. VisitScotland has managed to secure from its advertising campaigns in the UK a return of £32 for every pound that has been spent; it has also managed to secure £23 for every pound that has been spent across Europe and £30 for every pound that has been spent across America. Failure to invest in such marketing is short-sighted. The Government must consider whether it has made the right call on the issue. The industry target of 50 per cent revenue growth by 2015 is—and will remain—tough to meet, but it is achievable if we work at it and are prepared to back VisitScotland and the tourism industry in the way that they deserve. I was disappointed that Jim Mather mentioned the green tourism business scheme only in passing. Perhaps he did so because his party's manifesto said that the SNP would have a lighter regulatory touch. I hope that that approach does not extend to the green tourism business scheme. It has been recognised that many people come to this country to enjoy our wonderful scenery and our great outdoors, but if our economy is to grow and thrive, we must ensure that that scenery is protected and that our tourism industry is sustainable. That is why the green tourism business scheme is important. It is currently Europe's largest green accreditation scheme—it  has well over 500 members—and we should all be proud of it. It also helps to save the industry money, which can be reinvested. It deserves our and the Government's support. The image that we portray to our visitors directly affects our place in the world of tourism. As the minister correctly said, we all have a role to play in promoting our country, but the tourism industry has a particular responsibility, of course. It is not enough simply for us to meet our visitors' expectations or to be able to match the standards of our competitors; rather, if Scotland is to continue to thrive as a tourist destination, it must exceed our visitors' expectations and set the standard. To do that, we must have the best-trained workforce in the world and raise the profile of careers in tourism and hospitality among our young people. That is important. For many people, there is still frustration with the number of schemes and projects that seek to provide training in the tourism and hospitality industry, albeit that many of those schemes and projects are very good. Given that the minister has taken to filleting the enterprise networks, which had an important role, I wonder whether he will now consider establishing a dedicated tourism and hospitality institute to promote the importance of training and draw together all the existing expertise. It is disappointing that the concordat with local government did not mention the key role that local authorities must play in taking forward the tourism product. Local authorities have a key role in funding and shaping how tourism develops and, of course, in influencing the product in their area. They also have a key role to play in supporting tourist information centres—in which Mr Gavin Brown is so interested—and deciding where they are located. The Conservatives failed to understand that in lodging their amendment. Indeed, if they were truly concerned about centralisation, they would oppose the changes that the minister is planning. I waited with interest and an open mind to find out what the Government's much-vaunted new slogan would be, but I was disappointed. We want to welcome visitors to Scotland, but we always did, as the previous slogan was: "Welcome to Scotland—the best small country in the world". I note that the photographs at our airports are designed to "show what a modern, vibrant and successful country Scotland is." I have news for the Government. The images that were used at airports always showcased the very best of Scotland, but they were also underpinned by a strategy that aimed to attract people to Scotland. Often, the aim was to attract those  people through our airports, but they were then encouraged to travel outwith the airport's immediate area to other parts of Scotland. Showing photographs of Glasgow at Glasgow airport will hardly encourage visitors to go to Aberdeen or Orkney. We have a tourism product—our country—that is the envy of the world; one of the most successful and respected tourism agencies in the world; and one of the best tourism industries in the world. The Government's job is to support and encourage that industry in trying to achieve its target, and the Parliament's job is to ensure that the Government does just that. I make a final plea to the minister. I ask him please not to feel obliged to change things just because he can.

I congratulate Paul Martin on securing the debate. Stobhill serves his constituency, but the wider area that it serves stretches into my constituency, too. I suspect that Paul Martin and Gil Paterson will not be alone in claiming some affinity with the hospital—most of us who intend to speak in the debate probably have that kind of affinity. For the record, then, I was not born in the hospital, but I have been a patient there and I also worked in it for a brief period earlier in my working life. One of the reasons that have been given for the imposition of car parking charges, by Tom Divers—a former colleague of mine who is now chief executive of NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde—is that some of the health board's sites are log-jammed by commuters taking advantage of free parking at the hospital, which results in patients and visitors, especially the disabled, struggling to find spaces. On other sites, there is so much congestion and lack of managed parking regimes that the car parks do not serve the needs of the patients, visitors and staff. That is a rational and understandable explanation of the reasons why there are car parking charges in hospitals.  However, Stobhill is probably unique in Glasgow, as it is one of the few remaining hospitals that was built either with a fever rationale behind it or for isolation purposes—it occupies what was, at the time of its construction, a rural location and it is laid out on a grid system across a substantial acreage of ground. That layout, which persists to the present day, makes a mockery of the imposition of car parking charges on the site. It is a hospital with a generous layout and space for parking, and it does not have the kind of congestion that Tom Divers described. Ironically, as a result of that now semi-rural location, the hospital is also difficult for many people to reach, especially by public transport. I am concerned that some of the people who live in the areas that Gil Paterson mentioned—Milton, among others—have difficulty in accessing their local hospital. What will the scheme achieve for Stobhill? It could restrict the number of visitors who are able to visit their relatives and friends while they are in-patients, and it will make the visit more difficult for those who attend as out-patients. It will discourage those members of staff who need to travel between hospitals from taking up posts, and it will—as Paul Martin rightly identified—affect the neighbouring communities, which will bear the brunt of the displaced parking from the hospital. It will also require staff who use public transport or who park their cars outwith the hospital to walk down a relatively long and ill-lit path that borders on to Springburn Park; that is not an attractive proposition, especially for those who work irregular hours. What will be achieved as a result of those plans? I had a look at what the parking scheme says and what it will mean for individuals, and I have never seen a more complicated scheme. A number of people are exempt, including people who require longer-term treatment, people who need to visit frequently, people who are disabled and have a blue badge, people who are in receipt of benefits and credits, motorcyclists and cyclists, delivery vehicles, couriers and taxis. That is not to mention the staff categories that are also exempt. In return, we will have a complicated bureaucracy to manage the scheme; that work has already been given out to another company. For Stobhill, that is a pointless exercise. I hope that the idea of charges, particularly with regard to Stobhill, can be re-examined and reviewed once more, taking into account the specific circumstances that apply at that hospital.

Other members have thanked the partners who delivered the successful bid, but I add my thanks and praise to them. I also place on record my thanks to the officials of the Government's sports division, who have worked hard over the past three years to help to secure the games for Scotland. The First Minister will be aware that, in sport, good preparation often makes the difference between winning and losing. Given that our athletes will compete in the New Delhi Commonwealth games in 2010, will he ensure that the Commonwealth games endowment fund will be maintained—or, indeed, enhanced—so that our athletes have the best chance of improving on their record performance in Melbourne in 2006 in setting the scene for 2014?

I thank the minister for her statement, the best bits of which were familiar to me. The minister said that it took eight years for the previous Administration to get round to drafting the culture bill. I point out to her that in those eight years, we established the National Theatre of Scotland, we secured the national companies for the future, we established the year of Highland culture to great success, we put in place plans for the Burns year of homecoming, which I hope will be a great success, we introduced a national plan for Gaelic, and we established the winter festivals, to name but a few achievements. We were not standing still and the idea behind the culture bill was to build on that success and to take Scotland to the next step. It seems that ministers have been warned not to mention money when they come to Parliament, but can the minister at least guarantee, without mentioning sums of money, that the upward trajectory that we have seen in arts funding in recent years will continue? What new initiatives will she develop as a result of any additional funding that she secures? Importantly, will she also explain how her policies will help to ensure a more level playing field in local authority support for culture and consequently in access to local provision? After all, that was part of what cultural entitlements were going to achieve.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it plans to fight crime in Scotland's communities. (S3O-1042)

The recent evaluation of the Scottish Executive's community warden scheme by GEN Consulting concluded that there was evidence from a number of sources that wardens were having a positive impact on the quality of life in their target areas, leading to reductions in crime and antisocial behaviour. Will the minister confirm that funding will continue for community wardens after March 2008? Presuming that the minister agrees with the First Minister that such schemes complement the work of police officers, does he agree that such schemes should be rolled out across Scotland in tandem with the Scottish Government's promise to have 1,000 extra police officers on the front line by 2011?

I am grateful to the cabinet secretary for indicating his desire to achieve sustainability for third-sector organisations. However, given that neither his colleague, the Minister for Communities and Sport, nor the First Minister could give me a guarantee that the community regeneration fund would continue, can he end the uncertainty for organisations that depend on that money to keep them going through the year? Or is he content to see those organisations send out redundancy notices with their Christmas cards next month, as one of the organisations put it to me?

The SNP has, at long last, recognised that John Wheatley saw the connection between health and housing, but it has not so far recognised that John Wheatley also saw the links between housing and other aspects of behaviour and problems experienced by communities. Quite rightly, the minister's document makes much of the role of housing associations as housing providers, but it is notably silent on their wider role in many of Scotland's communities. Does the minister accept that housing associations have such a role and can she explain how her proposals will strengthen their role in, for example, helping to prevent antisocial behaviour? Does she accept that the role of a housing association is not only to build houses but to build and support communities? Can she guarantee that her proposals, particularly the proposal to change the way in which subsidies such as the housing  association grant are distributed, will not diminish that role in any way?

The First Minister and his Government have made much of their inability to announce the detail of the funds that they will make available until after the comprehensive spending review, and that inability even extends to vital local services such as those delivered by the community regeneration fund. Is the First Minister aware that his ministers have remained silent when asked whether they will give at least in-principle support to that vital fund? Will he commit his Government today to the continuation of the community regeneration fund?

I congratulate Bob Doris on securing a debate on this particular area of the Maryhill constituency. I am sure that many members who travel daily to Parliament from Glasgow and the west of Scotland are unaware that they pass by the Chirnsyde community initiative not long after the train leaves Glasgow Queen Street station. The Chirnsyde facility is in the Ashfield area of my constituency and has been the subject of many allegations in the past few years. I must make it clear that Glasgow City Council did not run the Chirnsyde initiative—it was run by a management committee, although some of the funding for the centre came from the city council. Unfortunately, the allegations that were made were never substantiated; nor were they ever absolutely tied to the day-to-day running of the centre. At the same time, criminal factions have been engaged in a dangerous turf war in the area. A family connection between one of those families and the centre existed, but once again there has never been proof that organised crime was linked directly to the facility, either before or after the events outlined in Mr Doris's contribution. As the constituency MSP and one who has a passion for education and the ability of all our citizens to have the opportunity to use good, safe local facilities, I made a point of passing each and every allegation that I received on to the relevant agency—in spite of what Mr Doris said in his speech. I passed them on, whether that was to Strathclyde Police, Glasgow City Council or, on some occasions, to both. Ashfield and the neighbouring community of Milton do not have the community facilities that they deserve, although that will be addressed in part by the new community campus that is currently under construction. The Chirnsyde initiative provided a range of sport, leisure and educational facilities. It was a vital part of the community's infrastructure. As a result of a fatal shooting in another district and amid renewed allegations about the alleged involvement of employees of the initiative, the city council took the decision—in my view it was the correct decision—to work with the management  committee to close the centre to help address heightened concerns. As Mr Doris said, arrests have been made in connection with the shooting and a trial is pending. The city council decided that the initiative should reopen in the summer, with a new name and a new management arrangement, and arranged to make repairs to the building to allow it to be used by the local community once more. Unfortunately, a spate of major vandalism, including break-ins and thefts of equipment, has prevented that from happening, although it has been possible to run some of the centre's activities from other venues in the area. I understand that the building is now secure and that the department of regeneration services at the city council is considering the extent of the damage, which I understand is significant. Let us hope that in the new year the centre will reopen in its new guise as the Ashfield centre as soon as possible, so that local people have access to safe, local services in their own community. Having laid out the facts of the matter, I want, in the spirit of Mr Doris's motion, to place on record my appreciation of all those who work tirelessly for safe communities and safe local facilities throughout my constituency of Maryhill and my pledge to continue to support them.

Does the minister agree that, although he and his colleagues have consistently refused to advise Parliament how much it will cost to implement its manifesto commitment on primary class sizes, Glasgow City Council has shared with the Government the fact that the proposal will cost it an additional £45 million, if it has to provide 186 new teaching spaces and 397 additional teachers. Will the Government meet the additional cost that Glasgow has identified and, if so, when?

In her submission to the spending review, will the minister make a point of ensuring that, as has been the case up until now, funding for culture continues to increase? It has doubled since devolution, with a £20 million addition in the previous funding round. Will she confirm that an increase is still on the agenda?

On 11 May 2004, employees of two companies, ICL Tech and ICL Plastics, arrived for work as usual. It was warm and sunny as the staff made their way into the former Victorian paper-mill to begin another working day. The companies specialised in plastics and plastic coatings, and production was largely carried out on the ground floor, with offices on the second floor. At approximately 12 noon, the builder Kenneth Murray went into the basement to pick up his tools. He switched on the lights—it is presumed that that simple act was the trigger for the tragedy that became known as the Stockline explosion. What is known for sure is that nine workers died, 33 were injured, some very seriously, and 17, although not injured, were placed at risk of death. One 82-year-old passer-by was injured by flying debris. For four days, up to 200 firefighters from all over the United Kingdom toiled in dangerous conditions to find those who were missing. For four days, Maryhill Road, normally a busy commuter route, was unnaturally quiet. For four days, the families of those who were missing waited for word of their loved ones. For four days, workers at nearby Community Central Hall did not go home, but stayed at their workplace, offering much-needed support to those who waited and searched. For four days, offers of help poured in from Maryhill and beyond, as people with no direct connection to the tragedy tried to do something to help. Over four days, the death toll rose until, on 14 May, the body of the last missing worker, Tim Smith, was found. Finding Tim signalled that the recovery  exercise had ended and that the investigation would begin. For over two years, Strathclyde Police, the Health and Safety Executive and the area procurator fiscal's office were involved in a painstaking investigation into the cause of the explosion. What did the £1 million investigation reveal? Could the explosion have been avoided? In 1969, the company had pipework installed to feed liquid petroleum gas into the factory from a tank outside in the yard. The installer was a marine engineer, the brother-in-law of the chairman and chief executive of the companies. Whether that installer had any experience of that type of work was disputed in court. What was not in doubt was that the installation did not conform to the regulations that were in place at the time, and that the fittings on the pipe were neither galvanised nor wrapped to prevent corrosion. Five years later, an exposed section of the pipe was buried when the level of the yard was raised. Over the years, that pipe corroded, allowing LPG fumes to enter the basement area that had been created. Kenneth Murray's flicking on of a light switch was enough to cause the catastrophic explosion. Could the explosion have been prevented? From the evidence that was presented in court, the answer seems to be that over the years a number of opportunities were missed, but which could have made a difference. First, had the pipe been laid according to the regulations that were in force in 1969, it might not have corroded. Secondly, had the pipe remained above ground, its deterioration would have been evident. Thirdly, had routine inspections of the pipe been undertaken, the corrosion could have been identified and the corroded section replaced—at a cost, as was revealed in court, of just £405. Finally, had proper health and safety assessments been carried out over the years, the potential danger of a corroding pipe would have been clearly understood. When the case came to court, the two companies pled guilty to breaches of health and safety legislation and were found guilty. In fining each company £200,000, the judge said that the fines were not meant to equate to the lives lost, the injuries received or the suffering inflicted. As he remarked: "These are not things that are capable of being expressed in terms of sums of money."— a sentiment that the bereaved families share. How do we ensure that such a tragedy never happens again? The families and their supporters, the Scottish Trades Union Congress, my Westminster colleague Ann McKechin and the thousands of people who have signed the petition  firmly believe that a full judicial public inquiry into all the circumstances of the case is needed. By law, any death at work is automatically the subject of a fatal accident inquiry but, given that such an inquiry would be relatively limited in scope, we believe that a full inquiry initiated jointly by Holyrood and Westminster is required, not least because health and safety issues and the conveyance of gas through pipes are matters that rest with the UK Government. We want all the issues that are raised by this case to be aired in public, not just those that we were able to hear about in court. In addition, the inquiry must have the scope to examine whether new legislation needs to be introduced to deal with such situations. The relatives also want an inquiry to consider why the number of accidents and injuries in workplaces in Scotland is higher than anywhere else in the UK and why the number of prosecutions is so low. They also want the inquiry to give due consideration to the level of fine that can be imposed. The Lord Advocate has said that a decision will be made on this issue by the end of the month and we are grateful to her and to the Procurator Fiscal Service for meeting us. We are also grateful to the First Minister and the Secretary of State for Work and Pensions, Peter Hain, for meeting us in the past few weeks. They have heard directly from the families why a full judicial public inquiry is needed; I hope that they will realise that those families also represent all the other families who have lost loved ones, and those who have been injured at work. They also represent all those who waited, worked and watched with them during what were the longest four days of their lives. To honour the memory of the nine people who died, we must do all that we can to ensure that such an avoidable tragedy never occurs again. That is why the families' call for a full judicial public inquiry must not go unheeded.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Further to Mr Purvis's point of order and, indeed, to the points of order that Mr Purvis and I raised earlier today, will you rule whether it is acceptable to this Parliament and to you as Presiding Officer that the only way that members have any opportunity of getting the information that is available to the Government is through freedom of information legislation rather than through statements or information relayed to the chamber?

To ask the Scottish Executive how many teachers were employed in Scottish education on 31 August 2007. (S3O-559)

I thank the minister for that answer and for confirming that Labour's manifesto commitment on the number of teachers in Scotland has been met and, indeed, exceeded. I invite her to tell us how many teachers are needed to fulfil her party's manifesto commitment to cut class sizes, and to indicate the cost of meeting that commitment, and when it will be met.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. You will recall that in my question to the Minister for Schools and Skills, I specifically asked how many teachers were needed to meet the Scottish National Party's manifesto commitment to reduce class sizes. The minister did not give a figure, but she alluded to calculations that have been done and information that has been provided to the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth so that a bid can be made for the required number of teachers. Her answer did not give me the information that I asked for, but it contained the implication that the minister has that information, which my colleague Cathy Jamieson also asked for during First Minister's question time. Given that the Scottish Government has the information but is refusing to share it with the Parliament, I would be grateful if you would comment.

To ask the First Minister whether he will ensure that there is appropriate co-operation between the Scottish Executive, the Crown Office and the UK Government in any consideration of a judicial public inquiry into the explosion at the Stockline factory on 11 May 2004. (S3F-116)

I thank the First Minister for his response, and I put on record my thanks to the Lord Advocate for the meetings that she held with me and the families yesterday. The First Minister will know that, because the two companies that were involved in the tragedy pled guilty to breaches of health and safety legislation, it was not possible for all the issues of concern to be aired in court. Does the First Minister agree that a full judicial public inquiry is necessary in order that all the lessons of the tragedy can be learned? Furthermore, given that some of the contributory factors, such as health and safety legislation and the regulations that apply to the conveyance of gas through pipes are reserved, whereas others, such as building control and the interaction of the various agencies are devolved, does the First Minister agree that the most appropriate way to proceed is by an inquiry initiated by the UK Government working in tandem with the Crown Office to ensure that we send out a signal that, in this country, it is completely unacceptable that nine people should lose their lives just because they went to work?

I have no wish to disrupt the consensual attitude in the chamber these days, but I must take issue with my colleague Dave Whitton. Maryhill is of course acknowledged as the capital for the canal in Scotland. Maryhill lock is a scheduled historic monument and we in Maryhill are particularly proud of it. Joking aside, when the minister discusses such issues with British Waterways, will he take up the regeneration of the area around the Forth and Clyde canal in my constituency? The prospects for regeneration are huge, and the opportunities are immense for the communities that live around the canal, but progress has been very slow. There seems to be movement now, but I would be grateful if the minister took the issue up with British Waterways.

I congratulate Andrew Welsh on securing this evening's debate. I know that the subject is dear to his heart, and it is a pleasure to support the motion. I have been asked to give apologies from members of the European and External Relations Committee who are meeting Westminster's International Development Committee and therefore cannot be in the chamber for a debate that many of them would like to observe and participate in. Like David McLetchie and others in the chamber, I have attended tartan day. In fact, I possibly hold one or two records in connection  with it. I might not go into those just now—or maybe I will, because there are no journalists in the gallery. On one occasion, I was called queen of the junkets because of my attendance at tartan day, but I will not go into that. I have attended tartan day in America on four occasions, twice as Deputy Presiding Officer and twice as a minister in the Scottish Executive. When I first attended tartan day, in 2000, it was a small event that took place only in Washington. Over the years, it has grown to become very much part of the annual cycle of large events in New York, Washington and Chicago. Its appeal has begun to spread throughout the world. Why do we celebrate tartan day in that way? The original idea came from Canada, but it was particularly galvanised by the efforts of Trent Lott and the former United States Senate chaplain Lloyd John Ogilvie. Interestingly, they were responsible for another resolution that the Senate passed—I do not think that they had to go to Congress for it—because when they arrived, resplendent in their kilts, to move the tartan day motion, they were almost debarred from doing so, because at that time the Senate's standing orders indicated that gentlemen had to wear trousers. They, of course, were wearing their kilts, and they almost caused an international incident. Tartan day has grown. I remember being interviewed in 2000 by an American radio station. During the discussion, the interviewer mentioned that they estimated that there were 5 million Americans with Scots ancestry. The same radio station interviewed me the following year and put it to me that at least 20 million Americans have Scots ancestry. I do not know whether the emergence of tartan day had anything to do with the massive increase or whether there was an underestimation in the first place. As Andrew Welsh rightly said, the reason why we have such a close affinity with America—and therefore tartan day—goes back to the declaration of Arbroath and the American declaration of independence. A lot of the language of the latter declaration comes from the declaration of Arbroath. That is probably not a surprise to us when we consider that at least 13 of the signatories were first or second-generation Scots who went to America to escape privation and other issues in Scotland. Some of the proudest moments in my life are associated with tartan day. I was part of the celebration when 10,000 pipers marched down Fifth Avenue in New York, and I attended the opening of VisitScotland's Scottish village in Grand Central station, where I and the then provost of Stirling, Colin O'Brien, led the Wallace sword into the station. The police held back crowds of people who had gathered to see the  sword. Apparently, they thought that it had been swung around by Mel Gibson, but we soon cleared up that misunderstanding. There was genuine feeling about that artefact from Scotland and its age and history. We sometimes underestimate that. I congratulate Bashir Ahmad on his speech. Glasgow's relationship with America is interesting, because Glasgow is largely responsible for the relationship, particularly with Chicago. There were a lot of Scots in Chicago more than a century ago when a fire devastated the entire city. The people of Glasgow had a whip-round and sent the city what was at the time a considerable sum of money. That relationship has been maintained over the years. I congratulate Angus Council on its work. I very much enjoyed taking part in the council's celebrations a year or so ago. I was also impressed by the council's comprehensive approach to developing tartan day. When I first attended tartan day there was an air of cynicism in Scotland about the event. Some ladies and gentlemen of the press, and perhaps even some of our colleagues, shared that cynicism. However, over the years, the cynicism has reduced—if not disappeared altogether—and the time is right for Scotland to recognise tartan day. I am glad that Angus Council is spreading its tentacles and sharing its good work. David McLetchie was right to mention Angus Council's non-partisan approach to tartan day, which is echoed in Andrew Welsh's methods. I congratulate Andrew Welsh on that. Many agencies are involved and many people work hard all year to make tartan day a success. I offer a special tribute to the volunteers in America and Scotland who are part of that international, almost global, effort. I hope that that effort will increase and that in a few years' time we will debate the issue again and hear from Andrew Welsh about the success of other local authorities in Scotland. I am sure that all members will encourage their local authorities to take part.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it will develop purposeful play for primary 1 pupils. (S3O-313)

Will the minister continue the good work that was begun by the previous Administration and take forward the idea of purposeful play, particularly for primary 1 pupils? Children enter our primary schools at a relatively young and tender age, and for many of them the transition can be difficult. We in the Labour Party believe that purposeful play can help children to integrate properly into primary schools. Will the minister give a commitment to develop that agenda further in the coming years as the good results that will undoubtedly come from it become clear?

In the course of the meetings that have taken place, have the minister or her officials had an opportunity to discuss with embassy representatives or consulate officials of other EU states the fact that the information and consultation directive, to which my colleague John Park referred, has already been agreed? What action will the Government take to ensure that Scottish companies that breach the directive, such as Simclar in my colleague Irene Oldfather's constituency, are brought to book under its terms?

Will the minister give way?

rose—

To ask the Scottish Executive what its priorities are for culture in Scotland. (S3O-123)

I wish the minister all the very best in what I know is an enjoyable but challenging portfolio. Investment in culture in Scotland has doubled since devolution and the previous Administration agreed a £20 million increase in funding. Will the minister assure me that her Administration will continue that record funding of the arts in Scotland? If she cannot assure me of that, will she tell the Parliament what she intends to cut?

The Scottish Executive considers mountain safety to be of paramount importance. My officials are in discussion with the Mountaineering Council of Scotland, which is the lead body for walking, climbing and mountaineering, about the options available to ensure that a comprehensive mountain weather forecasting service is available to the users of Scotland's mountains.

The service to which the member refers is a very good one—I have taken the opportunity to look at it myself. I am also aware that the Met Office currently provides a service, albeit that it is a service that some people do not regard as being equivalent to the one to which Mr Morgan refers. That is why I have asked my officials to look into the matter and to take forward discussions with the parties involved. I certainly hope that those discussions can be concluded prior to the start of the mountain season.

Aberdeen City Council wrote to me on 30 August 2006 with a proposal for a 50-metre swimming pool. I replied to that letter on 15 October. I have not published my response, but I am considering a request for me to do so under the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002. In my reply I recognised the need for a 50-metre pool in the north-east but expressed concern about the funding that was requested by Aberdeen, which was in excess of the awards that are available through sportscotland's building for sport programme and the national and regional sports facilities programme. I suggested that the council discuss the matter further with  sportscotland, in order to develop a realistic, viable and affordable proposal. I remain supportive of an affordable bid for a 50-metre pool, if the case is made.

There have been informal meetings between my officials and Aberdeen City Council and between sportscotland and the council, and there is a proposal to have a tripartite meeting, at which we can try to get some sense into the situation and make progress.

I add my congratulations to Karen Gillon on securing the debate. I have listened with great interest to the experiences that she and other colleagues have outlined, many of which they have shared with me in the past year or so. I have been interested to hear the information supplied by members about the activities in their constituencies and about their particular interests in Malawi. I welcome the cross-party support that has been shown not just today but throughout the time of our collective work on Malawi. It is one of the strengths of the work we are doing. I know from my visits to constituencies around Scotland that there is a genuine willingness throughout Scotland to become involved in the  work with Malawi to improve health, education and long-term sustainable economic development. As has been said on more than one occasion in the chamber, no one who visits Malawi comes back unaffected by the experience. The experience is not just of a country stricken by poverty and the devastating effects of the HIV/AIDS epidemic, but of a country with a truly warm-hearted people who have a deep appreciation of Scotland and our historical links. They are a people who are willing to work in partnership to improve their situation and eager to exchange new ideas. In March 2005, the Scottish Executive published its international development policy, which outlined our aims and strategy for engaging with developing countries. Building on that, it became clear in discussions with ministers, officials and those involved on the ground in Malawi that the themes of education, health and civil society needed to be widened and that a stronger emphasis was required on governance and sustainable economic development in order that we could help to meet the specific circumstances faced by Malawi. As a direct result, we saw the signing of a co-operation agreement between our two countries. It is not a sterile document; it has tangible aims and aspirations as to how we will work together. Ministers and officials have worked in partnership with Malawian counterparts and agreed a more detailed action plan that provides clear, focused direction on what will be delivered and who will be involved. The aims are not simply what we think Malawi needs; they have been identified by the people of Malawi as their priorities and where they see Scotland having something to offer and being able to make an impact. The action plan is not set in stone. It will be and is reviewed and revised regularly to ensure that it is still fit for purpose and developed to meet new and emerging needs. Again, that will be done in discussion and consultation with our colleagues in Malawi as well as with key stakeholders in Scotland. The Executive's work in Malawi is supported by the international development fund. Initially, it was a commitment of £3 million per year for three years, but we were pleased to be able to announce last September that the fund had been increased by 50 per cent to £4.5 million per year for the remaining two years. I thank Murdo Fraser for his support, and I hope that, given his comments, that 50 per cent increase does not diminish it—I am sure that it does not. Since the fund was set up in 2005, some 58 projects have been awarded more than £7.7  million, and a total of 35 projects based in Malawi have been awarded more than £5.25 million. As is often the case, it is not the amount that is spent but how it is spent that makes the difference. That is why all the support provided through the international development fund—whether through the main grant or through the small grant schemes—must fit strict criteria and must clearly meet the needs and aims that the people of Malawi have identified. I do not want to talk too much about the "Frontline Scotland" programme other than to say, in response to the points that colleagues have made, that I, too, was particularly disappointed by the programme's tone and the coverage it gave the issue. None of our international aid budget is spent on administration—administration costs are met from the Executive's central budget—and the amount that we spend on administration does not equate to anything like a third of the budget that we have identified, as the programme claimed. The figure is closer to 7 per cent. As Mark Ruskell correctly pointed out, of course some of the money that we put into assisting Malawi will be spent in this country, not least because many of the goods and other items that are needed to support Malawi are not available in that country and have to be sourced here. The role of the Government is only part of the story. Our links with Malawi go deeper than those between our countries' Governments. As we have heard throughout the debate, schools, churches, church groups and other civic organisations are active and keen to work together. That is a highly encouraging sign that the time is right to renew and reaffirm our links with Malawi. From Shetland to Dumfries and Galloway, individuals and groups are working in their own way to make a difference and to keep Malawi at the forefront of our minds. That is why we have adopted a sector-wide approach and why, in addition to working closely with the Department for International Development and the Malawian Government to offer practical advice and support, we are brokering partnerships between Scottish institutions and their Malawian counterparts. For example, in health we have funded Scottish midwives to train 140 clinical nurses and doctors and 12 instructors. Karen Gillon correctly identified the work that the RCN is doing in partnership with the nurses organisation in Malawi. That, too, is an Executive-funded project. Through the University of Strathclyde's Malawi millennium project, the Executive supports the Chikwawa district hospital to provide equipment, to strengthen facilities and to offer environmental health training and basic child and maternal health training for village health assistants. We have supported Adam Smith College to prioritise ways in which Scottish  colleges can work with Malawi to strengthen the role of vocational education and training in its education system. A project that is being run by the Scotland Malawi Partnership to facilitate the exchange of skills and knowledge at higher education level has also received our support. On governance, we have been working with the respective ombudsman offices on a programme of collaboration, which includes the promotion of human rights, the provision of services for vulnerable and hard-to-reach groups, computerised casework management and website development, and a programme of staff information exchange. Through education, we can help not only to improve literacy rates and the general level of education, but to influence directly the thinking of future generations on, and their approach to, dealing with health issues and the prevention of disease. We can provide a broader understanding of sustainable economic development and help to establish sustainable, thriving and healthier communities. An example of such work is our provision of assistance to Mzuzu secondary school, which is running an environmental project based on fish farming that teaches children in the school how to make the best use of their local resources.

Sylvia Jackson has made the point about that project—her intervention was timely. The work that is being done in Mzuzu secondary school will help children to feed themselves and provide resources to sell so that they can support their families. The school is sharing its experience and expertise with another 10 schools in the area and two villages. That has the potential to benefit more than 15,000 people. The school, which is now a centre for excellence in education, ecological and environmental engagement and citizenship, is hoping to link with a Scottish school, to share its experience. School children in Scotland will benefit directly from the knowledge and expertise of pupils in Malawi in what will be a true example of partnership and information exchange and a blueprint for the future. We know from our figures that school links have grown from around five two years ago to more than 70—the number continues to increase, which is borne out by members' testimonies to the work in their constituencies. Links range from the  informal exchange of experiences between pen-friends to more direct involvement. For example, Stenhouse primary school has developed a leadership programme that will be delivered to senior teachers in the north of Malawi and cascaded by those teachers in their home areas. That course of continuous professional development will help to fill the professional development gap for teachers in Malawi. Organisations such as the Scotland Malawi Partnership have been active in drawing together people with an interest in Malawi and providing a forum in which groups and individuals can exchange ideas and formulate new ways of working together. The partnership has been instrumental in the development of the Scotland-Malawi business group, which I hope will provide advice and support to the business community in Malawi to help it develop and become sustainable, so that it can be a key driver in the economy. The Scotland Malawi Partnership's online pledge, which is mentioned in the motion, calls on MSPs and others "to continue working to develop relations between Scotland and Malawi, for the betterment of both countries in a genuine partnership." Like Karen Gillon, I urge members who have not yet supported the pledge to give serious consideration to doing so. I sincerely thank the partnership for the initiative. We had in mind organisations and links such as I have described when we established the small grants scheme, which is part of the international development fund. I was pleased today to announce funding in excess of £260,000 to Scottish community organisations, schools and universities. The money will go to projects such as the Malawi trade school appeal, which aims to support the Samaritan Trust and provide tools and training for young people, to prepare them for work so that they can have independent and economically rewarding lives. Such projects are small but have the potential to have a big impact. Through innovative approaches by groups and individuals, we in Scotland can make a big difference to people's lives in Malawi. Scotland has much to offer in skills and knowledge and its people are genuinely willing to become involved. Our commitment to Malawi is long term. By working in partnership, we can all help to build a better and more sustainable future.

I thank Rob Gibson for giving us the opportunity to congratulate Hands Up for Trad on its sterling work and recognise the tireless work of its founder Simon Thoumire in promoting Scotland's traditional music. Scotland's music is, of course, distinctive, easily recognised and much loved around the world. It is an important part of determining who we are. It tells the history of the nation and illustrates clearly the story of Scotland and her people. That is why I believe that the Scots trad music awards are so important. We need an opportunity to celebrate and honour the best in traditional music. Although the awards have been running only for the past four years, they have become an important part of our cultural calendar. As someone who had the pleasure of attending one of the events, I may say that the awards are also a very lively part of our cultural calendar. As Rob Gibson said, the 2006 awards were presented in Fort William. I am sorry that other ministerial duties prevented me from attending. Like many organisations throughout Scotland, Hands Up for Trad is engaging with the Scottish year of Highland culture, and the awards will take place in the Highlands again this year. I refer to Jamie McGrigor's point about displacement caused by the year of Highland culture. The aim of the year of celebration is to provide international, national, regional and community events so that there is something for everyone. I hope that people will take the choices that are on offer to them and explore new things as well as events that they have attended in the past. I hope that they will have the opportunity to attend whichever events they prefer to attend, and I hope that that will help some of the smaller events to build up their capacity in future years.

The function of EventScotland is to attract big, national events as well as to support smaller, local community events. It has a special budget for the latter events, so, if they are not being funded proportionately, they should apply to EventScotland for that money. I am sure that if they contact the regional manager at EventScotland, they will be given assistance in doing that. I am happy to give Mr McGrigor the details of that later, if that would help. I join Rob Gibson in congratulating the staff of the Nevis Centre for ensuring that the event was  well catered for. I heard that it was a particularly good event, and I am sure that that was at least partly due to the legendary Highland warmth and hospitality. I hope that many visitors from both home and abroad will discover that during 2007. Through funding from EventScotland, VisitScotland and the Scottish Arts Council, the Executive has shown its full commitment to supporting and showcasing our culture as well as to developing traditional arts as a whole, including Scotland's traditional music. It is worth taking Cathy Peattie's point about tourism. I hope that the involvement of VisitScotland and EventScotland is evidence of the fact that they see traditional music, and the traditional arts more generally, as being important in providing visitors with the package that they now require when they visit our country. The year of Highland culture, which has been developed by the Executive in partnership with Highland Council, Highlands and Islands Enterprise and others, is an exciting programme of events that is promoting Scotland overseas and providing Scotland's citizens with an opportunity to celebrate our culture. I have no doubt that it will also have an economic impact, which is especially important in the Highlands. However, it is not enough to recognise achievement in traditional music; we must also encourage the next generation to become involved. I was particularly pleased to read today a special newsletter that has been produced by Fèisean nan Gàidheal with the youth music initiative at Highland Council. The newsletter says that not only has the youth music initiative reached every primary school in the Highland Council area but it has led to the creation of employment for many talented professional traditional musicians. That is to be applauded. In addition, we have the music school at Plockton, which focuses very much on our traditional music and arts. In the past school year, the music school had 21 pupils, of whom 20 were residential—the pupils are drawn from throughout Scotland. That is evidence of the growing popularity of, and interest in, traditional music. Rob Gibson mentioned John Wallace and the RSAMD. I am always happy to applaud anything that is being done at the RSAMD, as I am always confident that it is absolutely of the best. No exception to that, the department of Scottish music at the RSAMD offers the only honours degree course in Scottish traditional music in the world. The course offers a broad-based training to talented traditional musicians, enabling them to pursue a variety of careers or further study. The piping degree, for example, is run in collaboration with the National Piping Centre, which is recognised internationally as a centre of  excellence in Highland bagpipe teaching. Hands Up for Trad is involved in promoting the traditional music of our country and allowing young people to experience it and excel in it. In that regard, its organisation and promotion of the young traditional musician of the year awards should be recognised. The awards are held in January each year, as part of the Celtic connections festival—another event that promotes traditional music.

I am trying to address all the points that members have made, and I will come to that point. As I was saying, the young traditional musician of the year awards are a vital part of taking that agenda forward. The awards are broadcast by BBC Radio Scotland. I never cease to be amazed by the talent shown by the young people in the final line-up. I have never been involved in judging such competitions—thankfully—but I think that the judges must have a tremendously difficult job in singling out a winner. As I mentioned, and as members will know, we are committed to ensuring that all children have the opportunity to be involved in music of whatever genre. We have implemented that commitment through the youth music initiative. I am sure that Rob Gibson will be interested to know—this answers a question that he asked—that Northumbria University is currently finalising a year-long independent evaluation of the youth music initiative on behalf of the Scottish Arts Council. The evaluation exercise includes an analysis of the styles and genres that have been supported by YMI funds. Early indications are that Scottish traditional music projects have been very well supported by both formal and informal sector funding. We expect that the final evaluation report will be published later this month and I will ensure that a copy of it is sent to Mr Gibson. The issue of broadcasting was raised by several members, including Mr Maxwell. I for one would like to see more traditional music and traditional arts and culture on our television screens. However, as members know, broadcasting is reserved to Westminster and responsibility does not lie with us. It is fair to say that the broadcasters need to make decisions based on their perception  of the popularity of a particular art form. However, that is why broadcasters should perhaps reconsider the level of production that they dedicate to traditional music. I think that the trad music awards should be broadcast not just because we live in a world where people like awards ceremonies but because it would create value if we could see those who are being honoured. It would be a distinctive and helpful addition if those awards, and the young traditional musician of the year awards, were broadcast. As I said, I am amazed by the talent that comes through the young traditional musician of the year awards.  I believe that Scotland's traditional music is a reflection of our culture as a whole. It is alive and well and at the heart of our nation. It plays a real and relevant part in identifying that nation. That is as a result of the excellent input from many individuals and bodies, some of whom have been mentioned this evening. I am sure that Simon Thoumire and Hands Up for Trad are out there with the leaders. In concluding, I offer my congratulations on the past success of the Scottish traditional music awards and my very best wishes for the future.  Meeting closed at 17:37.

I, too, thank Christine May for securing the debate. I also thank members around the chamber for their thoughtful speeches. I welcome all our friends in the public gallery and extend our collective apologies if some of them thought, as many of us did until probably mid-afternoon, that the debate would start at 5. I welcome in particular two friends from Malawi who have joined us for the debate—Brian Namata from Kasinthula Cane Growers Ltd and Dyborn Chibonga from the National Smallholder Farmers Association of Malawi, which is known as NASFAM. I welcome them both to the Scottish Parliament. They will join us for the reception that was due to follow immediately after the debate and which takes place at 6 o'clock. I doubt that this is the case, but if anyone in the chamber has any lingering doubt about the effect of fair trade, to which Linda Fabiani referred, they need only attend the reception to hear Brian and Dyborn talk about the effect that it has had on their lives and on their communities' lives. It is probably fair to mention a housekeeping matter in connection with the reception's timing. If any of our friends is at a loss for what to do between the debate's culmination and the reception's beginning, officials who are on hand would be happy to show people round the Parliament if they have not been round before. I very much welcome this debate on fair trade, which is of course timed to mark Fairtrade fortnight 2007. First, I recognise the incredible energy and enthusiasm of Scots around the country who have worked tirelessly to highlight fair trade in their communities. Fair trade is not just about two weeks of the year; it is about impassioned and sustained activism.  As we have heard from members around the chamber, campaigners everywhere have worked tirelessly to achieve fair trade status. I understand that in this fortnight alone, six organisations and communities in Scotland will receive that status, which might be for a zone, a city, a town, a village, a church, a university or a school. All such places are organising events to mark Fairtrade fortnight. They all deserve our thanks and support, because fair trade is not just about choosing one type of coffee over another. In answer to Christine May's point, I understand that more than 200 products are now in the Fairtrade range. The reason why we are all involved in the movement is that fair trade saves and improves lives. It is about partnership between us in the north and the producers, who are often in the south. We must all embrace that if Scotland is to have a chance of becoming a fair trade nation. In the past week and a half, I have had the opportunity to meet many fair trade supporters and stakeholders around the country. On Friday, I attended a summit of local authorities that East Ayrshire Council organised in Kilmarnock. I am delighted that one outcome of that summit is the establishment of a local authority network to share best practice around the country and to consider how local authorities can support one another.

A representative of Aberdeen City Council attended the event last weekend and I was pleased and heartened to hear the contribution that it makes. That council has arranged to share its ideas and practices with other local authorities. That mutual coming together and sharing of experience will help. At the summit, we briefly discussed procurement, which many members have touched on. We have issued guidance to local authorities and others about what can be done under the current procurement regime. However, I have asked our officials to look again at whether scope for improvement exists and whether a further chance exists to push the opportunities that we have while of course operating within the law. The issue is fairly complex, but we are looking at it in detail. I hope that we will be able to provide something that is more robust than the existing guidance and which goes further, too. That is the intention.

We are currently considering the issue of exactly how far we can go and how we can frame that guidance. That is work in progress. Through the Fairtrade group and others, I will keep Parliament informed. During my visit to Kilmarnock, I heard about the work of Loudoun and Stewarton academies. Pupils from Loudoun academy have created and run their own fair trade group to promote and sell Fairtrade products around the school and the local community. Pupils from Stewarton academy are equally enthusiastic about promoting fair trade and recently hosted their own fashion show to highlight the inequalities of global trade. Those young activists are the next generation of responsible citizens, and they are being empowered at a young age by learning about how they can make a difference to those living in poverty in the developing world. Fairtrade fortnight is all about raising awareness around the country. We are working closely with stakeholders and considering how best we can support the development of a Scottish fair trade forum to drive the implementation of the fair trade nation criteria. Raising awareness of fair trade is crucial. I was interested to note that, as part of a recent survey, the Scottish public were asked whether they recognised the Fairtrade logo, how much they felt they knew about it and what they thought that it represented. Some 64 per cent of those who were asked recognised the Fairtrade logo, as opposed to 52 per cent in a similar United Kingdom survey. Additionally, 62 per cent correctly associated the logo with the phrase "a better deal for third world producers", compared with the UK figure of 51 per cent. Those are really encouraging figures that show just how quickly the fair trade movement is growing in Scotland. This year, we have had some really positive messages of support for the fair trade nation campaign. I personally thank the Fratellis, Gail Porter, the Proclaimers and Edith Bowman for their contributions, which are in the fair trade nation brochure that we produced. Having such role models for our young people can be enormously helpful.

I agree entirely with Mark Ballard. I was concerned to hear about the development of something that might be called "fair trade style". I must say that I do not have a clue what that could possibly mean, but I urge anyone who sees it to beware and to steer clear. Last weekend, I attended the fair trade experience in Glasgow. The event has been held for a number of years, but it is fair to say that this year's event was the biggest so far. I was heartened to see that, so great was the crush of people who wanted to visit the fair trade experience, the hall's staff had, at one point, to limit the number of people who were going into the hall to the number who were going out, so that they did not exceed the fire regulations limit. It was also heartening to see the number of families and older people who had come along to see what it was all about because they had a personal interest in fair trade. We must take a lead in continuing that momentum. Last week, I was lucky enough to meet the first UK leg of global journey, more than three years after it set off from Mumbai, travelling through 50 countries including Malawi. That fantastic symbol of the global fair trade movement shows just how many people around the world are joining the fight against poverty. We are all determined to work in partnership to ensure fair trading conditions for workers in the developing world. Partnership is at the centre of our international development work. Fair trade can also help to bring Scotland and Malawi closer together. Trade is a truly sustainable way for Malawians to escape poverty and build a better life for themselves. Through the international development fund, the Scottish Executive is supporting the work of Imani Enterprise, a fair trade consultancy with offices in Scotland and Malawi, to encourage sustainable, mutually beneficial trade between the two countries and to help promote Malawian products in Scotland. We are providing more than £200,000 for a project that will help to develop Malawi trade policy, by identifying and then training Malawian producers to access export markets and by showcasing Malawian products in Scotland via a Malawi trade fair, thereby opening up the Scottish market. That will make a key contribution to our commitments on sustainable economic development in our co-operation agreement with Malawi. That will not only help to develop Malawi's economy, but, we hope, result in greater sales in Scotland of fairly traded goods from Malawi such  as tea, coffee and nuts. I should also say that members will be able to sample some of those goods at this evening's reception. Raising awareness of fair trade is hugely important, as is developing an understanding of the wider issues of trade justice, but the problem of global inequality can be solved only by taking action. I am delighted that there is such enthusiasm for fair trade in Scotland—and across the political spectrum in particular. However, we must not rest on our laurels because we have so much more to do. I look forward to working closely with members in the future on helping to make Scotland a truly fair trade nation.  Meeting closed at 16:41.

The City of Edinburgh Council published a draft development brief for public consultation in December 2006. The brief set out the council's intentions for the Meadowbank site. Comments are sought by 30 March. The decision to replace Meadowbank sports centre with a new facility at Sighthill was taken by the City of Edinburgh Council. Sportscotland will continue to work with the City of Edinburgh Council on its sports facilities strategy.

The issue of the throws area should be raised in the public consultation, and I have no doubt that the City of Edinburgh Council will reflect on it. However, the situation concerning Meadowbank is not quite as simple as has perhaps been stated. The ultimate situation will depend very much on the decisions that are made by the City of Edinburgh Council following its consultation. I was pleased to note that a key element of the draft development brief is the inclusion of a local sports centre to replace some of the current facilities at Meadowbank, in addition to what is planned for Sighthill. I hope that that reassures the member.

As one would expect, Mr McLetchie makes a good case for his constituency, which shows the complexity of the issues that the City of Edinburgh Council will have to address. However, the project has the potential to have significant regeneration impacts on  Sighthill. Cultural and sporting facilities can often have such an effect, and I have encouraged my colleagues across the chamber to take that view. I am particularly aware of the situation in Sighthill, having recently visited the excellent Sighthill library as part of a launch that was organised by bookstart. I was pleased to hear that the plan is that the new stadium should be able to give some focus to what is happening elsewhere in Sighthill.

A new public library quality improvement matrix has been developed and, after the completion of successful pilots, will be launched very soon. The matrix is designed to be used by local authorities as a self-evaluation tool to encourage continuous improvement in public library services. The Scottish Library and Information Council has developed the matrix in partnership with local authorities, with new funding of £500,000 per year from the Scottish Executive.

I am not surprised that others are interested in the progress of the work that is being done on the quality improvement matrix. The feedback from the eight pilot projects shows that there can be very positive results for library communities. I am sure that the interest from elsewhere will increase as time goes on, particularly following the launch of the matrix. I am aware of the situation in Fife, and I would be happy to meet Christine May to discuss what may be done.

We are making good progress. In January, Scotland's first ever conference of the fair trade movement took place in Perth. A smaller stakeholder working group, of which the Executive is a member, is taking forward the conference's recommendations, including that for the establishment of a Scottish fair trade forum to co-ordinate implementation of the fair trade nation criteria. We are working closely with stakeholders to maximise the awareness-raising opportunities presented by Fairtrade fortnight and are participating in a number of events around the country.

The decision that North Lanarkshire Council and other authorities and organisations around the country have taken is exactly the kind of action that will help us to  achieve fair trade nation status. More important, such actions raise awareness of the difference that fair trade organisations can make to those who produce the goods. It has been refreshing and interesting to watch the progress that is being made in Scotland's schools. Pupils, teachers and others in school communities are to be congratulated on the work that is being done around Scotland. This morning I was privileged to welcome a fair trade procession at the Parliament and was pleased to greet two of the Malawi fair trade producers who formed part of the delegation. They explained the contact that they have had with retailers in this country, including the Co-op, which has been at the forefront of the campaign. I want their produce to filter through into many other retailers throughout the country.

The criteria for fair trade nation status have now been agreed, and we are working to meet those criteria. Linda Fabiani is right to mention procurement practices, but the issue is fairly complex, not least because some of the regulations that we are required to follow are made at European level. The Scottish Executive's aim is to ensure that local authorities and other public bodies in Scotland, including the Executive, are able to maximise the opportunities to purchase fair trade produce, and to ensure that we do that within the law. We hope to issue guidance in the near future that will supplement the existing guidance that explains to local authorities how far they can go on the issue.

We all want our farmers to be dealt with fairly, but I am not 100 per cent sure  that farmers in this country can be compared with those in countries such as Malawi, where the situation is very difficult as there are literally no outlets for the produce that farmers have to offer. We are setting an example by encouraging farmers in those countries, but I am sure that the Executive will be happy to do whatever it can to assist our farmers further. However, I am aware that not all the levers are in our hands. Obviously, the issue is important for farmers and producers in this country, too.

I am tempted just to say yes, but I think that Mr Ballard expects a bit more from me. I am delighted to be able formally in the Parliament to congratulate the University of Edinburgh on the work that it has done, not just in recent times, but over a long period. Along with other partners, the university has been at the forefront of driving the fair trade agenda. I am sure that its contribution will continue as we work towards fair trade nation status.

Sportscotland has not yet received an appropriate application for a 50m pool from Aberdeen City Council, but it has committed to assist the council in preparing such an application. There are no plans to fast track any sporting facilities under the national and regional sports facilities strategy. There is a rigorous two-stage process in place for approving awards under the strategy and it would be wrong to take short cuts in that process. Applications from Scottish  facilities for inclusion in the London 2012 pre-games training camp guide are being actively considered. In addition, sportscotland and the Executive will be considering how best to promote facilities that could be used by other countries and sports in preparation for London 2012.

Not even the Scottish National Party in its wildest moments would regard it as sensible to award money for a scheme that has not been developed yet. However, £7 million of sportscotland support is already going in to facilities in Aberdeen. I hope that Aberdeen City Council and its partners are actively considering whether those facilities would allow the city to attract teams to its area in the run-up to 2012. I should point out to Mr Adam that the £25 million in lottery funding that has been allocated for the training of elite athletes in Scotland is guaranteed and will be there to help our elite athletes in their preparation.

That is an interesting point concerning the energy uses of swimming pools and other sports facilities—a matter that is being actively considered and one that will be very much at the heart of the issue regarding the facilities that would be provided for the Commonwealth games. It is fair to say that swimming pools that are operated by local authorities—which I think Mr McGrigor is referring to—should be maintained and looked after by those local authorities as part of their responsibility to provide for sports in their areas. The first part of Mr McGrigor's question should be addressed to those local authorities.

I very much welcome the steps that are being taken by the music industry and internet auction sites to protect the interests of fans from ticket touts. The Department for Culture, Media and Sport has hosted a number of meetings to discuss that issue, which have been attended by UK organisations that represent Scottish interests.

I am sympathetic to the points that Pauline McNeill makes. I have followed the debate with great interest and have discussed the matter with colleagues. It looks as though the measures that are now being put in place by the industry as a result of its conversations with the Department for Culture, Media and Sport will offer a resolution to the difficulty, but I am reassured that the Westminster Government has not yet ruled out the prospect of legislation, should those initiatives not be found to work. Obviously, in that context, we would work on devolved matters with our colleagues at Westminster if that was the route that we decided was the best one to take.

Edinburgh zoo is an extremely successful visitor attraction that, like other attractions in Edinburgh, benefits from VisitScotland's marketing of the city as a great city-break destination.

Most of the issues that Margaret Smith has raised are for the zoo's management. However, I am aware that the zoo participates in a number of particularly successful initiatives to encourage visitors. The management of the zoo has shown great strategic vision in setting plans for its long-term development over the next 20 years, which I know have been discussed with Scottish Enterprise Edinburgh and Lothians. Moreover, the office of the chief scientific adviser for Scotland keeps in touch with the zoo on this and other issues, and I hope that the zoo finds those meetings to be helpful.

In his effort to help Edinburgh zoo, Mr McGrigor is perhaps conflating a number of different issues, and it might help to set them out individually. I met the zoo's management in its capacity as a visitor attraction, and I am very happy to work with it, or any other visitor attraction, and VisitScotland to ensure that it maximises its potential. However, as Mr McGrigor rightly identified, the zoo also has an important role in animal and species preservation. The Executive has a dialogue with it on that subject and, as I pointed out, the zoo is meeting the office of the chief scientific adviser in the near future. However, any further discussions about the possibility of funding for the zoo's science base would be for the Scottish Executive Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning Department, and I am happy to pass Mr McGrigor's suggestion to the appropriate minister.

Projects such as the Burns international museum in Alloway will provide a lasting legacy from the homecoming Scotland campaign to boost the number of visitors to Scotland in 2009 and beyond. The National Trust for Scotland is responsible for the museum project. It plans to open the refurbished Burns cottage and the new education centre adjacent to it early in 2009, and expects the museum to open later that year.

Mr Ingram totally misunderstands the concept of the Burns homecoming project. The event throughout 2009 is not about buildings and facilities but about people and events and about opportunities for people who have an affinity with Scotland to come here to enjoy the best of everything that Scotland has to offer. Only the Scottish National Party could criticise an initiative that the Executive took when it became aware of a problem in Ayrshire with the Burns cottage and the Burns memorials. We brought together people to try to form a partnership, which we have achieved. We have committed £1 million to the project's design costs and we are committed to providing another £5.5 million towards building the project. The HLF is committing £5.8 million. The National Trust for Scotland will use its networks to fundraise and South Ayrshire Council is transferring land, buildings and collections to the trust at no cost. If we add to that the £20,000 per year until 2009 that has been given to the Robert Burns World Federation to allow it to contact its members throughout the world, and the additional sums that  have been given to the Burns project, we can see that there is no lack of imperative or ambition in the Executive for the project. If SNP members had taken some control and some initiative, they might have had more to offer. As it happens, a wonderful event will take place in 2009 for people throughout Scotland and for the diaspora.

As Mr Scott knows, because he attended the reception the other evening, the homecoming year will have wide benefits not just for Ayrshire but for Scotland. The themes that have been identified for the homecoming year celebrate Burns, whisky and other Scottish icons, such as golf. The constituency of Ayr will benefit hugely, given the great number of golf courses in and around Ayr and Ayr's affinity with Burns and his legacy. That legacy will continue with the new museum and the new education centre that will open in Alloway in 2009. I hope that the people of Ayr, Ayrshire and Scotland will enjoy that for a long time.

VisitScotland's imaginative techniques and use of new technology ensure that its award-winning marketing is constantly improving.

Tourists coming to our country wish to book their accommodation and experiences through a variety of methods, one of which is the national website visitscotland.com—which I would emphasise has a slightly different structure from VisitScotland, which is the core agency for tourism in Scotland. I would be the first to acknowledge that visitscotland.com has not been without its difficulties, but since its inception the website has encouraged thousands—millions—of visitors to come to our country. The website is not the only way in which visitors can book their accommodation; many people use the website as an information portal and then book directly with the individual business providers. However, visitscotland.com is taking all opportunities to improve its relations with individual providers and with different geographical areas of the country—for example, by inviting tourist information centre staff to work in the call centre and by allowing call-centre staff to pick up more information about what is available in local areas. It is fair to say that visitscotland.com is taking all the steps that it can.

I am sure that those of us who were there would agree that the launch of Scotland's year of Highland culture was a real success. It gave people a taste of the many cultural and sporting events that are to be held this year, particularly in the north, thus ensuring that the rich cultural heritage of the Highlands is properly understood and celebrated. We also want to use this year of Highland culture to raise the profile of the Highlands as a great place to live, work and invest in, as well as to visit. We hope that that will, in turn, bring real benefits to the Highlands and to the whole of Scotland for a long time to come.

I am happy to assist the year of Highland culture in any way that I can to promote events, whether international, national, regional or local. I look forward to attending many more of those events over the coming year. Maureen Macmillan makes a valid point. I hope that the extremely diverse attractions that are on offer this year will ensure that as many people from other parts of Scotland as possible will want to visit the Highlands, and not only this year. I sincerely hope that they will visit this year and then come back in future years.

The best thing that young people could do would be to visit the exhibition, see for themselves the items on display and read the interpretative information that is available. Some of the material that has been produced for the exhibition is of the highest quality. The exhibition is an excellent example of an approach that I have been trying to encourage for some time, whereby our national collections co-operate with local providers to ensure that the best materials are on display around the country. The fact that the exhibition will tour other parts of Scotland as well as the Highlands means that not only children but as many people as possible of all ages will have an opportunity to view the objects and understand their relevance to the Highlands and Scotland as a whole. I hope that they enjoy the experience, too.

I am happy to look into the matter that Jamie McGrigor raises and to ascertain whether funding has been cut. The best thing for the company that is arranging the St Andrew's day celebrations in Oban to do would be to contact EventScotland, which has budgets for regional, national and international events. I am sure that, as long as the company meets the criteria, it will have an opportunity to secure funding.

As Fergus Ewing knows, I have been keen to promote the Highlands as an area in which adventure sport can be enjoyed by local people, Scots who visit the area and international visitors. That is one of the reasons why our agencies have been so involved in helping to secure international adventure sport events. Adventure tourism is expanding all the time and Scotland is fast acquiring a reputation in that area. Although I have not seen the proposal from the UHI Millennium Institute for the degree course to which Fergus Ewing referred, it sounds like a good idea and it probably is unique in the UK. I hope that if the course goes ahead, it meets the high standard that our graduates expect.

The Scottish ministers are currently consulting on a series of Scottish historic environment policy documents that set out how the historic environment will be protected and managed. A policy document on battlefields will be put out to consultation during 2007-08.

Mr Gorrie is correct to identify the importance of the planning system. In fact, battlefields are already protected under local authority planning guidelines. The Bothwell bridge proposal is possibly a case in point, as I understand that the proposal will be the subject of a local planning inquiry in the near future. It is important to recognise that battles in Scotland tended to be relatively small in scale and often involved a certain amount of, as it were, skirmishing around the edges. That makes it very difficult to delineate battlefields clearly. That problem is usually exacerbated by the fact that records are limited and no proper maps exist for many of our battlefields. Historic Scotland has commissioned a gazetteer of battlefield sites, which will be used in taking forward the work that can be done to try to protect and give due recognition to our battlefields.

It is possible that such an extension could have the effect Mr Maxwell describes. Many of the international examples of how battlefields have been protected and used as tourist attractions relate to relatively recent battles, for which there is a great deal on record that it is possible to explore as well as, on occasion, maps and other memorabilia that allow such sites to be properly shown and interpreted. I think that the new interpretation centre that is being built at Culloden will be a world leader. The new centre might teach us other lessons about how battlefields in general can be promoted and interpreted to the public. As I said to Mr Gorrie, many of the battles that happened in Scotland took place hundreds of years ago and are not well recorded. Often, the delineation of the battlefield is a matter of dispute. Such matters are often researched by historians and archaeologists. There have been several notable occasions in recent years when a battle site has been proven to be somewhere other than where it was originally thought to have been. We are keeping the matter under active consideration.

I am not aware that there are plans for such a development at Culloden. I am particularly heartened by the fact that the new facility at Culloden will be world class, which will have the effect that Mr Maxwell rightly mentioned: it will encourage tourism, a clear recognition of our history and a regard for history and its accurate portrayal. The Culloden site has a number of listed monuments, as physical structures and graves are located there. Those matters would have to be taken into consideration if anyone were to suggest building a wind farm on the site.

Sportscotland is investing £1 million annually through its community regeneration programme in projects in areas of multiple deprivation. Those projects aim to assist communities to develop through sports and physical recreation, and aim to promote capacity building by helping groups to establish and sustain projects by developing voluntary and other community organisations.

I would be delighted to meet the member to discuss issues in which we share an interest. A number of projects in Fife are being supported through the initiative that I mentioned. The projects target people in areas such as Lochgelly, Levenmouth, Dysart and Kirkcaldy. I would be more than happy to meet Ms Livingstone to discuss those matters in more detail.

That level of detail on tourism employment and income is not held centrally. However, we know that tourism accounts for 10 per cent of all employment in the VisitScotland network area that includes Mull.

My officials meet Mr Finnie's officials regularly, and Mr Finnie and I meet regularly to discuss such issues and issues that are of interest more generally in our portfolios. One subject that we discuss with increasing seriousness is the sustainability of tourism, which is dear to my heart and to Mr Finnie's. We want more visitors to come to our country and to spend time in our rural and coastal areas, but it is important to understand that we want visitors to spend more money during their stay if we are to grow our tourism economy and to bring the benefit and effect that we would like to bring to communities up and down the country.  We do not want more visitors all to come at a particular time. We must be better at encouraging them to visit different areas at different times of the year, so that they do not converge on one area at the same time. We must provide better public transport and more environmentally sustainable accommodation and visitor attractions, so that our visitors do not damage the feature that many of them come for: our environment and landscape. Having a coastal and marine national park will allow us to support the tourism industry in whichever area of the country the park ends up being located and to maximise the benefits for the community, while ensuring that tourism is sustainable in the environment that it inhabits.

As I said in my answer to Ms Scott, I meet my ministerial colleagues regularly to discuss such matters. As a result of the tourism framework for change, co-ordination between VisitScotland and the enterprise networks nationally and locally is now much better. We very much want to encourage that. We want to ensure that those linkages at a local level involve not just the big agencies, but local agencies and businesses. I have absolutely no problem in concurring with Mr Mather that that needs to happen and, where it comes within my purview to do so, I will certainly ensure that such co-ordination takes place.

The provisions of the culture (Scotland) bill take existing international cultural rights as their starting point. I refer the member to my statement to Parliament on 19 January and to the cultural policy document, "Scotland's Culture",  which I launched that day.

The culture bill will give greater practical effect to those rights and entitlements in each local authority area. We want to encourage people to get involved in planning cultural services and to take part in, and enjoy, the opportunities that result. The pathfinder projects that I launched this week—13 projects across the country, which involve 26 local authorities and many more community planning partnerships and other organisations—will provide us with a good opportunity to give local authorities guidance and advice on how initiatives might work in their areas. The point of the measure is to ensure that we have a citizens-based approach to culture. That is exactly what we are doing in the culture bill.

If Mr Maxwell wants to pursue that issue, I will be happy to look into the matter for him if he will write to me. We need to understand that an initiative that is provided through schools will have some restrictions on the number of instruments that might be available to any one child, given the number of children who might opt to play a particular instrument. All those things need to be balanced. In my experience, learning to play one instrument almost automatically leads one to begin to understand, and to want to play, other musical instruments. Therefore, I would encourage that child to take the opportunity that is available and to move on to another instrument at another time.

The Executive is investing significant funds through the national and regional facilities strategy to put in place facilities to give elite and up-and-coming athletes top-class facilities in which to train and prepare for future success. Those facilities and others will be available in the run-up to the 2012 London Olympics and a possible Commonwealth games in Glasgow in 2014.

On 4 December, sportscotland held a seminar for local authorities and other facility managers to explain the specification requirements for facilities that they might want to qualify for inclusion in the LOCOG brochure. The deadline for submissions is, as Mr Arbuckle said, 31 January and the brochure will be launched at the Beijing Olympics in 2008. It is almost certain that Scotland will be represented in that piece of advertising.

I am sure that the member does not need me to point out that the re-election in Scotland of a Government of a Labour complexion is required for that proposal to be taken forward, as it is a key plank of our manifesto for sport. There is a list of universities in Scotland that might want to be considered for that accolade, and in the fullness of time we will work with those universities to help them to develop such a proposal and consider which would be best suited to the title.

The Wanlockhead Museum of Lead Mining houses an important collection of mining artefacts. An estimated 15,000 visitors come to the museum each year and it is a major employer in the area, so its future is clearly important for the local tourism industry and for the economy of the area more generally. Because of that importance, we are working urgently with the Scottish Museums Council to examine the museum's financial position and to try to find ways of helping to keep it open.

A lot more is happening than Mr Morgan has outlined. One of the things that we must do is ascertain why the Wanlockhead Museum Trust is in its current financial situation despite the fact that it already has considerable support from the public sector, not least from Dumfries and Galloway Council, which has promised funding into the next year, too. We must also gauge what other financial support or support in kind might be available to the museum from other organisations and we want to discuss with the museum the way forward, which might include commissioning a business plan. However, the fact of the matter is that the museum will have to be accredited to be able apply to the significance scheme. Before the museum's trustees made their intention to close known, we wrote to the museum indicating that we would give it any assistance that it needed to apply to the scheme. That is a facility that we offer  to many other museums too, but it is important that those discussions continue.

The museum has already lost its manager and the Executive has offered funding to assist the museum to advertise for a new manager to ensure that everything about which Alex Fergusson asks is in place, so he can see our commitment to the museum. I cannot pre-empt the decision on whether it would receive funding from the significance scheme, but it must be in the best possible position to apply for that funding. Obviously, if it is closed, it will not be able to do that. However, I do not think that there is any reason why the museum should close. It has already received significant funding for next year from Dumfries and Galloway Council and, given the level at which it has operated in the past, I am sure that that funding will be sufficient to allow it to continue to operate until such time as its significance is judged and rewarded, if that is the case.

It is fair to recognise the significance of the museum to the south of Scotland more generally. However, I must say that it was disappointing that, at the time of the announcement of the closure by the trustees in October, neither the Executive nor the Scottish Museums Council was aware that that was their  intention, nor were we told that such a measure was being considered. The opportunity for support from the Scottish Museums Council exists for museums such as Wanlockhead and other smaller museums around the country, but it must be a two-way process. Museums must engage with the council if they are to access the support that so many of them need.

I thank Murdo Fraser for lodging the motion and colleagues around the chamber for contributing to this interesting and informative debate, which has raised some fascinating issues. It is worth being clear at the outset about the fact that I have been asked to respond to the debate on behalf of the First Minister in his role as the keeper of the great seal, which is one of the four commissioners of the regalia. The First Minister regrets that he cannot attend the debate in person. He and his fellow commissioners have responsibility for the care of the stone of destiny, on behalf of Her Majesty the Queen, under the terms of the royal warrant that was issued in 1996. As we would all agree, the stone has been a royal symbol of Scottish nationhood for many centuries and is held by the Crown on our behalf. I am particularly pleased to have this opportunity to join colleagues in marking the 700 th anniversary of Robert I at Scone abbey in 1306. I would also like to join Mr Swinney in congratulating everyone at Scone Palace who is involved in the commemoration of the event. I am sure that that has been a welcome additional attraction for visitors to Perthshire this year. However, the celebration of the event is a poignant reminder that Robert the Bruce was the first king of Scotland to be crowned at Scone after the stone of destiny was seized in 1296, by Edward I of England. Perhaps Mr Swinney will understand why it was deemed to be inappropriate to move the stone to Scone for that anniversary. As Murdo Fraser rightly said, this year also marks the 10 th anniversary of the return of the  stone of destiny to Scotland. I have listened with interest to and have carefully noted the views that have been expressed this afternoon. I remember when the then Prime Minister, John Major, made his unexpected announcement in July 1996 to the House of Commons that the stone of destiny was to return to Scotland. Recognising that the stone was close to the hearts of many Scots, Michael Forsyth, the Secretary of State for Scotland at the time, decided to invite the public's views on where the stone should be displayed. I am sure that many of us will remember the fascinating and wide-ranging debate that followed. There were more than 100 responses to the consultation from individuals and institutions with an interest in where the stone should be housed. The locations that were suggested by the consultation ranged across Scotland. They included the abbeys of Iona, Dunfermline and Arbroath, Scone Palace, Stirling Castle, the Museum of Scotland, St Giles cathedral, the Isle of Skye and a public house in Glasgow. It was also suggested that the stone should feature in a constantly touring exhibition. However, the outcome of the public consultation was clear. The overwhelming preference was for the stone of destiny to come to the capital city, and within Edinburgh the castle was the most popular location. I recognise that, during the public consultation, an impressive case was made for the stone to go to Scone Palace, and there is no doubt that Scottish kings were inaugurated at the medieval abbey at Scone for many generations. However, there is little left of the medieval abbey today and the other principal symbols of Scottish monarchy are in Edinburgh. Above all, as I said, Scone was not the public's choice. The criteria for the choice of location were set out at the time of the consultation. They sought to balance the importance of the stone's future security and conservation needs with a desire to ensure the widest possible public access to this internationally renowned ancient Scottish symbol. In addition, the commissioners were charged with the responsibility to ensure that the stone is available immediately when it is required to be returned temporarily to Westminster abbey for any future coronation. The commissioners decided that Edinburgh Castle was best able to meet all those criteria. Ease of public access to the stone of destiny is important. Edinburgh Castle was open for 363 days last year and some 1.2 million people visited it. To ensure that everyone has an opportunity to visit the castle, Historic Scotland provides free entry on a number of days in the year, including St Andrew's day. That tradition started in 1996 to mark the return of the stone. During this year's  free weekend in April, some 39,000 people visited the castle. I draw members' attention to the fact that educational visits to all Historic Scotland properties are free. More than 70,000 pupils and students took advantage of that last year. At Edinburgh Castle, some 14,000 pupils took part in free educational visits and a further 8,000 attended pre-arranged educational activities.  I hope that members agree that the return of the stone of destiny came at a turning point in Scottish history. Members' views on whether there is a need to review the location of the stone of destiny will be of great interest to the commissioners of the regalia and I will ensure that they receive a copy of the Official Report of this debate. In closing, I am sure that the First Minister would wish me, on behalf of the commissioners, to thank everyone who participated in the debate.  Meeting closed at 17:37

I join colleagues in thanking Christine May for bringing the motion before  Parliament. I also thank members for what has been, as Jamie Stone rightly said, an interesting and informative debate. I cannot help but agree with a lot of what has been said and a lot of what is in Christine's motion. I am pleased that we have had the opportunity to debate the historical environment again in Parliament this year and that the Parliament recognises the support given to the historical environment by the Scottish Executive. Overall, ministers will provide, through Historic Scotland, about £13 million of funding in the current year to the historical environment, including grants to owners of buildings and monuments and to the voluntary sector. Support can be given in many ways and the sustainable management of the historical environment can be guaranteed only if the Executive works in partnership with many others. I join Christine May in thanking the myriad other organisations that contribute experience, energy, funding and enthusiasm, in particular those who, as Christine May and Stewart Maxwell rightly pointed out, do so on a voluntary basis. We all work hard together on the historical environment, because we recognise that it adds greatly to our quality of life in so many ways. Jamie Stone was right to pick up the fact that those who wish to visit our country do so at least partly because of the diversity of what we have to offer. I may have said in the chamber once before—or perhaps even more often than that—that one of the ways in which VisitScotland markets our country is as a national dish with regional flavours. The whole area of heritage works well in that regard. I will respond to a number of points that members have made before I go on to the substance of my speech. Stewart Maxwell, and perhaps some other members, mentioned battlefields. It is important to remember that in Scotland, battles tended to take place over a wide area, involving skirmishes and guerrilla-type warfare, so there is a lot of dispute about the location of battlefields, particularly as often no visible evidence of them is left today. However, Historic Scotland, having produced a gazetteer of important sites in Scotland, is now working on a policy for their protection, which will in due course be issued for public consultation. Stewart Maxwell mentioned the Antonine wall. Personally, I think that no parliamentary debate on the historical environment would be complete without mention of it, not least because it runs through my constituency. It is important to mention it for several reasons. It is very visible, and we have a responsibility to protect it.  The fact that the Antonine wall is part of a larger area nominated for world heritage site status is interesting. The wall crosses many areas within Scotland and the bid crosses many current national boundaries, which reflects the Roman world as it was then and the boundaries that existed to protect those within it. The bid also gives us an opportunity to work with colleagues in other countries on our shared history. From that point of view, the way in which the matter is being taken forward is extremely interesting. Ted Brocklebank mentioned what I think he referred to as Bothwell's bones. He described them as an artefact, so it would be remiss of me if I did not say that in fact they are not an artefact—they have a different legal status. They are remains and, unfortunately, in law there is no ownership of human remains. Although the idea of repatriating those remains is interesting, and perhaps even attractive, it is a matter for Bothwell's ancestors and the Danish authorities. Christine May mentioned gardens, and I will talk about our proposals a little bit later. I was interested in what Tricia Marwick said about the Wemyss caves, not least because Christine May has spoken to me about them on a number of occasions. The cost of preserving the caves from the encroaching sea would be colossal. The task would also be extremely technically challenging, and the effect of the work would probably be to direct the force of the sea towards other parts of the coast and into other caves. Moreover, the caves are geologically unstable. When prioritising our work on the historical environment, we have to consider where funding can do the most good. In the longer term, the continuous struggle with the sea at Wemyss would eventually be lost, as would the money that had been spent. However, I understand that a great deal of work has been done by a local society that takes an interest, and that all the carvings and paintings have been extensively recorded. A good job is being done in publicising the existence of the Pictish drawings in that part of Fife and in teaching people about them. Scotland has effective legislation and systems to identify and protect important monuments and buildings, which is to be welcomed, but it is vital to acknowledge that alterations to the historical environment to suit society's changing needs are inevitable. I stress again that the purpose of legislation in this area is not to halt development but to manage change in an intelligent, responsible and sympathetic way. Statistics for scheduled monument consent and for listed building consent show that Historic Scotland and local authorities do just that.  I noted with interest Christine May's comments on the opportunities to improve the protection of our historical environment through legislative measures. Members are aware that the Historic Environment Advisory Council for Scotland—which, for ease, I will refer to as HEACS—has recently submitted a number of reports to me. Two of them are particularly relevant to this evening's debate. The first is on whether there is a need to review heritage protection legislation in Scotland, and the second is on the role of local authorities in the conservation of the historical environment. The reports make recommendations on issues such as a duty of care for the historical environment and minimum standards for local authority historical environment services. I know that such matters are of considerable interest to Christine May, Stewart Maxwell and everyone who has taken part in this debate. Both reports contain detailed and interesting recommendations, some of which raise complex issues. I have advised HEACS that I will give a preliminary response to the reports this year, and that work to consider the recommendations in more depth will continue at least through the first half of 2007. I am sure that members will understand that it would be inappropriate for me to pre-empt my response to the reports today. The final part of the motion asks that "all MSPs and ministers should consider what further support can be given to protect Scotland's historical places and artefacts." Ministers are setting out a vision and strategic policies for the historical environment through an important series of documents called the Scottish historic environment policies—which, again for ease, I will refer to as SHEPs. The policies were the subject of a stimulating debate here in April. Following public consultation, SHEP 1, which sets out the overall framework for the historical environment in Scotland, is being finalised as we speak. It is planned to issue SHEP 1 in its final form and to release four further SHEPs for consultation—on subjects such as the listing of buildings and access to properties in the care of the Scottish ministers—before the end of March next year. Gardens and the designed landscape have been the subject of consultation as part of the same series. That consultation ended in June, and the policy implications are still being considered.

The entire issue of gardens and designed landscapes was the subject of that SHEP consultation. Albeit that the consultation is closed, I am happy to get a copy to Mr Stone. I am sure that he will be interested to read the responses. I am sure that members will be interested to note that Historic Scotland will publish operational policies for many areas of its work. That will make the way in which the agency conducts its business even more transparent.  I hope that members will agree that our historical environment is vital to Scotland and its people. For that reason, we must ensure that effective policies and systems are put in place to protect and manage it. The recent HEACS reports and the SHEP series represent important and substantial contributions to this key aim of the Scottish ministers and our partners. I look forward to bringing more information on those matters to Parliament in due course.  Meeting closed at 17:51.

Already a range of events has been planned by national agencies and others to commemorate the union. The events include book launches and a debate by the National Library of Scotland; an exhibition of documents by the National Archives of Scotland; a display of artefacts by the National Museum of Scotland; and a display of relevant portraits and new video work by the Scottish National Portrait Gallery and the National Galleries of Scotland. In addition, the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland will work with those bodies and with the Scottish Parliament to organise a schools competition about the impact of the union. Further announcements of other Executive plans will be made in due course.

The announcement of the programme may be a little late in light of previous announcements, but it is at least up to date. Unfortunately, Mr McLetchie is not quite as up to date, because my colleague the chancellor  announced on 15 June this year that, in his capacity as master of the mint, he would be striking a £2 coin in celebration of the union, so it is fair to say that work is going on in England that will complement what we do here. We expect that there will be collaboration and that artefacts will be displayed both here and in England. As part of that collaboration, the English—literally—and Scottish versions of a special artefact from that time will be exhibited together for the first time.

Well, if everything were as simple as Mr Neil makes out, life would be easier. However, I must point out to him that opinion polls come and go, but the Scottish people have consistently rejected his party and its policies and voted for parties that believe in the union and understand its benefits. I am sure that things will be no different this time next year.

Very much so. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton is correct about that. I am grateful to him for his consistent interest in such events. However, other events that are happening next year deserve our attention, not least the year of Highland culture.

It has already been made clear that we want to celebrate all facets of Scottish life on St Andrew's day. One of the things about Scotland that I and visitors to our country find so interesting is the diversity of our culture. I am sure that Mr Canavan's views can go into that large melting pot along with those of everyone else.

The Executive invests £12 million per year in the active schools programme, which provides a wide range of sporting and physical activities to children. More than 8.5 million participant sessions took place in the last school year. A key aim of active schools is to make effective links to community sports clubs by involving local volunteers in the delivery of activity sessions and by encouraging lifelong participation in sport through community clubs.

Until about 10 minutes ago, I was not aware of that particular project. However, Mr Welsh has drawn it to my attention  and has helpfully given me a brochure, so I have been able to acquaint myself with it at least a little. I have to say that all the claims that Mr Welsh makes for the project appear to be borne out in the literature that he presented to me. I was very pleased to read it, and I am pleased to say that the ethos of the project seems to be exactly what we are encouraging. I was delighted to see the list of people who have made the project possible—the list includes Angus Council, as I would expect. Local authorities have at least initial responsibility for providing local sports facilities. I am more than happy to draw the facilities operated by the CAFE project to the attention of sportscotland and other organisations with an interest in that area. I thank Mr Welsh for drawing the project to my attention.

I agree with the premise that Rosemary Byrne puts forward. It is important that young people have opportunities that are an alternative to hanging about in the street and that they are able to learn about other facets of life in the area where they live. I had hoped to visit the particular project that Rosemary Byrne mentioned. However, due to the illness of the club chairman at the time, the visit was postponed. I look forward to meeting those involved in the project to discuss it in more detail once the chairman's recovery is complete.

We are working very hard to encourage more volunteers to come into sport. One way in which we think we can do that is by ensuring that there is a clear pathway for their efforts to be recognised by us all and for them to obtain a proper coaching certificate, which they  can be proud of holding. That programme is beginning to achieve real results, as is our young leadership programme. I am keen for the Executive to do whatever it can to encourage people to become involved in sport, as volunteers are the life-blood of sport.

The organisations and individuals who expressed an interest in exploring how the issues raised during the summit could be taken forward have been invited to a further meeting with the Scottish Executive later this month.

I am happy to acknowledge the work that Pauline McNeill and the cross-party group on the Scottish contemporary music industry have done to raise awareness of an important issue. I reassure her that our investment strategy and other support are committed to the music industry and the other creative industries in Scotland. As I have said several times in the chamber, I work closely with my colleagues Nicol Stephen and Allan Wilson to ensure that we have in place the proper support for the music industry in whatever form it manifests itself.

Yes. We often encounter the example of Highlands and Islands Enterprise in our discussions. It is fair to say that how we progress the work will be discussed with Highlands and Islands Enterprise, Scottish Enterprise and creative Scotland once it is established. It is not fair to say that no support exists. The Scottish Arts Council supports music through several initiatives, many of which are connected with contemporary music, such as the south by south-west festival, showcase Scotland at Celtic connections and the world music expo 2006, which was held in Seville. All those events are opportunities to showcase Scottish talent and are supported by the Scottish Arts Council. We will continue that work, but we will of course redouble our efforts and learn from experiences around the country to ensure that we are doing the best that we can for an important industry.

I join Chris Ballance and Derek Brownlee in thanking Karen Gillon for giving us the opportunity to debate an important subject that is of particular interest to South Lanarkshire. The debate has been interesting and I add my congratulations to South Lanarkshire Council and everyone who has recognised the value of the historic parks at Castlebank and Delves and worked tirelessly to ensure that they will be preserved for future generations. Public parks are an important part of the historic environment and play a role in social history. Karen Gillon is correct to identify her constituency as being one of the most attractive in the country and as having a famous history. The park at Castlebank lies in the buffer zone around the world heritage site at New Lanark and its renovation will help to preserve the setting of that internationally recognised industrial and cultural complex. The renovation of the parks at Castlebank and Delves is another example of the benefits that investment by the Heritage Lottery Fund provides to Scotland. Well over 2,000 projects have secured more than £454 million in awards and Scotland has received some 12 per cent of all the awards that have been made throughout the United Kingdom. It may be of interest to Mr Brownlee to learn that many other parks and public open spaces throughout Scotland, whether large or small, are being restored with support from the Heritage Lottery Fund. Examples include Glasgow green, the Mid links in Montrose and Baxter park in Dundee. To date, £24.2 million has been spent specifically on park projects in Scotland. Parks should be valued as places of relaxation, exercise and enjoyment. I am delighted that our agency, Historic Scotland, is working closely with the Heritage Lottery Fund on projects that involve parks. As well as supporting each other and working with local authorities, the two bodies contribute to the project funding packages, share specialist expertise and play to their strengths. The results of such collaborations are quality  public spaces that are fit for the 21 st century but which retain their historic character and distinctiveness. I particularly welcome the Heritage Lottery Fund's recently launched parks for people scheme, which will build on the success of previous schemes, and I look forward with confidence to more Scottish projects being successful in years to come. Even when the Heritage Lottery Fund is not involved, Historic Scotland supports projects that fall within its funding remit, especially when key historic buildings form the focus of parks. I have already mentioned Baxter park in Dundee, where funding from the Heritage Lottery Fund supported the landscape work and Historic Scotland focused its support on refurbishment of the pavilion. The tournament bridge in Eglinton country park and the Dalzell estate in Motherwell are other examples of where Historic Scotland has provided support to historic parks. Scotland's parks, both historic and modern, are important for a range of reasons that lie close to the Executive's key objectives. From the viewpoint of the economy, parks add to the range of quality places that tourists can visit and encourage them to stay longer in the neighbourhood of headline destinations such as New Lanark. I was struck by what Karen Gillon said about the attractiveness of Castlebank and Delves parks as visitor destinations. They sound like perfect examples of the attractions that are joining our green tourism business scheme in growing numbers. I look forward to hearing of them applying to join that scheme and receiving accreditation in due course. In a less direct but nonetheless significant way, quality public spaces project a confident civic image, which in turn supports investment in economic regeneration. However, for me it is local people's need for and use and appreciation of our historic parks—and parks in general—that make projects such as those at Castlebank and Delves so important. Physical and mental well-being is supported by energetic exercise or gentle strolling, by access to fresh air and simply by relaxing in pleasant surroundings. In that context, I am particularly pleased that the Heritage Lottery Fund requires all applicants to take thoughtful account of maximising all-needs access to our great parks. The Scottish Executive has of course long recognised the multiple benefits of public open spaces, both formal and informal. This August, we published a consultation draft of a new Scottish planning policy on physical activity and open space.

I am going to come to a point shortly that might help Mr Ballance with that. The planning policy will highlight the many advantages of ensuring that quality public spaces are not just retained but planned in new developments and will help to set minimum standards. Many of Scotland's councils recognise the benefits of green space, with many parks and squares forming the subject of ambitious renovation proposals. Those benefits are increasingly being set in context through comprehensive surveys of green space. I know of excellent examples of that in Edinburgh and in Ayrshire and I am sure that there are many more examples throughout the country.  I welcome Karen Gillon's motion and congratulate sincerely all those involved with the project as well as those at local, council and national level who share and support this renewed vision of Scotland's parks—great and small, historic and modern—as key public assets at the heart of everyday life. Karen Gillon was kind enough to invite me to visit the parks in question. As she knows, I am always delighted to visit Lanark. As soon as my diary permits, I will be happy to accompany her to the parks, so that I can discuss in more detail with those responsible all the aspects of the project as it goes forward and so that I can see some of the work that is being done.  Meeting closed at 18:32.

It is gratifying that my parliamentary colleagues recognise the importance of tourism to Scotland and to their areas and that they are as determined as I am that we get the system right. However, several issues—mainly raised by the Conservatives—still require to be clarified. I will start with Mr Adam's points. Mr MacAskill may have supported the route development fund, but if my memory serves me correctly—I think it does—it was Lewis Macdonald who introduced the fund. Perhaps the fund is not a matter for which the SNP should take too much credit. We must be realistic about US travellers. Understandably, after 9/11, people from the US did not travel in the way that they used to. However, good examples of joint marketing have  taken place. I will mention two joint marketing activities that VisitScotland has undertaken, with Continental Airlines and with Delta Air Lines on their respective routes to New York and Atlanta. Some $1 million has been spent on that. I hope and am almost positive that a result of those activities is the 7 per cent increase in the number of visitors to this country from the US in the first six months of this year over the number in the first six months of 2005. I hope that Mr Adam finds that reassuring.

I drew attention to only two examples of the work that we are doing; I was not suggesting that that was the limit of what we are doing in the US—far from it. We will continue to work with our colleagues on that issue as time progresses. I am afraid that, a bit like Mr McGrigor's memories, the name "Scottish Tourist Board" belongs in the past. I also have to say to him that training is one of the key priorities that we have identified. Interestingly—in the light of one of his other points—we have jointly with the Scottish Tourism Forum and VisitScotland identified training as an issue that we must all address. As recently as yesterday, when I attended the national tourism convention in Perth, I helped to launch a project called the Perth discovery trail. Young school pupils are encouraged to learn more about tourism in a fun and innovative way in order to give them a positive view of the tourism industry and to encourage them to go into it. Mr McGrigor is wrong to say that the bookings to which he referred would have been made under the previous regime. Increasingly—I am sure that many members in the chamber can bear this out from their own experience—people who want to travel are more inclined than they were in the past to book close to the date of travel. We must recognise that trend. Charlie Gordon is correct to identify the events strategy as a major plank in our work. Our events strategy is about encouraging international visitors to come to big events such as the ones that he mentioned, including, I hope, the 2014 Commonwealth games. I think also of events such as the Heineken cup final and the rowing championships at Strathclyde park, each of which  netted about £12 million for the local economy. Such events are vital, but so are the small regional events programmes, which are also funded, in part at least, by EventScotland. For example, the number of visitors who go to Wigtown is increasing all the time because of the help that it has been given to market itself as Scotland's national book town. That is an important part of what we are trying to do and we will continue with that work. Murdo Fraser has a glowing view of the old system, but I am afraid that the whole reason why this debate is taking place and why VisitScotland has come about is that that system was beginning to fail us and was not working to best effect. When I left Peter Lederer, the chair of VisitScotland, in Perth yesterday, he was about to embark on the latest leg of his chair's tour. He and members of the board go out regularly and talk to accommodation providers and to visitor attraction owners and operators around the country. They have the opportunity to hear at first hand what people are saying. The feedback that is coming through the industry is increasingly very positive about VisitScotland. Its success and satisfaction ratings are incredibly high, which is a good thing. I am afraid that the Scottish Tourism Forum's view is not as jaundiced as Mr McGrigor might think. We work closely with the forum. Earlier this year, having worked on the document for some time, the forum and I launched our latest strategy to ensure that we can achieve our ambitions for tourism. A joint document was produced by the Government, the public sector and the tourism industry about the way forward for tourism in Scotland. I was interested that Alasdair Morgan wanted to talk about the section 104 order. I suppose that we would expect a nationalist to make any debate one about the constitution. The section 104 order will go ahead and will be laid shortly. Such orders make consequential amendments to United Kingdom Government acts; for example, the order will change references from "the Scottish Tourist Board" to "VisitScotland". It is a straightforward administrative action that happens from time to time. I am confident that this is the right way forward for Scottish tourism. Our industry is moving forward, working in partnership with VisitScotland, and moving towards the joint ambition to increase tourism revenues by 50 per cent by 2015. Let me repeat, because it bears repeating, that 50 per cent more overseas visitors came to Scotland last year than came in 2001. Therefore, the industry is making excellent progress towards achieving its ambition. However, it can do that only if we have a national tourism organisation with the right structures to support it. The bill ensures that  we have exactly that. It will put the seal on VisitScotland's restructuring and allow it to continue its world-class, award-winning work. I take this opportunity to thank the board, management team and staff of VisitScotland for their contribution to making Scottish tourism the success that it is today. I also thank members of the Enterprise and Culture Committee for their consideration of the bill over the past few months. I ask the Parliament to support the bill.

This is a great time for Scottish tourism. It is one of Scotland's real success stories and much of that success is down to the work of VisitScotland. Since its reorganisation, the new VisitScotland network has gone from strength to strength, which is why it is important to put the reorganised network on a proper legal footing. That is what the bill is all about. As members are probably aware, tourism is worth £4.2 billion to the Scottish economy, and the industry employs 200,000 people in 20,000 diverse businesses throughout Scotland. It supports around 9 per cent of employment in Scotland, rising to 13 per cent of employment in the Highlands. Tourism sustains many of our rural communities. Last year was a record year. Nearly 2.4 million overseas visitors came to Scotland—an increase of 50 per cent since 2001 and the highest figure ever recorded. That is a fantastic achievement by our tourism industry and by VisitScotland. Also, our overseas visitors are spending more when they are here. Last year they spent £1.2 billion, beating the previous highest amount, which was recorded in 1998. There are increasing numbers of visitors to visitor attractions, and occupancy rates are at a record 10-year high. It is clear that much of that success is down to the tourism industry, which is raising its game and has responded to the challenge that it has set itself through its ambition of achieving 50 per cent growth. The industry is working in a genuine partnership with local authorities, the enterprise networks and VisitScotland. However, some of the success is down to the Executive's investment in tourism. For example, as a result of our investment in the route development fund, 36 new direct flights to Scotland are currently operating, including 27 international routes, which have played a major role in increasing the number of overseas visitors. In the past financial year, about 1.4 million passengers were carried in and out of Scotland on our supported direct routes. Three  years ago the figure was 291,000. To achieve the massive improvement in Scotland's international connections, we have invested £4 million, which is putting in place the strategic connections that Scotland needs, and bringing significant benefits to Scotland's economy, especially our tourism economy. Our investment in VisitScotland is also paying dividends. For every £1 that VisitScotland spends on marketing in Europe, £29 is generated. For every £1 that is spent on marketing in the United States of America, £33 is generated. VisitScotland's United Kingdom marketing—not including its television and cinema campaigns—generates an incredible £34 for every £1 spent. I am sure that Parliament will agree that that is money well spent. Others think so, too, which is why VisitScotland has won more than 20 awards for its innovative marketing campaigns. and why I am investing a further £800,000 in VisitScotland this year, to allow it to do even more marketing of direct air services to Scotland. I am investing in an organisation that we know produces results—I am investing in success. The purpose of the bill is to put the new VisitScotland network on a proper legal footing and to ensure that it is fit for purpose, so that it can continue to do the excellent work that it has done to make Scotland's tourism industry the success story that it is today. Existing legislation requires that there be area tourist boards, but having different strategies for different areas simply does not work in this age of global tourism. VisitScotland has demonstrated that its network approach works. The bill will therefore repeal the requirement for area tourist boards and dissolve the two network tourist boards that were set up temporarily as part of the integration process. That means that VisitScotland can become fully integrated and operate as a single legal entity. The bill also makes provision for the transfer of staff from the network tourist boards to VisitScotland. Given the broader role that VisitScotland now has, the bill will increase its board from seven members to a maximum of 12. That will ensure that the board has knowledge, expertise and experience in all aspects of VisitScotland's work. Finally, the bill will change the organisation's legal name from the Scottish Tourist Board to VisitScotland—a change that has, for all practical purposes, already taken place. The bill gives us the opportunity to put the new name on a proper legal footing and to confirm VisitScotland as the way forward for Scottish tourism. As the minister with responsibility for international development, I am delighted that, in addition to the work that VisitScotland does to  boost Scottish tourism, VisitScotland will now contribute to our work with Malawi to help to develop a tourism implementation plan. I understand that we are joined in the gallery today by visitors from the Malawi Ministry of Tourism, National Parks and Wildlife and the Malawi Institute of Tourism. I hope very much that they find this afternoon's debate interesting and that they have a fruitful week with us in Scotland. The success of VisitScotland means that it will have a good deal of advice and experience to share. The bill is not about changing the way in which VisitScotland works; the organisation is already working well against a backdrop of increasing competition and an ever-changing international market. All the signs are that our growth will continue and I am confident that VisitScotland will continue to lead that growth. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Tourist Boards (Scotland) Bill be passed.

Twelve local authorities are to receive a share of £8 million in funding from Historic Scotland's historic environment regeneration fund to improve the state of repair and appearance of conservation areas, many of which lie within town centres. Both the public and private sectors will benefit from the partnership funding, which will support 13 area-based regeneration schemes and conservation initiatives. East Ayrshire Council has received an initial grant from the fund of £711,170 for Kilmarnock town centre.

Ms Jamieson is correct to say that funding for the former opera house project will be provided by East Ayrshire Council out of its historic environment regeneration fund grant, which has been increased by £100,000 to accommodate that particular project. The sum is now larger than the amount that it might have been possible for the opera house to attract had it been able to receive money directly from the building repair grant scheme. Although the proposals for the repair and renovation of the opera house are at a very early stage, I understand that the only part of the work that would have been eligible for the funding would have been largely used for the repair and retention of the façade. I understand that, in the event that the costs of the eligible works exceed Historic Scotland's initial estimate, the agency has already given East Ayrshire Council an undertaking to increase its conservation and regeneration grant further.

I am not sure that the basic premise of Mr McGrigor's question is accurate. However, I will say that Historic Scotland keeps its grants, and the criteria that apply to them, constantly under review. It will of course respond to any specific examples of difficulties in as sympathetic a manner as is possible within its structures.

EventScotland uses its regional events programme to support the development of cultural and sporting events throughout Scotland. It devotes £500,000 per annum for the purpose, which is disbursed through two competitive application rounds every year. Applicants such as events organisers can apply for between £2,000 and £25,000 as appropriate.

My experience of the festival indicates that it is already carrying out that role well. We wish to see such work increase and evolve as time goes on. One of the strengths of EventScotland's regional programme is that, although it does not provide core funding to events that take place around the country, it will assist with the development of projects year on year if there is a reason to fund them in successive years. I am sure that the Aberdeen international youth festival will make its case to the appropriate bodies and I look forward to seeing the outcome of that approach.

The Executive, through sportscotland, will continue to provide financial and other support to athletes and sports governing bodies to ensure that our elite athletes are able to reach the highest possible level of attainment. The Executive is also revising the current sports strategy, sport 21, to ensure a renewed focus on improving elite performance and increasing participation.

We were party to commissioning the report, because we needed to get that kind of information. It provides a snapshot of the condition of facilities at one point in time. However, we must make clear from the outset that the way forward is not to upgrade every facility that is in need of renovation. We need to decide on the right quality and mix of facilities that we need across the country to provide people with opportunities to participate in sport and to meet the needs of our elite athletes. The report highlights a number of facility issues, such as the need for robust maintenance regimes and the need to take a strategic approach to the planning, location and development of sports facilities to meet demands that change frequently and fast  because of changing demographics and sporting trends.

Absolutely. That is why we have asked schools to provide young people with two hours a week of good-quality sporting opportunity and why we are investing £12 million a year in the active schools programme, which has already delivered 86,000 hours of quality activity for young people in schools.

The Executive supports mountain biking through the annual grant aid that is awarded by sportscotland to the sport's governing body. In addition, the Forestry Commission Scotland provides support for the development of mountain biking facilities throughout its estate.

I understand Mr Purvis's concern, but I point out that Glentress has to an extent been a victim of its own success. The number of visitors enjoying the trail has grown so significantly that it has outgrown the present site and facilities. I understand that the Forestry Commission has acquired 12 additional acres of land adjacent to the existing entrance and that it intends to relocate the present facilities and to redevelop the new site into a visitor services centre that will serve all of the Tweed valley forest park. I understand that a planning application will be submitted, so it is probably not appropriate for me to comment further.

I suspect that this is one of those one-off occasions when I can unreservedly agree with Mr Ewing—although I might perhaps have chosen to phrase my support a little differently. It is good to have Mr Ewing's support for events that have been attracted to Scotland in no small measure by EventScotland, the Government agency that was set up do just that. I am delighted that he accepts that people are coming to Scotland as a result of those events. Of course, such things also need partnerships on the ground, and we now have the accolade of being one of the world's best mountain biking destinations—that is according to the cycling unions, not us. As part of that accolade, they also recognise that the Government is bike friendly. I am grateful for that, too.

In a way, Mr McGrigor is arguing against himself. The reason why the world championships are coming is the fact that the course is so severe and is one that experts want to use. It is important to take the opportunity to harness the enthusiasm that local people will no doubt build up for the event and to use it to give those people the opportunity to enjoy mountain biking. Many other matters need to be taken into consideration, not least the environmental impact on the area, so I am delighted that partners in the area are working together to work out the best strategy. If that means more routes, that is great, but that has to be balanced against other factors.

The Executive is investing £28.8 million in the national and regional facilities strategy to support the development of multisport facilities across Scotland.

The report to which Tricia Marwick refers identifies a number of issues, all of which are of great interest, and in some cases concern, to me and the Scottish Executive. The results of the report show why we commissioned it in the first place, so we will work with partners to take it forward. It is important to remind members that the initial responsibility for providing such facilities lies with local authorities. One of the interesting points that came out of the report was that not enough money had been spent on on-going maintenance of many facilities, particularly those that were built recently. That is an issue that we have been reminding local authorities about. I am well aware that Fife Council is currently deliberating on what to do with its facilities, but I am afraid that it would not be appropriate for me to offer any comment on what support could be made available to the council until the council itself has come to a decision on what it wants to do.

I am happy to confirm that there is a good working relationship between officials in Fife Council, in the Executive and, of course, in sportscotland. It is worth pointing out that, since 1995, facilities in Fife have benefited from around £6.5 million in awards made, including £500,000 for a synthetic pitch at Wade academy, £200,000 for Dalgety Bay bowling club, and £500,000 for the Pitreavie indoor athletics facility. Through the new opportunities for physical education and sport funding, Markinch primary school received more than £77,000 for a multi-use games area, and 26 projects in Mid Scotland and Fife have benefited from funding from the same fund. That includes £485,000 for synthetic pitches and floodlights at Balwearie high school and £68,000 for a multi-use games area at Kippen primary school.

Mr McGrigor may have noted from my previous response that one of the things that we are keen to do is to ensure that, where facilities are provided, they can be used for as many purposes as is sensibly possible. When we build multi-use games areas, the needs of those who wish to play shinty are, of course, taken into account. I am aware that the Sutherland cup event is taking place this weekend. In fact, I attended that fixture last year and am sorry that I will not be able to attend it this year, because I will be attending UK school sports events in Glasgow over the weekend.

I thank members for their speeches in an almost entirely positive debate, which has demonstrated that it is possible to reach a broad consensus on how Scotland should try to alleviate international poverty. I hope that no member would disagree with the fact that, as Des McNulty said, we all have an obligation to look beyond our borders and support the countries of the developing world in meeting the challenges that they face. I hope that no one would disagree that the historic values of fairness, equality and mutuality should continue to drive forward our international development policy today. The debate has focused on the huge amount that Scotland has to offer in terms of skills and knowledge. There are a number of people in the Parliament today who are now quite familiar with Malawi and with the enormous challenges that are faced by the country, which is one of the poorest in the world. I particularly value the support from members of different parties for our common goal of building a better future for Malawi. I will probably not have time to respond to all the points that have been made and I apologise to members in advance if I do not manage to do so. However, I will try to write to members about any substantive point in the debate that I do not manage to respond to now. In her opening speech, Linda Fabiani asked whether the database that the University of Edinburgh is working on is to include small agencies. I understand that the directory is intended to focus on institutions in Scotland with a specific expertise in Africa, as well as bodies and associations that aim to represent Africans in  Scotland. In the discussions that my officials and I will have with the university, we will take up that issue and find out whether there is some possibility in that regard. Murdo Fraser has had to leave us, for understandable reasons, but I put on record my thanks to him, both for his considered speech today and for his support for the work that we have been doing on fair trade. That has been worth while and Murdo Fraser has played an active part. As a member of the Co-operative Party—as are many of my colleagues—I thank Mike Pringle in particular for his reference to the Co-operative Society's early commitment to fair trade products. It has led the way and has encouraged people to realise that fair trade works and that it is not just about charity. It is important to reiterate a point that Linda Fabiani and Maureen Watt made about the Westminster Government reaching the target and fulfilling its obligation on assistance. It is important to mention that this is the first Government ever to have such a target. The fact that we have a target is a measure of the commitment that our Westminster colleagues have shown. Gordon Brown has been pivotal in that regard and he deserves a great deal of praise from us, which I am happy to give. Anyone who heard Hilary Benn speaking in the chamber last week should have no doubt about the commitment of our Westminster colleagues to ensuring that those aims are reached and the wider agenda is addressed. Mike Pringle was right to focus on the issue of maternal health. We can help a great deal there. We have an obligation to focus on that area in a country where women have a one in 25 chance of dying in childbirth. As with many other aspects of our work in Malawi, we do not want simply to train midwives; we want to train the people who train the midwives. By training the trainers, we can fan out the effect, allowing that training to trickle down into the country in a way that will not be achieved simply through training individual midwives. Karen Gillon correctly identified the partnership approach that we are trying to take to our work with Malawi. A good, early, practical example is the relationship that has been built up between Minga community day secondary school in Malawi and Sanday community school in Orkney. The relationship that was formed between those two schools was partly responsible—along with the great work of Glenys Hughes of the St Magnus festival, who has also visited and worked in Malawi for a time—for ensuring that this year's St Magnus festival had a focus on Malawi. We have heard a lot about the fact that primary education is now free in Malawi, whereas secondary education still has to be paid for. I  asked people at Minga school whether that factor inhibited children from completing their education. It does, of course, particularly if there is more than one child in the family, and girls will perhaps come off worse than boys. I asked how much a year's education at Minga school would cost and learned that it translates to approximately £21 per annum. That brings home to all of us the fact that small actions can achieve a great deal in our work in Malawi and that we can all play a part. That amount of money should not be an inhibitor to anyone's education—not when we have such resources at our disposal. As Karen Gillon rightly said, teachers and midwives are dying. That is a great problem. There is the proliferation of AIDS and the average life expectancy is only 35. We are therefore concentrating on programmes for training the trainers, to help the numbers to reach a critical mass. I say to Maureen Watt that the President of Malawi is dedicated to wiping out corruption. He has made that a keystone of his Administration. However, to be frank, the existence of corruption is not a reason for us to do nothing. Alex Johnstone was right to say that the corruption that Maureen described in Malawi is not about people getting rich quick but about people being able to find the next meal for their family. The choices are that stark. We are talking about people who are often surviving on the equivalent of 6p a day. For them, the opportunity to get some other money will always be a huge temptation. I congratulate Des McNulty on a particularly thoughtful speech but also on the leadership that he has shown in the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on international development. He is right to emphasise the responsibility that we all share. I hope that our approach to our relationship with Malawi—which is about partnership not about the building of a large hospital or school that the people cannot then populate or use—will ensure that we can build capacity at an early stage. Irene Oldfather mentioned the Malawian High Commissioner; I too had the pleasure of meeting the High Commissioner. I congratulate the schools in Irene's constituency on the good work that they have done. I want to mention one thing that the High Commissioner told me when he was here on Monday. A key thing that his President asked him to do while in Great Britain was to make the co-operation agreement with Scotland a priority. We welcome the fact that the High Commissioner and the consul are committed to the work that we are doing.  Robin Harper mentioned Currie high school and Inverkeithing high school, which should be congratulated. Robin's comment about Malawi learning from our mistakes was very interesting. I had a similar conversation with one of my counterparts in Malawi. We were talking about trade and the conversation drifted on to the subject of packaging. I suggested to him that one thing that Malawi must not do is replicate the mistakes that we have made in that and in many other areas. Stewart Stevenson gave us an interesting family history of his connections with Malawi—I have to say that it came as no surprise to many of us. Stewart's story was similar to that of many people in Scotland, which is one reason why our partnership with Malawi is so important. Links go back a long way, as can be seen in the missionary graves of 150 years ago. People as young as 24 died while trying to help Malawi. I say to Stewart Stevenson that the Malawian finance minister, in a recent report to Parliament when he was presenting his budget, said that he hopes that Malawi will be able to have its debt cancelled very soon. He believes that the country is very much on track towards meeting the criteria. Christine May mentioned schools in her constituency. I know that Pitteuchar East primary school has issued me with an invitation, and I would very much like to go—not least to talk to the teacher who has spent time in Malawi. At lunch time, I had the pleasure of briefly meeting Karen Gillon's constituent who is in the public gallery for the debate. I heard about her experiences in Malawi. I have now visited Malawi myself and feel that I understand the country a little better, but it is always good to hear from people who have spent a considerable amount of time working in the country. Their experience is particularly valuable. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton asked for reassurance on how money that the Executive has given to projects is being used. He is right. Our approach is to give it to organisations that work on the ground. Although we work with the Government in support of its objectives and priorities, money goes directly to projects. It is important that we do not forget the challenges that we still face. The wave of public support for the make poverty history campaign brought those challenges right to the top of the political agenda and sent a stark message to the world leaders who met at Gleneagles. A year on, we need to keep up the fight and, as representatives of the Scottish people, we have a duty to respond to the demands that have been made and to keep the issues of aid, trade and debt on the agenda.  I am delighted to have had the opportunity to speak to the Parliament and to provide an update on the Executive's international development policy and, in particular, the progress of our work with Malawi. I am rightly proud—as I am sure we all are—of the tremendous contribution that Scottish organisations and individuals make in that area. Our commitment to Malawi is long term. My visit to Malawi and today's debate have reinforced my view that our approach and the priorities that we have set are the right ones. Through our unique relationship with Malawi and our wider international development policy, we will continue to encourage Scots to learn more about global issues and to act where they see injustice.

Nearly a year ago, a quarter of a million people from all over the world and from all backgrounds came to Scotland and marched through the streets of Edinburgh. They sent to the world leaders who were gathering for the G8 summit at Gleneagles a clear message that we should make poverty history. It is no longer acceptable that half the world goes hungry while the other half prospers. It was that same generosity of spirit and good will that prompted thousands of Scots to respond so generously to the Asian tsunami and to the terrible tragedies since—the continuing food crises in sub-Saharan Africa and the earthquakes in Kashmir and Indonesia. It is because we, as Scots, understand our obligations as a prosperous nation that we have an international development policy. Frankly, we cannot afford not to have one. We are not a traditional aid donor. International aid is the responsibility of the Department for International Development at the United Kingdom level, and that is a responsibility that we fully support. However, what Scotland has to offer is unique, and nowhere is that better expressed than in our relationship with Malawi. In the late 19 th century, ordinary Scots—men and women—travelled to that small country, which is nestled in the south-east of Africa. They went out of a sense of obligation to their fellow human beings. They went to spread their gospel, but also to share their expertise in health and education, in running public services and in developing businesses. They went to help to build a better country. One hundred and fifty years on, the same Scottish values of fairness, equality and mutuality drive our relationship with the people of Malawi. We are two small countries that share a common past and a desire for a better future. I want to talk about progress in our work with Malawi since the signing of the historic co-operation agreement between our two countries last November, but first I will reflect on the year since the make poverty history march and G8 Scotland, on the achievements of that summit and  on how a national effort in Scotland is contributing to making poverty history. The decisions that were taken last year at G8 Scotland are already making a difference, with a £28.8 billion increase in global aid by 2010; an increase in aid to Africa by $25 billion a year by 2010, which will double that aid over six years; full debt cancellation for the world's poorest 18 countries; universal access to anti-HIV drugs in Africa by 2010; and reform of international trade rules. However, as the Prime Minister has said, that is a long-term agenda. Many of the Gleneagles commitments relate to future years and western Governments must maintain their efforts. That is why we welcome the recently announced Africa progress panel, which will track the promises that were made in Perthshire last year, just as we will keep to our commitments to work with developing countries, as set out in our international development policy. The primary funding distribution mechanism for our policy is the international development fund. In the first round of awards, almost £5 million was provided over three years to benefit 34 projects. We provided £250,000 last year to projects that fell below the international development fund threshold, because we recognise that although small-scale projects are tightly focused, they can deliver benefits for very little money. We are reviewing the arrangements for this year after consulting key stakeholders and we expect to announce the next round for the fund in August. We are actively supporting Scottish volunteers and have developed a new small grant scheme for people who work in the health sector, which was launched in November 2005. The humanitarian health fund provides essential travel and subsistence for Scots and will enable more health care professionals to undertake vital humanitarian work in some of the world's poorest countries—in Malawi and more widely. We have completed one round of that fund—allocations were made in May this year—and we look forward to undertaking more rounds in the near future. In addition, and in line with the aim in our international development policy of capacity building in the Scottish non-governmental organisation sector, we have provided core funding to the Network of International Development Organisations in Scotland and the International Development Education Association of Scotland to allow them to provide a stronger voice for their members. However, developing countries do not want to depend on aid. In the long term, it is trade that will help those Malawians who live on 15 kwacha a day—about 6p—to escape grinding poverty.  However, that must be fair trade. Let us be clear that fair trade is not about charity; it is something for which we in the west have fought: a way to ensure that workers receive fair pay, fair prices and decent working conditions. Members who visited Malawi in February saw for themselves the benefits that fair trade has brought to the sugar producers in the village of Kasinthula, which now has the best schools and clinics in the area, built using the fair trade premium. Last March, the First Minister expressed his wish that Scotland should become one of the world's fair trade nations. The group on fair trade, which I chair, has considered the best way to achieve that, and I am pleased to say that we hope to make an announcement very soon. One thing that has struck me most in the past year is ordinary Scots' desire to make a difference. Through the international development fund process, I have been made aware of the number of Scottish organisations—large and small—that are active in international development in countries throughout our key geographic areas. I welcome and applaud that work. At this point, I want to turn to our work with Malawi. As members know, I have just returned from my first official visit to the country, and I was struck by the extreme contrasts that I found. Malawi is beautiful; however, amid all the wonderful scenery lies the most extreme poverty. There is a great deal of cheerfulness and optimism, despite the fact that one child in seven dies before his or her fifth birthday; and there is a national desire for good governance and economic progress, even though the country has known multiparty democracy only since 1994. Since the co-operation agreement between our two countries was signed, good progress has been made. Indeed, I was able to see some of that progress on my visit. For example, I saw for myself the great work that is being done by Scottish International Relief's Mary's meals programme, which, as a result of our funding, is now able to feed 80,000 children a year. Although many projects that we support are still in the early stages of development, it is clear that progress is already being made on the ground. However, there is much to be done and we are clear about the need to focus our efforts. As a result, we have been working with our Malawian counterparts to develop more detailed action plans to underpin the commitments in the co-operation agreement. For instance, we are, along with DFID, working closely with the Ministry of Health to support its sector-wide approach, offering practical advice and support and brokering partnerships between  Scottish institutions and their Malawian counterparts. Our approach is focusing support on maternal health and HIV/AIDS, given the grave difficulties in those areas, and within it, we are helping to build capacity and exchange skills. As far as governance is concerned, we are developing a programme of partnerships between media agencies in both Scotland and Malawi to strengthen the media, recognising its role as a core part of building good governance. For example, the BBC and STV are working with national radio and television stations in Malawi to develop public information programming and training packages and are providing them with essential hardware. Moreover, Napier University is working with the University of Malawi to develop its journalism courses. Our ombudsmen and ombudswomen are working together on a programme of collaboration and are, for example, considering different approaches to ensuring access to services for people in rural areas. In addition, a lawyer from the Ministry of Justice is working with the office of the Scottish parliamentary counsel to share experiences of developing and drafting legislation. We also recognise the importance of economic development. After all, like any country, Malawi needs a strong and stable economy if it is to flourish. As a result, we are sharing expertise with our Malawian counterparts on how best to realise the full potential of tourism. Through the international development fund, we are supporting a number of projects that address the Malawian Ministry of Education's priorities, particularly with regard to gender equality and attainment. We are also working with the increasing number of schools in Scotland that are developing partnerships with schools in Malawi, ensuring that young people in both countries not only grow up with a much deeper awareness and understanding of one another but celebrate that spirit of friendship. Of course, we can share our common human experience in many other areas, including those in my own portfolio of sports, the arts and culture. Earlier this month, I went to the St Magnus festival in Orkney where I was entranced by the Limbe church choir from Malawi, whose visit we supported. Indeed, I know that MSPs greatly enjoyed the choir's performance in the Parliament. While I was in Orkney, I also had the great pleasure of meeting the distinguished Malawian poet Jack Mapanje and of hearing his experiences as a prisoner and poet. I hope that others will build on that type of exchange and that Scotland's other festivals will establish links with Malawi to allow us to learn more about each other's cultures.  Last month, on my visit to Malawi, I visited the graves of some of the early Scottish missionaries and their families. They sacrificed their lives for Malawi and their deaths brought home to me, in the starkest possible way, the depth of the friendship and the bond between our two countries. Just as Dr David Livingstone and others made a lifetime commitment to the country, we must be clear that we are in this relationship for the long term. Our renewed friendship with Malawi is not something that we will commit to for a few years and then abandon. This partnership has already lasted 150 years and will prosper for many more. I believe that, together, we can build a better future.

I listened with great interest to the debate and I genuinely thank my parliamentary colleagues for their speeches. I am particularly heartened that, like me, they believe that tourism is everybody's business. It is good to hear that, on the whole, Parliament agrees that Scotland and VisitScotland are making good progress. I thank the Enterprise and Culture Committee for its consideration of the bill and I am pleased that it supported the general principles. However, it is clear that the committee and members who are present require reassurance on several issues. I will attempt to answer as many queries as I can; if I do not manage them all, I will write to the members concerned after the debate. In opening for the Scottish National Party, Brian Adam made several points to which I should respond. Through interventions, too, he pursued a theme about marketing having been separated out. We have debated that already; that is how we reached where we are. We have worked hard to develop a single brand for Scotland, which it is important to have, for the reasons that Kenny MacAskill outlined. It is fair to say that the campaigns on the single brand are giving a very strong return on investment. For example, the return on investment for the welcome to our life  campaign was £23 for every £1 that was spent. That approach has worked well.

I will not give way as I have a lot to get through. Brian Adam asked whether Westminster was content with our changing legislation. We are discussing with Whitehall an order under section 104 of the Scotland Act 1998, but the United Kingdom Government has agreed in principle that we should proceed in that way. Brian Adam talked about the power to promote Scotland overseas. VisitScotland promotes Scotland to developed markets. In new and developing markets, it works closely with VisitBritain. Much progress has been made on that. Jamie McGrigor talked about the shabby treatment of members of the previous area tourist boards. VisitScotland and I have acknowledged the work that was done. If things are as bad as Mr McGrigor thinks, I am surprised that none of the people or organisations to which he referred chose to give evidence on the bill to the Enterprise and Culture Committee. The name "VisitScotland" is an example of an industry standard of using the word "visit" and the name of a country, so we are bringing our system and our enterprise up to date. I know that visitscotland.com receives much criticism on many matters, but a significant number of tourists nowadays choose to book online when arranging to visit a country. Through visitscotland.com, £45 million of business has been arranged for accommodation providers, which shows that the website is at least heading in the right direction. I accept that not everything in the visitscotland.com garden is rosy, but it has moved on significantly and will continue to do so.

When I make comments in the chamber, I sometimes wonder whether I should repeat them there and then. In response to an intervention by Mr Stone, I spoke about the review of tourist information centres that VisitScotland undertook. I understand that that is complete and that VisitScotland is to produce its plans. I cannot give a cast-iron guarantee—nor should I—that every information centre in the country will be kept open, because some are in the wrong places or operate in the wrong ways. Such matters must be reviewed over time. The centres have an important role to play, on which  we can improve. They are a valuable part of the network. Alex Neil said that the committee's various reports were excellent recess reading and I agree. He was correct to say that the board and the management of VisitScotland do a good job. However, I take issue a little with him and with Gordon Jackson about the initiatives that they saw in California, because we now have a model that is the envy of many parts of the world, which are considering copying the VisitScotland integrated structure and which are asking VisitScotland how that was achieved. Of course, we are always open to new ideas and we know that we must continue to innovate. Gordon Jackson was right to say that the debate is not just about the structure, but about the culture of the organisation and of tourism in Scotland and about the value that we—and everyone outside the chamber—collectively place on tourism. He said that it is important for the sector to be involved. The fact that the 50 per cent target that Alex Neil and Christine Grahame mentioned is an industry target that we in the Government support shows the buy-in from the industry. Chris Ballance and Alex Fergusson spoke about the problems that ADGAP perceives that it has in Dumfries and Galloway. I hope that Chris Ballance is correct that working methods have changed and that there have been positive developments between VisitScotland and ADGAP. However, we need to be clear that ADGAP is not just an association of accommodation providers; it provides a rival website and booking service and is a commercial organisation that competes with visitscotland.com. I understand that ADGAP's application to the area tourism partnership was rejected not by VisitScotland, but by the entire partnership unanimously, as Alex Fergusson said. It is worth putting that on record and into context, but I am perfectly happy to look into that further if that would help. Christine Grahame made the valid point that many visitors to the Borders come from England. That is why the UK domestic market is important. We know that 45 per cent of English people have never been to Scotland, so we have a big untapped market on our doorstep. If we could get them to deviate into Dumfries and Galloway, that would be all the better. Of course, it would be entirely possible for us to do that. I am sure that other members will put in bids for places those people should visit. Charlie Gordon was right to emphasise the importance of the Glasgow City Marketing Bureau, and I know that the Edinburgh bureau is having a similar benefit. However, we should acknowledge that the City of Edinburgh Council and Glasgow  City Council not only have worked well in partnership with VisitScotland but have made substantial investment, because they understand the importance of tourism to their areas and want their strategies to be successful. Several members, particularly Jim Wallace, rightly raised the issue of skills and the importance of making careers in the tourism industry viable and attractive to people. That is an important part of our work and the issue certainly poses a constant challenge, but the influx of people from other parts of the world is helping significantly to push up the standards of the indigenous workforce. For example, three weeks ago, I launched a project at Dunfermline high school to encourage young people in schools to learn online about training opportunities in the hospitality, catering and tourism sectors. Moreover, Sector Skills Alliance Scotland has launched a DVD that highlights the workplace training at the St Andrews Bay hotel as an example of good practice. The hotel has won awards for its training and stands as a good example of how the tourism industry can get things right. Presiding Officer, I am not sure whether I am running out of time.

Thank you. I can now wax lyrical about tourism, which, along with sport and culture, is one of my favourite subjects. In my intervention on Mr Gallie, I mentioned the regional events strategy. The fact that that is an important aspect of the work of EventScotland—which, of course, is an adjunct of VisitScotland—shows the synergy of tourism, culture and sport. We cannot underestimate the value of sporting and cultural tourism to our country.

As Mr Stone is sitting next to me and I am aware of his interest in the subject, I was just about to mention the importance of food to tourism. In that respect, I am pleased to support the EatScotland scheme, which I think has a great deal of merit. The wonderful thing about it is that it concentrates not only on five-star restaurants, but on the good practice in small local tearooms and fish and chip shops and recognises the value of and the international interest in good, fresh Scottish produce. I hope that Parliament has been reassured that the Tourist Boards (Scotland) Bill is doing the right  things. The industry has set itself the ambitious and important target of growing tourism revenues by 50 per cent by 2015. However, I draw the attention of members—particularly those who might be spending some time in Scotland during the summer recess—to our green tourism business scheme. We have to take care of the country that everyone we know wants to visit and maintain the scenery and wildlife that members have referred to. The green tourism business scheme is a way of meeting that aim and I ask members who are holidaying in Scotland this summer to look out for providers who are members of that scheme. There are many, and their work is of very high quality. The bill will put the VisitScotland integrated tourism network on a proper legal footing and allow it to continue its world-class work towards achieving our ambition of making Scotland one of the world's foremost tourist destinations by 2015. I urge the chamber, including Mr Fergusson and his colleagues, to support it.

Does Mr Gallie recognise that local businesses are assisted not just by our commitment to tourism per se but by our commitment to a number of other strategies? For example, our international and regional events strategy encourages local events to go into local tourism areas so that the local market can benefit. We have the views, concerns and viability of local businesses at heart.

I know that the member has returned to this theme on a number of occasions. Mr Purvis and Christine Grahame made a valid point about the role that can be played locally. Perhaps Mr Fergusson could provide some leadership locally and encourage things to happen in his area. He would do VisitScotland and local businesses a great service if he did.

I agree entirely with Mr Stone that that incident was not only regrettable, but reprehensible and should not have happened. I was pleased with VisitScotland's reaction and correction of the mistake. To make a point that is pertinent to the line of debate that Mr Stone is following, one of the saddest aspects of the incident with the map is that it overshadowed and detracted from VisitScotland's opening of an  information centre at Edinburgh airport, which is an excellent centre that will give visitors an opportunity to find out as much as they can about the country.

Does Mr McGrigor accept that VisitScotland has not just local offices, but local partnerships with businesses, local authorities and other interested stakeholders in the area to develop that very expertise and allow things to be done in a new way?

Good morning, Presiding Officer. Just over two years ago, the promotion and development of Scottish tourism was carried out by 15 organisations: the Scottish Tourist Board and 14 area tourist boards. In March 2004, following a period of widespread consultation, the then Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport announced that that structure was no longer working well for Scotland and that we needed an integrated tourism network that would work across the whole country. Just over a year later, on 1 April 2005, those 15 organisations—including their staff, resources, systems, commitments and liabilities—were merged into one integrated organisation. Today, a further year on, VisitScotland's integrated tourism network is going from strength to strength. The purpose of the bill is to put the new organisational structure on a proper legal footing. The Local Government etc (Scotland) Act 1994 requires that there must be area tourist boards. Therefore, in 2004, secondary legislation was used as an interim measure to create two area tourist boards—know as network tourist boards—into which the 14 area tourist boards could be merged. The network tourist boards are under the control of VisitScotland. The Tourist Boards (Scotland) Bill will repeal the 1994 act's requirement for area tourist boards and dissolve the two network tourist boards. It will mean that VisitScotland can become fully integrated and operate as a single legal entity. The bill also provides for the transfer of staff from the network tourist boards to VisitScotland. As VisitScotland now has a broader role, the bill also provides for a larger VisitScotland board. The board's maximum size, which is set out in the Development of Tourism Act 1969, is currently set  at seven. The bill will amend the 1969 act to allow the board to be increased to a maximum of 12.

Actually, the reason is that we want to observe the guidance on the public appointments process. It dictates that board members should, in most circumstances, be appointed on the basis of their skills, talents and expertise rather than because they represent a particular set of people or a particular organisation. Exceptions can be made, but only in very extreme circumstances. For example, if being an advocate is a requirement for a particular role, it might make sense to reserve a seat for a member of the Faculty of Advocates. However, in this circumstance, it is not necessary to do that. If it is recognised, as it currently is, that VisitScotland needs local authority expertise, the appointments round will recognise that and ensure that someone with that expertise is appointed to the board. The existing board already has a representative of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities who is a local authority councillor. I believe that the current mechanism has served us well and will continue to do so, while allowing us to observe the recommendations on the public appointments process. In the short term, it is likely that we will increase the board's size by two members, to a total of nine. However, allowing for a maximum of 12 members provides the flexibility to increase the board at a later stage, if that seems appropriate, without reverting to primary legislation. The bill will change the organisation's legal name from "the Scottish Tourist Board" to "VisitScotland". Although the organisation has been known as VisitScotland for some time now and it could continue to use that as its trading name while continuing legally to be called the Scottish Tourist Board, the Scottish Tourist Board name belongs in the past and the bill provides a good opportunity to change it. The VisitScotland name emphasises the way forward for tourism in Scotland. The brand is already established and it is easily recognised and trusted by visitors and businesses alike.

I was not implying that there was anything intrinsically bad about the Scottish Tourist Board or its name; I was simply reflecting on the fact that changes happen and that styles and current usages change too. The change of name very much reflects that. However, it is important to recognise that VisitScotland is in the process of obtaining the trademark "Scottish Tourist Board" to ensure that the name cannot be used by anyone else. The bill consolidates the integration process that has already taken place and puts the integrated network on a proper legal footing. It does not change how the integrated tourism network works. The integrated network is working well and I am confident that it will continue to bring benefits to Scottish tourism. The tourism industry did not feel the need to give evidence on the bill to the Enterprise and Culture Committee. That is testament to the success of the integrated network so far and to the relationships that VisitScotland has built up with tourism businesses and other partners and stakeholders. Indeed, VisitScotland's recent stakeholder survey shows that 95 per cent of stakeholders agree that the work of VisitScotland makes a positive impact on Scotland's economic development. The majority of stakeholders associated VisitScotland with being excellent, efficient, inspiring and innovative. The proportion of stakeholders who now see VisitScotland as dynamic and highly reputable has increased since 2005.

That is absolutely fair. One of the good things about the way in which the integration has been taken forward is that VisitScotland has not thrown the baby out with the bath water; it has learned from the experiences of the Scottish Tourist Board and the area tourist boards and taken the very best of what they had to offer. A lot of good had been happening, but VisitScotland has taken it forward into a new century and, frankly, into a new and much more competitive tourism world. Although VisitScotland is no longer a membership organisation, businesses continue to have access to the full range of services that were previously available through the area tourist boards, but more flexibility is now offered in the products that businesses can select. As a result,  many businesses have seen cost reductions for equivalent service. Local areas are also now able to benefit more than ever before from VisitScotland's world class marketing campaigns, which promote Scotland as a national dish with local flavours. Seventeen area tourism partnerships have been set up across Scotland to involve tourism businesses, VisitScotland, all 32 local authorities and other public sector interests. The excellent relationship between VisitScotland and local authorities has been strengthened by the creation of the VisitScotland chairs committee. Its membership is drawn from the local authority community. The annual national tourism convention also brings VisitScotland and COSLA together to discuss joint strategy. In addition, as I mentioned in response to Mr Adam's question, the COSLA spokesperson for economic development and planning is on the VisitScotland board. I believe that the VisitScotland integrated tourism network is going from strength to strength and bringing benefits across the whole of Scotland. This is the right time to put that new network on a proper legal footing.

VisitScotland has been conducting a review of tourist information centres. One of the review's recommendations is likely to be that there should be co-ordination. It is not necessary for the information centres to be stand-alone entities. They could be part of their local community in a much more meaningful way, perhaps by being associated with a local town hall or another civic amenity. In that way, they might attract even more people to use their services. The Enterprise and Culture Committee has asked me for reassurance on a number of issues. The committee refers to the apparently differing views that have been expressed by the Executive and VisitScotland on a number of issues and asks for reassurance that those views have been reconciled. I am pleased to say that the Executive and VisitScotland have been co-operating closely on the issues. In relation to VAT and pensions, the figures that were provided by VisitScotland were very much worst-case scenarios. My officials are working with VisitScotland on a number of different options, and we are all confident that far less costly solutions will be found in both cases. We agree with VisitScotland that local authorities continued to fund VisitScotland last  year at the same level as in the previous year. Any confusion around the figures was due to a change in the way in which funding was allocated for business tourism in Edinburgh and Glasgow and to project funding coming to an end. The committee also asked for reassurance that the reserves that were held by the former area tourist boards will be ring fenced for use in the areas in which they were accrued. I am happy to give that reassurance, as I have done in the chamber before. I confirm that the final figure for the transitional costs associated with the planning and development of the VisitScotland network stands at £7.4 million, which has been paid to VisitScotland. No more funding will be provided for that purpose. Should any further costs emerge, they will be minimal and will be absorbed by VisitScotland's budget. I am pleased also to confirm that VisitScotland's business plan shows a balanced budget this year, one year ahead of schedule. Members will recall that the integrated network took on a large operating deficit from the area tourist boards, but efficiency savings mean that the deficit has now been cleared. Efficiency savings have been made already, in VisitScotland's first year of operation, demonstrating its commitment to making the best use of public funds. I believe that it is time to put the organisation on a proper legal footing. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Tourist Boards (Scotland) Bill.

As I announced to Parliament in January, we are preparing legislation to promote planning for cultural provision across the local authority sector. Together with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, we have also established a working group that includes local authority bodies and cultural agencies. The group will consider the best ways for local cultural entitlements to be delivered, including, importantly, their delivery to young people.

Already, under proposals and projects that we are funding through the Scottish Arts Council, a number of initiatives allow young people to do that. The youth music initiative has an important traditional music role. It has been particularly important in the Highland Council area, where the Fèisean nan Gàidheal movement has been very much involved in delivering quality experiences of traditional music to young people. The traditional musicians in schools scheme has also given children all over Scotland the chance to join in with performances from some of Fèis Rois's best tutors. I understand that, in 2005 alone, its musicians delivered a staggering 210 traditional music workshops to more than 9,000 children. Projects and organisations such as those could play a key role in delivering our agenda for entitlements.

There is already a statutory duty on local authorities to provide adequate provision for such matters in their area. We believe that these matters can best be dealt with by local authorities working with local community groups through cultural planning and the community planning process. We will not make the entitlements a statutory requirement for local government; we will instead issue authorities with what we believe and hope will be helpful guidelines and examples of projects that they may wish to pursue.

The First Minister and I are on record as saying that the Executive will support proposals for a 50-metre swimming pool in Aberdeen. However, until sportscotland, as the national body for sport development, receives a formal costed proposal, we cannot be specific about the level or timing of financial support.

In the past, the Executive has applied a clear formula to such facilities. Unfortunately, the facility to which the pool is intended to be an adjunct still has a £2 million funding gap, which Aberdeen City Council is trying to plug. Mr Rumbles said that the pool could cost between £12 million and £20 million. That is a considerable range. In such a context, and given the range of options that are on the table, it would not be sensible for the Executive or any other body to agree to provide match funding. However, we are committed to working with the council and its partners at the University of Aberdeen, which is also involved in the project, to try to make progress as quickly as we can.

Local authorities know the benefits that a strong tourism industry brings to their areas. I understand that the council in East Dunbartonshire does not have a partnership agreement with VisitScotland this year, although it contributed funding last year to strengthen local tourism and it is working with VisitScotland on a tourism action plan for the area.

That is for East Dunbartonshire Council to consider when it addresses its priorities. I am well aware of the promotional opportunities that exist in that area. In addition to visiting the west Highland way last year, on Tuesday I visited Bearsden to launch the bid for world heritage status for the Antonine wall. That is another great opportunity for that area to be marketed. Regardless of whether the local authority is willing to provide finance to VisitScotland, VisitScotland will continue to market the area as it has been doing. I understand that the west Highland way is included in several of the guides that it produces on where to stay in Scotland.

Events such as T in the park make a strong contribution to Scotland's economy by not only boosting tourism revenues but helping to promote the appeal of this country to younger visitors at home and abroad. The sustained commercial success of T in the park is especially encouraging for its future.

Such decisions have to be taken on balance. The right of access is warmly welcomed throughout Scotland by visitors and  Scots. I appreciate the importance of an event such as T in the park but, as long as it is commercially successful—which it certainly is, as Mr Fraser has indicated—its success is assured. I am particularly looking forward to visiting the event in July. Perhaps I can pursue those issues more seriously on the ground.

It is important to say that T in the park and other such events are vital not only because of the revenue that they generate but because of how they allow Scotland to be portrayed. On that basis alone, they are valuable to us. As Pauline McNeill rightly says, the music industry is of great value to the UK and Scotland. The cross-party group on the Scottish contemporary music industry has developed a music strategy, which I was extremely interested to read, but I cannot personally commit to implementing it, as most of the issues that it raises are matters for my colleague the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning. However, I know that he takes the issue seriously and I am sure that the cross-party group will be able to raise it at a forthcoming meeting that I understand he will attend.

I congratulate Mr Crawford on his foresight in backing T in the park in those early days and I hope that he has many more such inspirational moments. Some of my colleagues in the Labour Party might dispute his chronology, but never mind. It is important to point out that our economy benefits from the right of access that we now have. Many walkers come to Scotland and, this year, VisitScotland has produced a special walking guide to encourage them to do so. Access to Balado is not in my portfolio, but if Bruce Crawford and Murdo Fraser are particularly concerned about it they might like to write to the Minister for Communities, who has responsibility for planning. I am sure that he will discuss the matter with Bruce Crawford in more detail.

I congratulate Ted Brocklebank on securing the debate this evening. I also congratulate members on their contributions. Today has been a very interesting day for me, with some wonderful coincidences occurring. This morning, I had the pleasure of taking part in the opening of the new Scottish Storytelling Centre on the High Street, which is a wonderful example of innovative, modern architectural design that complements the older buildings in its setting. This afternoon, I took part in the debate on architecture and I am now taking part in a debate on the possibility of St Andrews being inscribed as a world heritage site. This evening, I will address the delegates to a conference of world heritage site leaders at Edinburgh Castle. Today is a rather strange but wonderful day for me. I agree with many of the statements that have been made in the debate about the historic and cultural importance of St Andrews and about its attractiveness as a city. It could be argued that St Andrews is the most important of the smaller historic burghs, having been the centre of the pre-reformation church in Scotland and, as a consequence, the setting of our first university. The town is said to be the resting place of some relics of St Andrew, which caused it to become a centre of pilgrimage and led to the adoption of St Andrew as Scotland's patron saint. As members said, St Andrews is universally known as the home of golf. It also enjoys an enviable landscape and coastal setting that, notwithstanding significant expansion in the 19 th century and, in particular, the 20 th century, remains an identifiably medieval university town in scale. The combination of those factors together with the survival of the medieval town plan and the significant intact and ruinous remains contributes to the town's national and international importance. The remains of the cathedral and associated Augustinian priory together with a substantial part of the wider precinct and a number of outlying buildings are in the care of Historic Scotland on behalf of Scottish ministers, as is St Andrews Castle. St Andrews would seem to have a good case for world heritage status.  However, a number of other sites across Scotland are considering whether world heritage listing is possible and a few of those are working actively towards nomination for inclusion on the UK tentative list. Although I have no problem in giving support in principle to the idea that the community in St Andrews should work towards consideration of such a status, it would be unfair to the other sites if the Executive were actively to support one site over any other at this point. It is also important for us to consider the implications of world heritage status inscription. The granting of world heritage site means that a site is recognised as being of universal significance and international value. It is a great honour, which brings many benefits but also great responsibility. Because world heritage status recognises the highest importance of sites at an international level, the criteria that any site has to demonstrate are stringent. In addition, comparisons have to be made internationally with other similar sites across the world. The tests are not easy to meet. Those tough requirements mean that a great deal of preparation needs to be done before a site can be considered for inclusion on the UK tentative list, never mind put forward to the world heritage committee for consideration for inscription. The work to secure the support of all stakeholders and to prepare the required nomination documents and management plan is not inconsiderable—I understand that Ted Brocklebank understands that. Should a nomination be successful, the accolade brings many obligations to protect and manage the site to ensure the long-term future of the important qualities that have been recognised. It is important that that is considered as we move forward. Those who are involved in the site's management and those who own it have a responsibility to protect and enhance it so that it can continue to be appreciated by all, as befits a site that, in effect, belongs to the international community. That is not always easy, and world heritage cities throughout the UK and in other countries are constantly challenged by development proposals that may not sit comfortably with world heritage listing. Although the care of Scotland's historic environment is a devolved issue, the nomination of bodies for inscription to the world heritage committee is reserved to the Department of Culture, Media and Sport as state party for the whole of the United Kingdom. However, as members know, the Scottish ministers, advised by Historic Scotland, propose Scottish sites for inclusion on the tentative list. As Iain Smith identified, there is a commitment to review that list over the next few years. We, along with the other  devolved Administrations, will be part of the review and will be able to influence it. The terms of the review have not yet been agreed, and it would be wrong for me to comment on the relative merits of possible sites before all interested parties have had a chance to make their case as part of the review process. It should be remembered that, even if a site is included on the tentative list, world heritage status is by no means guaranteed. Only one site from the UK is considered per year and the final decision is made by the world heritage committee, which is keen to ensure that the nominated sites are from underrepresented areas and types. Iain Smith was also right to make that point. I am very proud of our four world heritage sites—I am sure that we all are—and hopeful that, in due course, further ones will be added to the list. I welcome the support that the Parliament has shown for the recognition and continued protection of the historic environment in Scotland. I do not want to put too much of a damper on proceedings, but it is only fair to point out the many hurdles and pitfalls that there may be along the way. I acknowledge the work that has been done so far and look forward to further discussions in the years ahead—to be frank, I think that it will be years—with Ted Brocklebank and others who have an interest in the project. I wish them well with the work that they are undertaking.  Meeting closed at 17:38.

Today has provided me with my first opportunity to enter into a full debate on architecture and to discuss the challenges for our policy. As we have heard today, the quality of our architecture affects a wide range of interests. It impacts on issues of sustainability, heritage, culture, education, health, procurement and local government, and that is far from being an exhaustive list. The built environment affects almost every aspect of our existence and architecture has a great power to improve our experience of both work and leisure. It is the responsibility of Government to strive to ensure that the benefits of a well-designed and pleasing built environment are shared throughout society. Buildings and the places that they create  are instrumental in realising the Government's social objective of a fair, democratic and inclusive society. As we have discussed, a concern for the design of individual buildings is not enough. It is vital to support the creation and regeneration of neighbourhoods and communities. In the time that I have, I am not sure that I will be able to respond to all the points that have been made, but I will try. I begin with Michael Matheson, whom I thank for his speech. I share his concern that the public are perhaps not as inspired by architecture and design issues as they should be. Linda Fabiani also made that point. I point them to the work of the Lighthouse on our behalf to address that issue, particularly with schoolchildren. If it does anything, good architecture raises the bar and encourages debate. We may not all agree about the status, beauty or aesthetics of a building, but we can have the debate and use the lessons that result from it. If we cannot raise the debate and speak about architecture, how can we expect others to do so? This afternoon's debate has been encouraging. I share Michael Matheson's interest in our heritage and our built environment. That is why I was so keen to have the debate on the Scottish historic environment policy documents last month—speaking of which, I wondered whether Jamie McGrigor was responding to that debate today. I lived for many of my—shall we say—more youthful years on the 21 st floor of multistorey flats and I say to him that the joy of throwing pieces—jeelie or any other kind—from any window is somewhat overrated. To be serious, I point out to Jamie McGrigor that an interesting fact about the Gorbals project is that it was an award-winning architectural project. Frank McAveety's explanation of what happened in the Gorbals was correct. What is wonderful is that the Gorbals has now regenerated itself. From what I have seen of it, I think that it will be a place in which people will want to live and will enjoy living. I was interested in Robin Harper's amendment and speech, and I have much sympathy with many of the points that he made. I hope that he accepts that I am committed—as is the Executive—to sustainability and to considering how we green our policies. I point out that we regulate not through our architectural policy but through the Scottish Building Standards Agency, which is responsible for setting standards. A key priority of the agency's three-year corporate plan is to fulfil our partnership agreement commitment to "strengthen building standards to ensure that energy conservation levels improve to high and effective levels and consult on ways to ensure that new homes and public  buildings increasingly incorporate solar power or other renewable energy sources." As I am sure Robin Harper is aware, the agency's consultation on energy has just closed. The resulting document, which will be published next May, will give Scotland standards and requirements that are far more onerous than those anywhere else in the UK. I hope that he realises that that is how we will progress the agenda.

I have quite a lot to go through. I will respond to Chris Ballance's speech, too. Donald Gorrie is right about community involvement. I hope that he acknowledges that the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill recognises the need for community involvement. Initial work is under way on a planning advice note on how best to develop community engagement. Marilyn Livingstone made several interesting points. She and Christine Grahame shared the idea that not only houses but factories and other industrial buildings matter. I was taken by Marilyn Livingstone's point about the failure to encourage older trades to be practised, which means that we might be losing skill bases. However, Historic Scotland is doing much work on that. It has worked with the Scottish Lime Centre Trust to ensure that many such skills are retained. We believe that accessibility is an important aspect of good architecture. Through good design and sensitive approaches that subtly integrate the provision of assistance, accessibility issues can be managed in ways that do not isolate people who may require more help. Good architectural design can of itself promote inclusiveness. I agree with what Christine Grahame said about the need to conserve our old buildings as well as to build good new buildings. However, much of Scotland's best new architecture can be seen in reused and regenerated buildings. I will give only two examples: the wonderful example of Dance Base in Edinburgh and, of course, the Lighthouse in Glasgow. Carolyn Leckie spoke about PFI and PPP initiatives and how schools are built under PFI and PPP contracts. I point out to her that many PFI schemes have involved old schools being refurbished. I point to East Dunbartonshire as an example of where there have been such schemes and where extensive consultation has helped to inform the debate. We have been keen to get the message across that a PPP or PFI process should not be a bar to good design or consultation. On Chris Ballance's comments, among the proposed changes to the energy section of the building regulations is an expansion of the  guidance on heating systems to cover a broader range of systems, including certain low and zero-carbon energy-generating technologies. We are working hard to take forward that agenda. Frank McAveety spoke about what was important in the Gorbals. The point that I took from what he said—which applies throughout the country—is that partnership, genuine consultation and inclusion matter. It is more than likely that the views and ideas of communities will have been taken into account where buildings and places are successful. Linda Fabiani said that she had been encouraged by the provision of "The Gatekeeper" of the Gorbals. However, what has happened there is not confined to that arts project—in fact, the entire Gorbals redevelopment has required developers to devote 1 per cent of their building costs to art. There are several new arts projects in the Gorbals. I agree with Linda Fabiani that they very much enhance the place and community that new Gorbals now is. It is important for us to address the issue of public art, which I look forward to doing in the next phase of developing our policy. We have considered and discussed public art and will progress the matter. It is also important to remember that architecture is a key cross-cutting issue and that our policy must influence the quality not only of houses but of schools, hospitals and other public buildings. I welcome Linda Fabiani's support for Architecture and Design Scotland, which can make a significant contribution to the debate in Scotland and to the practical realities of policies on the ground. I think that it has begun to make such a contribution. People require places that bring an improved quality of life and provide a stimulating and healthy environment. They require places that encourage and foster social interaction, that are sustainable, that are easily maintained and that can adapt over time. One of the greatest challenges for Government in providing such environments lies in getting many of our policies—such as our architecture, planning, regeneration, procurement, sustainability and historic environment policies—to interact with and complement one another. Good design in architecture is not simply a matter of good looks—it also makes buildings and places function well. Good architecture is an essential part of creating a sustainable future. We must continue to consider both the promotional and practical aspects in developing policy and we must continue to advocate the benefits of well-designed buildings, encourage debate and seek greater community participation in development matters.  Not long ago, there was little awareness abroad of what was happening in Scottish architecture. The quality of what is happening here is now very well known and there is widely evident interest in and enthusiasm for Scotland's new architecture. We are now perceived as a dynamic place with a concern for our environment and an emerging architecture that commands respect. Let us not lose that respect, and let us live up to the image. Let us ensure that we cherish the qualities for which we are valued abroad. The First Minister said in his St Andrew's day speech: "For years, our culture, along with some of our most talented people, has been Scotland's great gift to the world. It is important that today, the world continues to see how successful a contemporary country and culture we are." In our policy, we refer to Scotland as a "place of imagination, creativity and innovation". Historically, that is undeniable, but if it is to continue to be the case, we must value and nurture our immense resource in creative skills and we must foster a climate in which our children learn to care about our built environment from the earliest age. The quality of our built environment is important not only to our own quality of life but to the perception of our country abroad as an outstanding place to live, work and visit. It is important that we maintain our momentum and that we build upon the many achievements of the first years of our policy. The creation of our new policy on architecture statement will be the next step forward. As Michael Matheson rightly said, it has often been remarked that good architecture is too important to trust to architects alone. I agree. If we truly wish to improve the quality of Scotland's built environment and we truly wish to add to the richness of our cultural lives, Government must continue to support and show its commitment to architecture.

I point out that, last month, we had a debate about the Scottish historic environment policy documents that Historic Scotland published then. The two debates are complementary, but the earlier one was the place to have a full discussion about our environmental and architectural heritage. I hope that Chris Ballance takes that information in the spirit in which I give it.

I want to make a factual correction: Rowallan Castle is open to the public, as it should be.

Today's debate on architecture, as I am sure everyone in the chamber knows, has been rescheduled from earlier this year. That is because, back in March, shortly before the debate was due to begin, we had what I will call a little local difficulty and it had to be postponed. I am in the chamber today to talk about the importance and wider benefits of architecture to Scotland, not to discuss one building—or, for that matter, one beam. In 2001, Scotland became the first part of the United Kingdom to develop a formal policy on architecture; we should all be proud of that development. Our policy demonstrates that Scotland values its architecture and recognises it as a key element of its contemporary culture and cultural heritage. I therefore very much welcome the opportunity to open this debate and to talk about the ways in which, over the past five years, we have taken forward the many commitments that we made in our policy on architecture. In the policy, we undertook periodically to review our priorities and assess the effectiveness of the actions that we have taken. Following on from that commitment, I launched a public consultation at the beginning of May. I am particularly pleased therefore to have the debate today and to hear the views of colleagues in the chamber on the future priorities for architecture policy. A growing number of our European neighbours have also developed policies on architecture. Like us, they recognise that the quality of the built environment is vital to the social, economic and cultural life of a nation. A network for co-operation between the different member states of the European Union on questions of architecture has been in place for some time now. Last year, we hosted the forum meeting here in Scotland as part of the UK presidency of the EU. It was gratifying to see representatives of many other governments enthused and impressed by our approach to policy. There are two main strands to our policy on architecture, the first of which has a strong aspirational and cultural component. It is essential that we have a robust vision for the kind of country that we want Scotland to be and that we are clear on the ways in which we wish to see it develop in the future. The built environment must be central  to that vision. However, we are also concerned about the practical measures that will improve the quality of our physical environment. The second strand of policy therefore concerns initiatives to effect real change on the ground; change that will have a positive effect on our quality of life. I believe that we have already made an impact in both these areas. I will say a few words on our cultural strand. When we began to develop policy, there was already evidence of an increasing interest in architecture in Scotland. Since devolution, we have seen a new wave of talent emerge as well as a significant number of new, high-quality buildings. By a pleasant coincidence, I had the great pleasure of being at this morning's opening of the Scottish Storytelling Centre on the High Street, just a little way away from the Parliament. It too is a wonderful and iconic building that also has a good and strong use. We have built on the rising interest in architecture in Scotland and have developed a wide range of initiatives, underpinned by partnerships, to stimulate public interest and debate. Over the past five years, we have provided £1.5 million in funding for a national programme on architecture, which is delivered by the Lighthouse, Scotland's national centre for architecture. By means of touring exhibitions, seminars, education programmes, a national website and a biennial review, we have tried to ensure that our initiatives reach a wide public audience throughout Scotland. The website ScottishArchitecture.com was launched in 2002. It has proven remarkably successful and is now the central on-line resource on architecture in Scotland. The Lighthouse has established itself as an important hub for the creative industries in Scotland since its opening in 1999 and has succeeded in raising the profile of Scottish architecture at home and overseas. It is a dynamic cultural centre; to date, it has attracted more than 2 million visitors, almost a third of whom were from abroad. In the recent past, our best new architecture has been exhibited at a variety of high-profile events throughout Europe—Scottish architecture was represented separately at the Venice Biennale for the first time in 2004. The strength of Scotland's creative industries and the new focus on our cities and their connected regions provide us with new opportunities to promote and celebrate our design talent. Therefore, we have earmarked up to £3 million of funding for a six cities biennial festival of Scottish creative design that will take place in Scotland's six cities starting in 2007. At a more fundamental level, we recognised that, for a change in our attitude to the built environment to be effective and long term, it must start with raising awareness of the built  environment's importance among young people. That is essential if our children are to grow to care about and contribute to the shaping of the environments that they will inhabit. The building connections initiative provides schools with extensive practical guidance on the use of the built environment as a context for learning. It is our intention to continue to support and develop that work and to build on similar initiatives by Historic Scotland and the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland. We educate our children not only through learning and teaching, but through the environment that we provide for them. A wide range of guidance material for local authorities has been produced as part of the school estates strategy. Those publications cover a wide range of issues around the procurement of school buildings and specifically include guidance for local authorities on raising design standards. The work on raising the quality of our new school buildings forms part of the second key strand of our policy, which is to seek to effect change on the ground. We have now placed design far higher up the development process agenda. As a first step, we reviewed the role of the Royal Fine Art Commission for Scotland and, following that review, established a replacement body—Architecture and Design Scotland—in 2005. That was a milestone in policy implementation, as Architecture and Design Scotland's increased funding enables it to have a much wider, more proactive role than the commission did in the promotion and advocacy of good design. A key function of Architecture and Design Scotland is to engage with planning and procurement processes to demand excellence in development at all scales and in all parts of the country. Our architecture and planning policies are increasingly integrated or complementary in their aims. Through "Designing Places—A Policy Statement for Scotland", design is now enshrined as a material consideration in the planning process.

We have to recognise that there will be local choice in those matters. I appreciate the point that Ms Grahame is making. We have to encourage local authorities and others  involved in the planning system to understand the importance of design and to raise it up the agenda. We should support them when they do that. That is not always an easy thing for authorities to do. We have modernised the building standards system. In 2004, we established the Scottish Building Standards Agency. The new system provides a flexible approach to regulation, which takes Scottish building standards into the 21 st century. The new system should allow more innovative approaches to building design. The Executive also recently launched its new "Construction Procurement Manual" for public sector clients, which emphasises that good design is not an alternative to value for money, but that it is integral to its achievement. How we address the question of sustainability in the built environment is a key policy challenge. The £1.2 million Sust initiative, which was developed by the Lighthouse, aims to help change attitudes to sustainable design and to help mainstream green thinking in the built environment. As members might be aware, we plan to launch a new architecture policy statement in the next year. Today's debate and the public consultation that I mentioned earlier will inform that. It is my intention to integrate architecture policy further with other priorities for Government, such as those on sustainable development, health, housing and regeneration, where the built environment is fundamental to the success of initiatives. The work of Historic Scotland and the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland is vital in developing our policy aims. We need to raise the awareness that our historical environment is one of our greatest assets. Through reinforcing local identity—I hope that I am making Ms Grahame's point—and a sense of neighbourhood pride, our historical built environment can often be the key to successful regeneration. Our regeneration policy, which we debated in the Parliament in March, makes it clear that investment in good design is an essential component of sustainable regeneration. I will reiterate why we believe that it is so important that the momentum that has been generated through the policy on architecture is not lost and why we should continue to build on our achievements to date. The Executive's three key aims for development in Scotland until 2025 are increasing growth and competitiveness; promoting social and environmental justice; and promoting sustainable development while protecting and enhancing the quality of the natural and built environments. The importance that we place on architecture is central to that. Although we have an increasingly vibrant architectural climate, we cannot be  complacent. If Scotland is to be the country that we wish it to be in 20 years' time, we must look for more ways to encourage interest in raising our standards of design and building quality. Architecture and the places that it creates touch on almost every aspect of our lives. Our buildings tell the story of our past and witness our aspirations for the future. They have a key role to play in meeting our environmental objectives. Buildings are instrumental in realising a wide range of economic and social objectives. Architecture should, therefore, be a matter of fundamental concern to us all. I move, That the Parliament appreciates the importance of architecture to many aspects of life in Scotland; recognises that both our new and historic buildings have a critical role to play in sustainable regeneration and in delivering successful urban and rural places; acknowledges the wide range of progress that has been made through partnership in implementing the commitments of the Scottish Executive's policy on architecture, and supports the Executive's intention to publish a renewed policy statement.

The Executive has had no discussions with Aberdeen City Council yet, but my officials, with representatives of sportscotland, have arranged to meet Aberdeen City Council on 14 June to discuss its plans to build a 50m pool in Aberdeen.

I am not sure about the references that Ms Watt makes to other non-departmental public bodies. My understanding is that Aberdeen City Council sought advice from sportscotland on its proposal some time ago and that sportscotland's advice at that time—as it would have been to any other applicant or council that wanted to make submissions to our national and regional facilities fund—was that money from sportscotland and the Executive in Edinburgh was finite, that money for Aberdeen would possibly be finite, and that any bid for money would have to be affordable. That was the upshot of the conversation that took place with the council. I hope that there will be good conversations in the future that will allow the matter to be brought to a successful conclusion.

A successful bid to host the 2014 Commonwealth games in Glasgow will present an excellent opportunity for the people of Eastwood and throughout the rest of Scotland. As part of the preparations for the bid, the all-Scotland sub-group has been established, on which representatives from councils throughout Scotland, including Councillor Allan Steele from East Renfrewshire Council, have been invited to sit. The sub-group's aim is to ensure that plans for the 2014 Commonwealth games consider every opportunity to spread the games' benefits throughout Scotland.

I certainly agree with Mr Macintosh. I welcomed the opportunity to make a presentation to the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities some time ago with Councillor Purcell of Glasgow City Council and Louise Martin of the Commonwealth Games Council for Scotland, at which every council pledged its support for Glasgow's bid. Mr Macintosh will see confirmation on the Glasgow 2014 website that all 32 local authorities have signed up to and support the bid. I encourage everybody inside and outwith the chamber to do likewise.

Obviously, as Ms MacDonald will know, the ultimate responsibility  for providing local facilities rests with local authorities. Ms MacDonald and I have previously discussed the case of Edinburgh. The City of Edinburgh Council has made a submission for funding under our national and regional facilities programme, which will ultimately help the council to maintain and refurbish pools, particularly the Royal Commonwealth pool. I look forward to seeing that come to a successful conclusion.

The Executive, through sportscotland, provides financial and other support to the Scottish Association of Local Sports Councils. It is for local authorities to determine the level of support provided to local sports councils.

Sports councils are a valuable way of taking forward local agendas in sport, so I would warmly welcome the establishment of a Kirkcaldy local sports council. Diary permitting, I would be delighted to meet the new sports council and the member.

Local sports clubs can receive funding in a number of ways. One of the most important ways—it is probably the best—for local sports clubs to get funding is through the governing bodies of individual sports. Obviously, that would mean working with organisations that understand the specific needs of the clubs, their sports and their athletes. I would encourage local sports clubs to make that kind of connection, but I  would be surprised if many of them have not done so already.

VisitScotland has provided a tourist information service in Wick since 2004 under a partnership working arrangement with a local business. The partnership opportunity was re-advertised in the spring of this year, and the two proposals that were received are being evaluated. VisitScotland is confident that a suitable partnership agreement will be reached, and staff at the partner business will be provided with training in order to provide visitors with a good service.

I understand Mr Stone's point, but it does not tie in what I understand to be the current situation. There is a staffed opportunity in Wick for people who want access to the kind of information that he mentioned. That is the opportunity to which I referred, which VisitScotland has been operating and which will continue. As I said, the staff of any business that takes the opportunity to be part of that partnership will be fully trained by VisitScotland staff to ensure that they have the expertise to which Mr Stone rightly referred. However, I point out that nowadays a great deal of business is done over the phone and through the internet, so we must be able to respond to all the ways in which tourists and people from our own country who want to go on visits around the country want to access information. VisitScotland is conscious of that aim and is working hard to achieve it.

I have previously announced that the scheme will run annually. The current round of awards was announced last week, and eight applicants successfully received grants in relation to on-going work in Malawi. I am currently considering when to reopen the scheme for next year.

I am grateful to Ms Gillon for her support for our on-going project, and for her interest in the work that is going on in Malawi. I was pleased to be in Malawi last week to see for myself much of the work that is being undertaken by people with a connection to Scotland. I will very soon be making a decision on when the scheme will reopen. I can say from my experience that the important thing about the scheme is that the money is being very well spent. It is being directed towards areas of great priority and need. At the end of the day, that is the most important thing that we can do.

Visitscotland.com is performing well and is generating significant business for the tourism industry in Scotland. Since its inception, it has generated more than  £46 million of business for tourism establishments across the whole of Scotland. Visitscotland.com acts as a very effective shop window for Scottish tourism and is a highly popular source of information for our visitors.

I will say first that Mr Fergusson perhaps calls into question my creativity—which I hope to display when we get to question 9. I do not recognise the picture that Mr Fergusson paints, and I am certainly not aware of a reduction in staff at visitscotland.com. However, I will check that out and will respond to him with my findings. It is important to remember that the businesses promoted on visitscotland.com are those that choose to register with visitscotland.com. It may well be that some hotels choose not to operate in that way—especially if they are part of a larger chain that does its own promotion and marketing in this country or overseas. It is interesting to note that, when we compare the first four months of this year with the first four months of last year, we see an increase in bookings of some 222 per cent in the area that Mr Fergusson represents.

Presiding Officer, I presume that Mr McGrigor is actually asking a  supplementary to Mr Fergusson's question, and not asking his own question, which will come later?

I say to Mr McGrigor, in response to his supplementary question, that visitscotland.com is a shop window for tourism in Scotland. Many people will access that website to find out preliminary information about what is available in our country. That does not mean to say that they are tied to making their bookings through visitscotland.com, and I do not think that any of us would want that to be the case. Tourists who come to our country and people who want to use our accommodation must have the opportunity to make their own calls, if that is what they choose to do, or to contact premises directly through the website. Much of the activity on visitscotland.com takes place in such a scenario.

VisitScotland seeks to build strong business relationships with every tourism establishment across Scotland. It offers a number of business opportunity packages for businesses to purchase, ranging from local and national marketing opportunities to quality assurance schemes and product development.

Visitscotland.com—that is the element of our tourism network that we are talking about—has placed some 340,000 bookings, the majority of which have been with  small accommodation providers. More than £45 million of business has gone in that direction, and the feedback that we have received indicates that some operators are getting more than half their business through that website. At first sight, the fact that large providers pay the same as smaller providers might seem off-putting; however, businesses might be reassured to know that the amount of space that is allocated to providers on the website is the same, regardless of the size of the business. In addition, the annual cost of registering with visitscotland.com is £30. I do not think that that should be off-putting to many of our tourism businesses.

As I explained, the cost of registering with visitscotland.com is relatively small. I hope that that will encourage small businesses in particular to use the facility. As I said to Dr Turner, the majority of the bookings that come through visitscotland.com go to smaller providers. Having said that, visitscotland.com is not resting on its laurels. It is about to launch a new system that will allow new and small accommodation providers themselves to update their room accessibility, their allocations and their room rates electronically. At the end of this year visitscotland.com will also launch a web-in-a-box idea that will give smaller operators their own website, which will be powered by visitscotland.com's booking engine. I hope that that will allow potential customers to make their bookings directly with the accommodation provider, which will encourage many more of our small operators to register with visitscotland.com.

The Executive and several public bodies responsible to it contribute in various ways to the development of angling in Scotland. Sportscotland provides financial and other support for the three recognised governing bodies and for the development of facilities.

It is always good to find new and innovative ways of keeping young people occupied, particularly during the winter evenings. The Scottish Anglers National Association, the Scottish Federation of Sea Anglers and the Scottish Federation for Coarse Angling receive some development money from sportscotland. In addition, since the inception of lottery funding, sportscotland has awarded almost £530,000 to the facilities programme for angling, £200,000 of which was for the construction of the national game angling academy at Loch Leven. I hope that once all those initiatives are established, they might be able to encourage clubs to do what the member suggests. There are also opportunities for clubs to apply individually for funding from the awards for all scheme, which is a very useful tool, and from sportscotland directly. If the member would find it helpful, I would be happy to provide him with website links for those particular organisations.

I might not be able to shed any light on the origin of the rumours but I might point to my colleague Mr McGrigor for their continuation. I am certainly not aware of any such proposal. Having said that, I respectfully suggest to the member that that might be a question to which Mr Finnie or Ms Brankin would be able to respond more readily. I will certainly check out the situation and make sure that the member receives some more information. I hope that those who have concerns have responded to the consultation on the proposed aquaculture and fisheries bill. At the moment, we are analysing 436 written responses to the  consultation, which closed on 3 March. Our response will be published in the near future.

Our forests are an important part of the Scottish countryside, which appeals to many of our visitors. To build on that appeal, a wide range of recreation and tourism opportunities are encouraged in forests, including walking, cycling, picnic sites, camping, wildlife viewing and water sports. Art, sculpture, music and theatre are additional attractions for visitors.

I, too, was disappointed that I was unable to attend the launch of the trail. I look forward to meeting the volunteers and the agencies that are part of the partnership that made that biking experience possible. I hope to visit the Carron valley mountain bike track during the summer recess. Such partnerships are important. Although most of us would accept that a certain amount of rough and tumble will be involved in mountain biking, there have been a number of serious accidents recently on Forestry Commission land. It is correct that the Forestry Commission, local authorities, volunteers and others working at those sites should be conscious of the risks and give all due consideration to them when promoting the sites. I am delighted that the Carron valley mountain bike route is now on the Forestry Commission website and I am sure that it will prove to be a great attraction to people from around the country and abroad. It is something else that we can add to our portfolio of places where people can mountain bike, all of which have contributed towards Scotland being accorded global superstar status by the International Mountain Bicycling Association.

It is important that we consider forestry in an even wider context than Mr Ruskell suggests. This is not just about mountain biking; it is about the promotion of tourism in forestry areas, on which we have been working with the Forestry Commission. We have many conversations with the commission, across portfolios, about such initiatives. Our focus is not just on those in the Highlands but on those in the central belt and the Borders. The events at Glentress in the Borders are particularly good and are becoming very successful. The area will continue to grow and, as Mrs Craigie rightly identified, it will grow best through partnership.

It is important that we consider the environmental impact of activities that we promote in forest areas. That is one of the things that we are concerned to do, but the environmental impact can be balanced successfully with access. There has been a great deal of progress in that area in recent years.

We and VisitScotland recognise the crucial importance of tourism to the economy of the Highlands and Islands. VisitScotland engages closely with stakeholders in the north to ensure that it provides a good service to visitors and tourism businesses in the Highlands and Islands, and it promotes the area strongly in its marketing.

I point out to Mr Munro that the local authorities in the Highlands are only one of the contributors to the funding of VisitScotland. We in the Scottish Executive, on behalf of Scotland, also contribute a great deal to its funding streams. I am conscious that there is a need to make sure that we all get value for our money. On the specific issue of Highlands and Islands tourism and the promotion of the Highlands and Islands, it is fair to point out that the year of Highland culture was a major focus during tartan week this year. It was much in evidence to anyone who visited the VisitScotland village at Grand Central station or saw any of the marketing material. Also, the three adverts in the senses marketing campaign, which focus on spring, autumn and winter, heavily feature the Highland scenery. In addition—I have a fairly long list, so I could go on for some time about the matter—one of VisitScotland's city freedom campaigns is specific to Inverness and the surrounding area. The Highlands also feature strongly in the autumn gold campaign, which promotes wildlife, walking, golf and activity holidays throughout Scotland.  If Mr Munro thinks that there are issues that need to be addressed, he should raise them directly with Philip Riddle, the chief executive of VisitScotland, who will be in the Highlands next month, and the chair, Peter Lederer, who hopes to be there soon, subject to dates being finalised.

Of the 10 projects that were approved under our national and regional sports facilities strategy in 2004, five provide indoor football facilities, including full-size pitches. Four of them are due to be completed by 2008 and the other is due in early 2009. As part of the work that is being done to implement the youth football action plan, the Scottish Football Association has established a facilities development steering group to develop a national facilities strategy for football.

The details on the use of facilities are a matter for their ultimate operators, many of which will be local authorities. It is important to begin discussions about scheduling early. I make it clear that we intend such facilities to be used by our elite athletes and to be available to local communities. The best place to negotiate the balance of use is locally.

I congratulate Alasdair Morgan on securing the debate and on describing the museum and the area in such an interesting way. All things considered, it has been an interesting afternoon and I have enjoyed the debates. In responding to the cultural review, I was keen to clarify the roles of the Executive and of local authorities in supporting non-national museums; that is a description that I do not particularly like, but I am still struggling to come up with a better one. We stressed in our response to the cultural review that local authorities have a key role in ensuring cultural provision in their respective areas. The Executive proposes to promote the development of that responsibility, building on its substantial current contribution to achieve more consistent delivery and standards throughout Scotland. We propose that the culture bill will create a legislative framework for delivering rights and entitlements. In developing the bill, I will consider how its provisions could affect the existing duty to make what is described in the Local Government etc (Scotland) Act 1994 as "adequate" provision. Audit Scotland's performance improvement figures for 2003-04—the latest available—show that Dumfries and Galloway Council owns more museums than any other council in Scotland. I must admit that that surprised me. The council is doing well in terms of its expenditure; as we have heard, part of that expenditure goes to the Museum of Lead Mining, which will receive £37,000 in 2006-07. Dumfries and Galloway's net expenditure per head of population for heritage and museums is £7.44, which compares favourably with the Scottish average of £7.74.  The local authority is playing its part, but how does the Executive support non-national museums? The channel for that support is the Scottish Museums Council. That is not a smokescreen that I or anyone else want to hide behind. As well as general support for its members, the SMC administers a number of grant schemes on the Executive's behalf. The largest of those is the regional development challenge fund, which is providing about £1 million over the three years from 2003. The aim of the fund is to develop the capacity and sustainability of the museum sector through active partnerships. Ten partnerships have been established, covering the whole of Scotland. The Museum of Lead Mining and Dumfries and Galloway Council benefit from being partners in the future museum-south west collaboration. Two other grant schemes administered by the SMC are the main grants scheme and the small grants scheme. In 2004-05, Wanlockhead Museum Trust received grants totalling £10,000.

I am coming to what might happen, so Alasdair Morgan's intervention is timely. As colleagues will be aware, when I responded to the cultural review in January, I announced additional funding of £500,000 per annum over two years for non-national museums. That funding scheme, which will be administered by the Scottish Museums Council, is designed to support collections of national significance in the care of local authorities and other organisations. Future funding for non-national museums will focus on supporting significant national standard collections. We are reviewing with the SMC how best to channel support to industrial museums. I hope that that will not take much longer. We also expect our national institutions to provide advice and assistance to the non-national museums where appropriate. As we have heard, the Wanlockhead miners library celebrates its 250 th anniversary this year. It was established on 1 November 1756 by 32 men who said that it was "for our mutual improvement". As Alasdair Morgan correctly said, it is the second- oldest subscription library in Scotland and, indeed, Europe. Members will be aware that 2003 was the 150 th anniversary of public libraries in Scotland, which developed from those subscription libraries. That anniversary was also commemorated by a debate in this Parliament. I remember the sniggers with which some of my colleagues on the Parliamentary Bureau greeted my suggestion of that topic for debate. However, it was one of the most over-subscribed debates that we have ever had, such was the positive attitude of members to libraries, particularly those in the areas that they represent. Everyone had a story to tell. I link the two events to emphasise the Executive's additional support for local authorities. Not only is there an extra £500,000 a year for non-national museums, but the same amount is available to help the public library service to improve its standards of provision and facilitate co-operation. As colleagues will have heard me say during the debate on the cultural review, the Executive currently dedicates 1 per cent of its total budget to culture and that figure is about to rise. The Executive's support for collections of national significance, including those held by the cultural non-departmental public bodies and agencies, will continue. We will channel funds to the collections that the nation owns and to the collections that are held and managed by bodies that are independent of Government. We will also seek to incentivise the raising of standards in museums throughout Scotland. As we seek to achieve greater efficiency in delivery, we will allocate resources to best attain national priorities for the conservation of collections and the improvement of public access to them. However, support for non-national museums, such as the Museum of Lead Mining, must come primarily from the local authority, although there will be targeted financial backing from the Executive, channelled through the Scottish Museums Council. Additional funding will be available to collections that are of what we call a "significant national standard". I am pleased to note that the celebration to mark the 250 th anniversary of the establishment of the miners library starts this weekend. The event—called Scotland's highest birthday party—is part of the show Scotland series of events in museums and galleries across Scotland that is organised by the Scottish Museums Council. The Scottish Museums Council awarded the Museum of Lead Mining a grant of £1,500 towards the celebration and would be happy to consider a further grant application for other events related to this anniversary.  The show Scotland initiative is a new creative events weekend celebrating Scotland's museums and galleries. A programme of exciting events designed to capture the public's imagination is taking place in more than 50 museums and galleries throughout Scotland this bank holiday weekend. I hope that, as a result of our raising the profile of the Museum of Lead Mining in this debate and because it features in the show Scotland events, more visitors will be attracted to Wanlockhead and that that increase will help the museum to become more sustainable.  I am sure that this is a discussion that I will return to over the next few months, as our final programme is set out. Meanwhile, I congratulate Alasdair Morgan on securing this debate. I have been interested in the speeches and I will pay great heed to what has been said.  Meeting closed at 17:44.

The debate has been stimulating. Members have spoken passionately about situations, buildings and landscapes in their constituencies. That shows the swathe of heritage that exists across our nation. I suspect that I will not have enough time to mention all the issues that members have raised, but if I miss out any that members particularly want to raise with me, they can do so either this afternoon or in writing at a later date. I will begin at the beginning by addressing Michael Matheson's speech, in which he made some interesting points. I reassure him that Historic Scotland works very much in partnership with other organisations that have an interest in the field and with those that may not be so  obviously connected. Policy integration is at the heart of what the Executive is trying to do. I refer the member to Malcolm Chisholm's recent statement on regeneration, in which he talked about culture and the importance of the kind of debate that we have had this afternoon. Michael Matheson was right to highlight the Antonine wall, which is an example of international partnership. Historic Scotland has joined up with other similar organisations—literally around the world—to make an application for world heritage site status. The application that is going ahead is not only for the frontier that happens to be in our country but for the frontiers of the Roman world. That sort of initiative gives enormous hope for what we are trying to do; it is also a wonderful tool for educating our young people.

I have a lot to get through, but I will try to come to some of the points that the member made. Although there is at least one element of Mr Brocklebank's speech on which I will not comment, I will address the point he made that Historic Scotland cannot force owners to repair listed buildings, which was a matter that other members also mentioned. At the moment, local authorities have fairly extensive powers to require owners to repair listed buildings. However, we have tasked the Historic Environment Advisory Council for Scotland to review the current legislation. I look forward to receiving its report later this year, which will help to guide our future work. Historic Scotland fully funds, and has always funded, the buildings at risk register. It tries to bring together owners and sustainable solutions. Again, many of the solutions are developed through the historic grants system. Mr Brocklebank also mentioned Castle Tioram. I have taken a great deal of interest in the issue during the time that I have been in this post. I say to him that it is not all doom and gloom. After discussions with the owner, and with his agreement, Historic Scotland has recently commissioned a study of the architectural history of the site. Historic Scotland is pleased to have established a constructive dialogue with the owner and his agents through that study. I understand that a site meeting is taking place today, with all parties in attendance. Hopefully, we will see some progress. Donald Gorrie rightly said hat we need to raise the profile of our historic environment, particularly in terms of its importance. I hope that today's debate has done that. I want to reassure him on the issue of ecclesiastical buildings. As someone who lived for many years in part of a grade A  church, I feel quite passionately on the subject. Appropriate other uses can be found for such buildings, but it needs to be done in a sympathetic way. That work often needs the partnership-type working that all of us want to see. Historic Scotland is taking part in a conference in Govan tomorrow on that very issue. I am sure that Donald Gorrie will watch that with great interest. Roseanna Cunningham raised a number of issues and did so graphically. She also mentioned a number of very interesting places in her constituency. Indeed, she made the good point that money is not always the issue. I point out to her that grant-in-aid from Historic Scotland in 2005-06 came to more than £13 million, compared with about £11.5 million in 2004-05. In talking about the grant-in-aid that Historic Scotland gives out, the important thing to say is that the money is often used in partnership with money that other organisations contribute. Historic Scotland is therefore able to lever in a great deal of additional money. As other members have done, I congratulate David Petrie on his maiden speech. It is always good to hear a maiden speech on a subject about which the member cares deeply. In his speech this afternoon, Mr Petrie showed that he cares deeply about this issue. I have to say to him that I do not agree with all the points that he made. For his sake, I fervently hope that my colleague Karen Whitefield was not listening to the comment that he made about his baptism of fire. In my remarks to Mr Brocklebank, I mentioned the report that is coming to us from HEACS. As I said, the council is examining for us any legislative changes that may be necessary for our historic environment. Our intention is not to complicate matters; in fact, we want to streamline the system and reduce the possibility of complication. I entirely take the point that Mr Petrie made on the subject. Euan Robson raised several local issues about which he was concerned. Although museums are not really part of today's debate, I have an interest in them and I suggest to him that he might wish to speak to the Scottish Museums Council about what funding might be available. Later this year, the museums recognition scheme will come into play and that might be of assistance to him. As regards the paintings in our national and other collections that are sometimes in storage, last year there was the welcome move to Kirkcudbright of some works from the impressionists collection that is held by Glasgow. That was an extremely successful venture that will be replicated to some extent by some of the partnership working that is developing for next year's year of highland culture.  Christine Grahame mentioned a particular issue in her constituency. Although it would be inappropriate for me to comment on it or on any other individual case, I point out that she might refer to the SHEP document on listing in order to advance her case and I encourage all members to participate in that way. I have taken a keen interest in Abbotsford and we appreciate the importance of the house to the nation's heritage. Historic Scotland will continue to work with organisations such as Scottish Borders Council, Scottish Enterprise and VisitScotland to ensure that its potential is recognised and developed. Historic Scotland is currently grant aiding further repairs to the house with the National Trust for Scotland supporting its running until a long-term management plan is established. Although the long-term future of the estate rests largely in the hands of the executors, if other relevant agencies work well together, Abbotsford's future can be secured. I am happy to consider views if, for example, the National Trust for Scotland thinks that more needs to be done. Earlier this afternoon, I described the historic environment as an asset, particularly for tourism and education. Last week, Historic Scotland announced that its free weekend over 1 and 2 April, when everyone can access its 74 properties for which there is normally a charge, attracted 103,000 people. That is more than double the number in 2005. Historic Scotland also welcomed around 3,500 new adult and child members to its membership scheme. That shows that many in our country share our aspirations. I stressed today that we have inherited the investment of many past generations. That is a legacy that we are determined to pass on, fit for use, to the future. Caring for that legacy is the most sustainable thing that we can do—it does not get greener than reusing old buildings. Let us look at some hard examples. There are well over 2.5 million dwellings in Scotland, some of which are of great historical interest and many others of which are of value as part of interesting and characterful townscapes. Many provide comfortable homes with spacious and flexible accommodation. Think about the energy and resources invested in those thousands of homes: the labour of men and women; natural resources extracted from the earth; and private and public money spent. Think how irresponsible it would be to throw away that investment: the work; the resources; the money; the energy; and the character. Think how irresponsible it would be to cause the waste and pollution inherent in demolition, if we do not have to do it. Think how irresponsible it would be to put the demolished material in landfill, if we do not have to do it. Think how irresponsible it would be to quarry and transport new materials, if we do not  have to do it. We cannot and should not always protect or conserve every part of our historic environment, but our decisions must be responsible and well informed and take the long-term view. The historic environment reflects the inclusivity of Scotland and the rich variation between the regions. From prehistory onwards, the styles of stone circles, houses, castles and farms reflect the different ways that people did things and how they thought about the world. That should make us think about our varied origins as a people. We are and always have been a mixed lot. Those and other issues are what our new Scottish historic environment policy series is all about. It sets a framework for us all to manage our rich historic environment. Our historic environment is a wonderful asset, not just for us but for our shared future.

I am delighted to have this opportunity to highlight the work being undertaken to set out our policies on the historic environment. It is worth pausing to consider what we mean by the term "historic environment". The historic environment is all around us. Scotland's countryside looks the way it does because more than 300 generations have used and managed the land and the sea and built villages and towns. Most of all, though, the historic environment is about communities and the people who live in them; not just the people of Scotland today, but the people who lived in Scotland before us and those who will come after us. The historic environment shapes our surroundings, creates a sense of place and gives Scotland an identity of which we can all be proud. We have been bequeathed a rich heritage, which is recognised throughout the world. Scotland's heritage represents 10,000 years of investment in our landscape and every generation has left its mark. We can see that depth of time in the pattern of streets established hundreds of years ago or in the pattern of fields and woods. That historic environment reminds us that others have lived here before us and, most important, reminds us that others will follow. We have a duty and a responsibility to live our lives and to manage our world so that we are proud to pass it on to our children. Our historic environment is one of this nation's greatest assets, which continues to grow in value and which we can use to the benefit of our country. It is a unique resource for education. Historic Scotland, the National Trust for Scotland and many private owners are committed to providing first-class education programmes, but we can also learn from the historic buildings and sites that surround us in every part of Scotland. We get a great sense of place and belonging from the sites and buildings that are around us, and caring for them can be a good way of bringing communities together. Our historic sites and landscapes are critical to our tourism industry. They are our unique selling point, attracting 85 per cent of the visitors who come to Scotland. They are part of the Scottish brand. We should remind ourselves of the economic benefits. Almost half of the £6.5 billion turnover of the Scottish construction industry is spent on repair and  maintenance rather than on new build. We are becoming more aware of the need to conserve energy, and our 47,000 listed buildings represent our most sustainable buildings, created as they are from natural and mostly local materials that last for decades or even centuries. Most people assume that our rich heritage of sites, buildings, places and landscapes is cared for by charities and the Government. However, most of Scotland's historic environment is cared for by private individuals and small businesses. We all have a role to play in the protection of some part of our past. Even if we do not own or look after a historic building or site, we can make a difference by keeping an eye on what is happening to a familiar site or building as we pass it by. However, national and local Government and other institutional stakeholders have a vital role to play in supporting individuals, businesses and charities in protecting our heritage. Over the past century, national and local Government have played a growing part in the care of our historic assets through legislation, through the town and country planning system and through partnership working with bodies such as the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland, Communities Scotland, the National Trust for Scotland and Scottish Natural Heritage. Historic Scotland is the key central Government agency dealing with the historic environment, an integral part of the Scottish Executive and an important part of my portfolio. Three years ago, my predecessor commissioned a review of Historic Scotland. The key recommendations of that review were that the agency must be more transparent, more accountable to the people of Scotland, their Government and stakeholders and that it must be more flexible and more focused on the delivery of high-quality service to the new Scotland. We have delivered on those recommendations. For example, three non-executive directors have been appointed to the board of Historic Scotland to provide the external challenge that the review identified as desirable and there is a real commitment to engaging with stakeholders. Further, the two inspectorates that were responsible for historic buildings and ancient monuments have been combined into a single unit to provide high-quality service to owners and occupiers, which will ensure consistency, flexibility, transparent decision-making and accountability. A particularly important recommendation in the review was that there should be a policy statement for the historic environment in Scotland, developed in consultation with stakeholders, building on the First Minister's St Andrew's day speech and the  national cultural strategy and approved by the Executive. The response to that recommendation is the Scottish historic environment policy series—I will refer to the papers as SHEPs from now on. The launch of the series and of the current consultations marks a milestone in the process of change at Historic Scotland. For the first time, not only since devolution, but since the first legislation was passed in 1882, we are developing detailed policy statements on many aspects of the historic environment. It is important that we are doing so in an open way, through public and stakeholder consultation. The current programme for the production of the SHEPs will see around a dozen either published or out for public consultation by March 2008. They will cover subjects such as the listing of historic buildings, the processes of listed building and scheduled monument consent, how we deal with battlefields and the protection of the marine historic environment. SHEP 1 and the other papers in the series, when published in their final form, will sit alongside and complement the Scottish planning policy series and other similar documents. Today, we have in front of us the first three papers in the series, two of which were issued for public consultation on 31 March. The third was published in its final form on the same day. Copies of all three are in the Parliament's library and are available on the websites of the Executive and Historic Scotland. I will deal first with the two that we are consulting on. SHEP 1 sets the scene for the other papers. It is the policy statement that provides a framework for more detailed strategic and operational policies that inform the day-to-day work of a range of organisations that have a role and interest in the historic environment. Those include the Scottish Executive, local authorities and the range of bodies that are accountable to Scottish Ministers. Our aims are to realise the full potential of the historic environment as an economic, educational and cultural resource across every part of Scotland and for the widest possible range of people; to maximise the role of the historic environment in achieving the wider aims of social and economic regeneration; to identify what forms our historic environment takes and protect and manage it in a sustainable way; and to break down the intellectual and physical barriers to its wider accessibility. By putting in place a strategic policy framework for the historic environment, investing in its delivery and working in partnership with others, we are determined to achieve three key outcomes for Scotland's historic environment: that the historic environment is cared for, protected and enhanced  for the benefit of our own and future generations; that there is increased public appreciation and enjoyment of the historic environment among all the people of Scotland and visitors to the country; and that the historic environment's importance as a key asset in Scotland's economic, social and cultural success is recognised and skilfully harnessed. That bold vision is achievable. The historic environment can make a valuable contribution to our wider agenda to create an aspiring, confident country with sustainable economic growth, confident communities and a vibrant and dynamic cultural life, and one that offers unparalleled tourism opportunities. SHEP 3, which is also out to public consultation, deals with gardens and designed landscapes. Those places are important tourist attractions, rich wildlife havens and major parts of the Scottish scenery. They are also living examples of unique artistic talent and vision. They are widely enjoyed by people of all ages, backgrounds and cultures. For 20 years, Government has recognised the need to identify and protect the most important examples, such as Drummond Castle in Perthshire and Torosay Castle on the Isle of Mull. At the moment, 346 sites are included in the inventory. Inclusion means that a site receives recognition and a degree of protection through the planning system. The consultation process includes questions about whether those places need greater statutory protection and how sites might be selected. The document also seeks views on Historic Scotland's role in that. The final SHEP on the table today, which is now published in its final form, deals with the protection of Scotland's nationally important ancient monuments and archaeological sites through the process of scheduling. That SHEP is the result of the most comprehensive review of the principles and processes of scheduling that has been undertaken, certainly since 1979 but, in some ways, since 1882. Scheduling imposes restrictions on what the owner of a nationally important site can do to it. It is, therefore, vital that scheduling is undertaken on the basis of sound principles and through processes that are both transparent and accountable. Those principles are set out in SHEP 2 along with guidance to Historic Scotland as to how I want them to be put into practice. The review has also produced a new strategic approach to scheduling, with greater local involvement and better targets to measure Historic Scotland's progress in identifying and protecting sites. SHEP 2 marks the formal launch of new, tighter and clearer criteria for deciding which sites should be scheduled. They are the first scheduling criteria ever to be drafted with public involvement, and it is important to record the fact that that involvement led to significant changes between the first draft and the version that we are able to  read today. That process of consultation is fundamental to my vision for the policy framework. This week, Historic Scotland's scheduling team is in Dumfries and Galloway, working under the policies that are set out in SHEP 2. The SHEP on scheduling takes us back to the review of Historic Scotland. Another key recommendation was that the agency should engage with stakeholders in a debate about its practices. The chief executive of Historic Scotland will oversee the preparation of a series of operational policy papers that will make explicit the way in which the agency will deliver the strategic aims that are set out in the SHEPs. The first operational policy, on volunteering, has been sent out to consultation and will be launched this summer. Others will follow. SHEPs 1 and 3 are now open for public consultation; other SHEPs and Historic Scotland's operational policies will follow. The papers are only drafts. The people of Scotland and the other stakeholders in our historic environment now have a real opportunity to work with Scottish ministers to put in place a policy framework that is fit for the 21 st century—a framework that will protect and manage Scotland's historic environment and set out bold aims and achievable results for the benefit of our own and future generations.

The 2006 Commonwealth games in Melbourne were a great example of how to showcase our country to the rest of the world, and in many respects the event acted as further inspiration to bring the event to Scotland. Our experience of the games has confirmed that we are on the right path, but we cannot be complacent about our bid. We need to continue the good work that we have started and ensure that a successful bid to host the games in Glasgow in 2014 will provide benefits for the whole of Scotland.

The answer is quite simply, "Yes." In welcoming the support that has been evident throughout Scotland, I very much took to heart the need to respond to that support. Our experience of Melbourne proves that it is possible to spread the benefits around the country. From the assessments that have been carried out, we know that the net economic impact for Scotland could be as much as £81 million. Obviously, that would be good, but we want to maximise that and use every opportunity to ensure that Scotland benefits from the games. The benefits will not be only economic. Although we hope that our economy and tourism industry will benefit, we also want to ensure that the health, sporting and confidence-building benefits that come from the Commonwealth games are spread around Scotland. On a practical level, I was very much aware that the Scottish team at the recent games was based at a holding camp that was more than two hours from Melbourne. Other teams had similar experiences—they, too, occupied facilities around the country. Obviously, we will look for opportunities to spread that kind of impact around Scotland.

My focus is on ensuring that Scotland benefits from the 2012 Olympic Games in London and that we secure and benefit from the 2014 Commonwealth Games. I take the view of our athletes—especially those who compete alongside others—who say that their best opportunity for succeeding is to participate in a successful Great Britain team. We have seen many of our athletes succeed in that way in the past. We want to ensure that, come 2012, as many Scots as possible can stand on the podium.

I and my officials are in frequent contact with the Scottish Tourism Forum on a number of matters. Those range from policy issues, such as the forum's view on our recently launched tourism framework for change, to tactical matters such as communications with the industry. Recently, a member of the Scottish Executive's tourism unit was seconded to the forum to assist with the organisation of the successful Scottish tourism week.

At a time when we have so many conferences and events coming to Scotland, it is interesting that Mr Adam is so negative about the available opportunities. I point out to him that VisitScotland is very much involved in promoting the kinds of niche markets that he mentioned. Along with colleagues in EventScotland, VisitScotland will be very much involved in promoting events that are connected with the year of Highland culture next year and the Burns year of homecoming in 2009. This year, VisitScotland has been involved in marketing—successfully so far, although it is early days—Scotland and Edinburgh as part of the special campaign that it has put together for the movie "The Da Vinci Code". It is fair to say that VisitScotland takes every marketing opportunity to attract people to Scotland.

The simple answer to Mr McGrigor's question is, "No." To expand on that, I point out that the reorganisation of VisitScotland and the tourist boards that constitute it happened very much in response to the industry's wish to change and to move forward into the present day. I do not accept that there has been centralisation. Some 98 per cent of VisitScotland staff are based outwith Edinburgh, where its headquarters is located. The picture that Mr McGrigor paints is not fair and is not supported by the industry as a whole.

We are keen to ensure that the first national veterans day properly acknowledges and celebrates in Scotland the valuable contribution that is made to our society by all veterans. We are therefore currently in discussion with Scottish veterans organisations, the Ministry of Defence and the Veterans Agency about how the day can best be marked in Scotland. The focus of the day in Scotland is likely to be in Dundee, where the Dundee Combined Ex-servicemen's Association is planning a parade and concert. We expect a number of other local events to take place. The Ministry of Defence is running a national art competition for schoolchildren and has written with details to all primary schools in the country. I encourage all primary schools in Scotland to consider how their pupils can participate.

I will try to rise to the challenge of working out what that has to do with  the cultural events that may be planned and to which Mr Swinburne's original question referred. However, I congratulate him on his creativity in his supplementary question. I do not accept that national veterans day is meant somehow to diminish the contribution of veterans. It is a day on which we will have the opportunity properly to recognise the contribution that they have made. It is one of a number of initiatives that the United Kingdom Government has taken in recent times to ensure that our veterans are properly recognised. As Mr Swinburne knows, war pensions, like other pensions, are reserved to Westminster. The Scottish Executive is tackling pensioner poverty in partnership with the UK Government. Of course, pensioners have the right to live in dignity. Since 1996-97, 120,000 pensioners have been lifted out of relative low-income categories, with three quarters of pensioners being lifted out of absolute low-income categories. If we add that to the work that is being done on central heating, free travel and free personal and nursing care in Scotland, it is clear that we are going in the right direction to ensure that our veterans are properly recognised and given the kind of gratitude that they definitely deserve from this country.

Last year, the number of visitors who came to Scotland from North America as a whole was estimated to be in the region of 543,000. A breakdown of the number of visitors from the United States is not yet available.

I do not accept the premise of Mr Johnstone's latter question. He is correct in saying that visitor numbers from North America appeared to be down by about 2 per cent last year, but we are not yet aware of the reasons for that. The figure should be offset against the 31 per cent increase in visitors from overseas in general. The marketing of Scotland that we do abroad is working particularly well. Mr Johnstone's view of tartan week is a little disappointing to those of us who have seen tartan week and tartan day develop and become a focus for Scotland and Scotland's ambitions abroad. For example, it is estimated that the £600,000 that VisitScotland spent on last year's tartan week generated about £2.4 million-worth of public relations, which resulted in our message about Scotland reaching about 39 million Americans. The money that the Executive, VisitScotland and other agencies have spent has been well spent. As we constantly review and evaluate our work, we will evaluate our work on tartan week. We intend to produce the information that Mr Johnstone asked for, so we will ensure that he gets a copy when it is available.

I thank Frank McAveety for lodging his motion and securing the debate. I also thank him for an excellent speech on the issue of Supporters Direct, even though it started rather badly. I had intended to say that this evening Partick Thistle has more supporters in the chamber than any other football team, but Michael Matheson got there before me. He is right. Partick Thistle would be very pleased with the loyalty that its fans have shown in uniting across the political spectrum to deliver the same message. Perhaps it is a result of the fact that we are usually so embattled that we are used to having to sing from the same hymn sheet on these occasions. This evening's debate is important. The Scottish Executive continues to recognise the important role that Supporters Direct plays in Scottish football. To that end, since April 2002 we have provided funding of £330,000 to Supporters Direct, as members know. For this year and next, Executive funding to Supporters Direct has increased to £95,000 per annum. Supporters Direct has achieved a great deal in assisting responsible groups of supporters to get more involved with their clubs. As other members have said, fans make a lifetime commitment to a club and should have a greater say in how their club is run. As we have heard, there are now 31 supporters trusts in Scotland. Thirty of those are in the Scottish Premier League and Scottish Football League. The other is Clydebank, in junior football. Scott Barrie may be heartened to know that Supporters Direct has identified as one of its aims  for the coming year increasing that number to at least 34. I agree with him that we and, in particular, Supporters Direct need to consider why the other teams are not signed up to this agenda and how change can be made with them. It is not simply a case of establishing supporters trusts; it is essential for the trusts to be run professionally. The continuing support of Supporters Direct is essential in meeting that objective. Supporters Direct is committed to assisting trusts to develop additional sources of income to ensure their self-sufficiency and long-term viability. As I have said before—not in this chamber, but in the one that we are more used to—the Executive does not want to run football. However, we want football to be well run. We believe that supporters are the lifeblood of the game and that it is entirely appropriate that their voice is heard in the running of their clubs. At a time when for some clubs money is very tight, the fact that 24 of the 31 trusts have already taken a shareholding in their club has brought some much-needed fresh capital into the industry. Scott Barrie and Colin Fox are correct to say that Supporters Direct should not—I believe, must not—be the option of last resort. Twelve trusts have representation on the board of their club and one trust—Clyde—has a 50 per cent shareholding and controls the club in partnership with a group of local investors. The trusts at Clyde and Dundee can reasonably be said to have played a key role in the survival of those clubs, which is important. Community support is crucial to any football club, and the work of Supporters Direct in helping to develop clubs as assets in the local community is to be welcomed and applauded. I know that that will become a major focus of the work of Supporters Direct over the next two years. It is important to recognise the work that is going on in football to raise standards among the professional clubs in various areas, including supporter involvement. As colleagues will know, the SFA is to introduce a national club licensing system, for which it should be applauded. Club licensing will set out measurable quality standards and procedures by which clubs will be assessed as a basis for continual improvement to meet specific standards. The licensing system includes a requirement for a supporters charter and a demonstrable commitment to equity issues. The supporters charter requires clubs to commit to providing supporters with a safe and enjoyable experience of football. The commitment to equity issues states that clubs are expected to demonstrate a meaningful and measurable commitment to address issues of discrimination, whether by gender, sexual orientation, race, religion, nationality, ethnic origin or colour, and to encourage equal opportunities by  means of a meaningful policy and strategy, with measurable results. Christine May should not feel intimidated about taking part in the debate, particularly when the women's game in Scotland is growing exponentially and our women's Scottish football team is ranked considerably higher in its world rankings than its male counterpart is in its rankings. Supporters Direct supports the wider equality agenda through its work with the trusts. Supporters Direct actively promoted the work of the Show Racism the Red Card initiative and encouraged the participation of its member trusts. Christine May touched on the work that the Executive is doing through the "Action Plan on Tackling Sectarianism in Scotland" initiative. However, that work will achieve nothing unless we have the support of the public and the buy-in of those who are involved in football at all levels. Supporters Direct represents the responsible, fair-minded football supporters, who have a lot to offer in this agenda, and I am particularly encouraged by its support of the Executive's policy. A lot of work is on-going with Supporters Direct and there is still more to be done, but in football, as in many other areas, partnership is what really matters. Without the backing of the police, the clubs and the football fans themselves, nothing in football will change. As I said earlier, I am delighted that Frank McAveety was able to secure the debate and I thank him for doing so. I am happy to support the motion recognising the work of Supporters Direct in Scotland.  Meeting closed at 17:52.

I will write to the member if I am incorrect about this, but my understanding is that some of the other partners have not committed the money, which is why sportscotland cannot put forward its money. The money is there and waiting, but certain criteria must be met when one is using public money. When that process is exhausted, the money will be in place.

Will Brian Adam take an intervention?

I was interested in Ted Brocklebank's speech. My only disappointment was that he did not mention Maryhill Harrier Duncan Wright, who won the marathon in the very first Empire games all those years ago. The Maryhill Harriers continue a proud tradition to this day. I hope that our elite athletes' tremendous achievements will continue throughout the year and beyond as we look to put in place a sporting infrastructure that will deliver both sporting success and long-term participation. As Karen Gillon rightly said, the two things go together. For the long-term good of our nation, we know that the more sporting activities people engage in when they are young, the more likely they are to follow through with at least one of them. That is important for our general health. Before the debate closes, I repeat that we delivered 29 medallists from the Melbourne games; Scotland is the current holder of the Calcutta cup; the team that won a silver medal in curling at the paralympics in Turin were all Scots; and Andy Murray is one of the world's top 50 tennis players at just 18 years of age. Our success in Melbourne was greater than had been forecast. Our estimated medal tally was 15, which was a genuine target assessed by the coaches and officials. We should be shouting from the rooftops about our success, as the Australians would have done had they been in our place at the games. Sport in Scotland is not as limited as has been suggested in some quarters. We are putting the correct building blocks in place and will continue to do so, but it is unrealistic to expect us to achieve on all fronts immediately. Donald Gorrie was right to mention that the Scottish Executive should persuade governing bodies to improve. We will do our bit, but there has to be a willingness from governing bodies to make that kind of change. It is interesting and challenging to note that the sports at which we did best in Melbourne, swimming and cycling, are among those whose governing bodies have made such changes, both in their governance and in the way in which they coach, employing full-time professional coaches. That is a lesson that other governing bodies will no doubt look to and wish to learn from.  I also endorse the valuable contribution made by sportscotland in delivering participation programmes such as the active schools programme, in developing sports partnerships and in supporting sports governing bodies and the Scottish Institute of Sport and its associated area structures. In the main, local authorities have been enthusiastic partners in active schools and several are championing new approaches to working with sportscotland, governing bodies and other councils through our sports partnerships. Karen Gillon mentioned PE. In 2003-04 there were nine recruits to the PE teacher training scheme, but in 2005-06 there have been 80, so I hope that we are moving in the right direction. Our ambition should be to have the maximum number of Scots in any team. We want to see Scots involved in competitive sport and we want to see them dominating. I am enthused by our success in Melbourne, but at the same time I am slightly disappointed that there are still people who want to undermine such success, in sport and in other fields. If we are to be a more confident nation, we must cast off that cloak of cynicism and be ready to recognise and praise our athletes and allow them to bask in our success, rather than look for things to complain about. For a small nation, we are amazingly successful and we punch well above our weight in sporting terms. From a population of 5 million, we have literally hundreds of sporting heroes—not only the 196 medallists on the world stage since 2003 but other giants such as Colin Montgomerie, Paul Lawrie, Andy Murray, David Coulthard, Jason White and Jim Anderson. We have much to be proud of. Let us move forward together to develop and support future generations of sporting stars and to ensure that Glasgow secures the Commonwealth games in 2014.

Such work takes places already. The active schools programme is funded jointly by my education colleagues, and my health colleagues help to fund YDance, which encourages young women to be active. Also, my justice colleagues help to fund midnight soccer and basketball leagues. That work is already happening and we will expand on it.

I very much welcome the debate, given our outstanding success at the 18th Commonwealth games in Melbourne. At yesterday's Cabinet meeting, my ministerial colleagues and I put on record our congratulations to the athletes, officials and volunteers who proudly flew the flag for Scotland. I anticipated the debate with some interest and pride. That pride continued even after seeing the motion in Mr Matheson's name. I had thought that the debate would be about the success of our team and our pride in that success. If there is one thing that we can learn from team Scotland in Melbourne, it is that unless we all work together we cannot achieve anything, so it was disappointing to hear the tone of the latter part of Mr Matheson's speech, particularly in light—

It is rich for Mr Matheson. The tone of Mr Matheson's speech was disappointing in light of the comments that have been made in Scottish National Party manifestos about the need to take money away from elite athlete support and about the fact that sportscotland—

Mr Matheson seems to think that I am misleading the chamber. I am obviously not misleading the chamber. The SNP's manifestos are published documents. It is on record that not only does the SNP not want our athletes to be supported in the way that they are, but that it has doubts about the involvement of sportscotland, which is one of our main delivery agencies. Although our medallists have, quite rightly, received at home the recognition that they deserve, we should recognise the many achievements of those who did not win medals but who achieved personal bests. On that point, I am in perfect accord with Mr Matheson. In addition to our medallists, six of our athletes finished in fourth place, meaning that more than 21 per cent of the team finished in the top four, while 72 per cent of the team finished in the top eight. Our thanks and congratulations should go to the coaches and officials who provided such excellent support to the athletes; they should also go to the volunteers and supporters who made the trip to Melbourne and contributed to the success of team Scotland—a team that was not just the most successful that we have ever sent overseas, but the largest and, as the Commonwealth Games  Federation said earlier this year, the best prepared. When we are considering sporting success we should also remember the performances in recent weeks of our elite athletes who took part in the winter Olympics and paralympics, and of course the success of our rugby team in winning the Calcutta cup. They have set a standard that we must use as a springboard for future achievements. I was privileged to be in Melbourne to witness the success of our athletes, which was achieved by their skill and talent. However, I was also there to promote Scotland's bid to host the 20 th games and to learn from Melbourne's experience. It was particularly noticeable that not only did the people of Melbourne embrace the spirit of the games, but everywhere one went in the state of Victoria people were enthused and excited by the games. We can expect the same to occur in Scotland if Glasgow wins the right to host the 2014 games. It is clear that sporting success brings a tremendous feel-good factor. When our rugby team won the Calcutta cup in February, the thrill and excitement around the country was palpable. I know, too, that when Scots were eagerly following our athletes' performance in Melbourne in the early hours of the morning, headlines such as "Two more gems in Scots' gold rush" generated and fed the excitement felt around the country. Major sporting events generate tremendous interest and excitement and can inspire people of all ages to participate. If we are successful in our bid for 2014, we will want to capitalise on the many benefits that it will bring. We are determined that we will build on the momentum of that success. We will discuss with our partners in sport and in local authorities how best we can do that.

As Mr Adam may know, for some time we have been in discussion with Aberdeen City Council about basing a regional facility there, for which we have put funding in place. Unfortunately, the council has not approached us about a 50m pool, but we would want to take that forward with it. The motion refers to the audit of local facilities. Sportscotland plans to publish the summary reports in May. Of course we need to have facilities that are fit for the 21st century to ensure that our aspirations as a sporting nation can be met, but we also need to address the level of  provision, the types of facilities that are required and where they should be located, and more effective use of the school estate. We must do that in partnership with our colleagues in local government. However, we must not forget that we already have some tremendous facilities: the national swimming academy in Stirling; Hampden park, which will play host to some of the Olympic football tournament; the national rowing centre at Strathclyde park; and, of course, Murrayfield. I could go on.

I shall come to that later. It is important to note that we are investing in facilities in a strategic way, through the national and regional facilities strategy. That strategy was produced in partnership with local authorities, sports governing bodies and sportscotland, and it is supporting 10 projects which, when completed, will have delivered £230 million-worth of facilities.

I am running out of time. I am sorry. The Executive and sportscotland will work with those partners to fill geographic gaps in the coverage of regional facilities. That is where the conversations with Aberdeen City Council might be useful. Once complete, we will have a first-class network of facilities throughout Scotland for our elite and developing athletes to train in, which will also be accessible to local communities. We have answered the calls for an indoor velodrome, which will be built in Glasgow, and we have listened to the requests for additional football facilities and a new indoor arena. Our strategy will deliver those and other strategic facilities. Let us be clear, though: athletes train where they do for a number of reasons. Facilities are important, but athletes go to where there are coaches, the right weather conditions and competition. That is why the Australian sprinter Craig Mottram trains in London and the English swimmer Becky Cooke trains in Stirling. Athletes must be able to make decisions for themselves. Our athletes' success in Melbourne is largely down to their talent, but that talent has to be given the opportunity to develop. It is no surprise that the vast majority of medallists in Melbourne are supported in some way, either through the athlete support programme, the Scottish Institute of Sport network or the world-class performance programme. I was delighted to note that the  Chancellor of the Exchequer's budget statement announced significant additional investment, which will benefit our top athletes. We are currently engaged in a review of the institute network to see how best we can build on its achievements in providing a range of services to our top athletes. We are also considering how best we can support our developing athletes to ensure that they are given the best possible support to continue and build on the success of Melbourne. However, we remain committed to the vision and principles of sport 21. To ensure future success, we need to encourage our young people to participate in sport. The active schools programme is already making a significant contribution to participation in sport and physical activity. It is one example of the work that has been going on throughout the Executive. It is currently under review—

I do not have time now, Ms Hyslop. The programme is currently under review to allow the partners to prepare a plan that will help us to deliver the sporting nation that we want to see enjoying the 2014 Commonwealth games, particularly if they are held in Glasgow. As a nation, we have some way to go towards meeting our sport and physical education targets. I hope that the new sport 21 delivery plans will help to move us forward. However, the Executive cannot achieve those targets in isolation. We need others to help us to meet the challenge and to replicate the good examples in West Lothian Council and Highland Council areas, for example. We need to ensure that, once young people are engaged in sport, they can continue with it after school. The links that are being established between schools and local clubs are vital and are beginning to be strengthened through the active schools programme. Clubs are the breeding ground for the next crop of elite athletes. It is essential that we have strong, vibrant club structures that are linked with local communities, and that in turn work with the institute network. The introduction of regional sports partnerships will assist in the development of player pathways by putting in place a more strategic and co-ordinated approach to the development of sport. Today's debate comes immediately after the Melbourne games. It is fair to say that our team's success is a great boost for the 2014 bid. I want to build on our success at Melbourne and ensure that we have the right investment so that the maximum number of Scots compete in team GB in 2012 in London and in team Scotland in 2014 in Glasgow. That investment will be not only about achieving  success, but about ensuring that we have a lasting sporting legacy for our country and all its citizens. If we can give our athletes any reward as they return from Melbourne, it will be to put in place that legacy, which will reflect the glory that they have undoubtedly attracted to themselves over the past fortnight. I move amendment S2M-4196.2, to leave out from "; believes" to end and insert: "and the valuable support provided by the Institute network, sport scotland and the World Class Performance Programme; believes that Team Scotland's success in Melbourne should act as a springboard to ensure even greater success for our sportsmen and women in the international sporting arena and will also inspire many young Scots to participate in sport; recognises the significant benefits to be gained for Scotland from London 2012 and a successful bid for Glasgow to host the Commonwealth Games in 2014; acknowledges that access to good sporting facilities plays a significant role in the development of our nation's sporting talent; welcomes the investment in facilities through the Executive's National and Regional Facilities Strategy which will provide a first-class setting for our elite and developing athletes and which can also be enjoyed by local communities, and welcomes the imminent publication of the reports on the audit of local facilities."

Scottish culture is distinctive in national as well as international terms. We believe that culture is a vital ingredient in Scotland's success, both here and overseas.

If Mr MacAskill had been listening when I made my cultural policy statement  in the chamber last month, he would have heard about the added emphasis that the Executive gives to both literature and publishing. I am very disappointed that he should decide to frame his question in that way. However, Mr MacAskill will know that the OFT's report is, strictly speaking, a matter for my colleagues at Westminster. The comments that he quotes must be seen in the context of the particular enterprise that the OFT was looking into at the time. That does not mean to say that there is any contradiction with the policy of the Scottish Executive. Our policy is clear: we see our culture as a vital ingredient in our success, as I have already said. The direct answer to Mr MacAskill's question, which was whether the Scottish Executive considers Scottish culture to be a distinct market from the rest of the United Kingdom, is yes, we do and we take every opportunity to ensure that our distinctive culture is given its place and is used to promote our country. We will see many examples of that in the coming year, such as on tartan day in New York next month, in which organisations as diverse as the National Galleries of Scotland, the Scottish Youth Theatre and Scottish Screen will be taking part. Our commitment to our culture should not be in question.

The Scottish Executive is committed to supporting fair trade and has taken a number of steps to support fair trade products. The parliamentary cross-party group on fair trade, which I chair, recently met to discuss appropriate steps for how best to achieve our agenda, and will continue to receive full support from the Executive.

The group that I chair is currently looking at a range of options, one of which is how we achieve fair trade status for Scotland as a country. We will work very closely with the Fairtrade Foundation to develop that work. We are sure that one of the criteria that we will be expected to meet is that of achieving a critical mass of local authorities, community, church and faith groups and schools to sign up to the fair trade agenda and achieve fair trade status. The work in East Renfrewshire is helpful in that regard. Guidance is already available to local authorities and other public sector agencies on the use of fair trade products through the procurement process. By coincidence, at this week's meeting of the cross-party group on fair trade, we discussed the possibility of looking at that guidance again to see whether it can be strengthened. We are also considering the possibility of holding a seminar for public sector agencies, perhaps in the autumn, to develop that agenda further.

Obviously, the Executive is working with the Malawian Government on our co-operation agreement. We intend to take forward  that agenda as expeditiously as we can. I would be very grateful if the delegation of which Mark Ruskell is a member could bring us back some information on the projects that he mentioned. If there is a way in which the Executive can assist any of those projects on the ground or in connection with marketing here, for example, we are more than happy to look at the possibilities and to give any assistance that we can.

Several locations in Scotland, including Greenock, market themselves as cruise liner destinations. VisitScotland has embarked on a research project into the economic impact of cruise tourism. Various ways of marketing the varied attractions of Scotland to potential visitors from cruise ships that call at Scottish ports will be assessed in light of the findings of that study.

I met many of the people who are involved in the project during my recent visit to Inverclyde with Duncan McNeil. I put on record my thanks to the volunteers who are making the experience of those who embark and disembark at Greenock as pleasurable an experience as it is possible to have. The volunteers are also doing a good job in taking people from the cruise liners around the attractions of Greenock and Inverclyde. I point out to Mr McNeil that the matter of signage is primarily for the local authority. I agree that the Greenock Ocean Terminal should be adequately signposted and I draw his attention to the "Scottish Road and Motorway Tourist Signposting Policy and Guidance: A Consultation  Paper", which the Executive issued at the end of last year. I understand that the consultation period closed last week, but I am sure that any further thoughts that he may have on the matter could be fed into the process and that my colleague Tavish Scott would be interested to hear them.

The Executive is committed to working with its partners to achieve target 7 of sport 21, which aims to have more than 250 Scots as medallists on the world stage by 2007. Success is measured in a number of ways, including performance in the European championships, the Commonwealth games, the Olympic games and the paralympic games.

Athletes occasionally have difficulties in balancing their various commitments. I understand that that is what happened in the case of Andrew Lemoncello, whose educational situation had to be taken into account. I want as many competitors as possible to compete for Scotland in the Commonwealth games and am pleased that between 170 and 175 Scots will go to Melbourne in a week or two. The importance of the Commonwealth games cannot be underestimated. However, for many athletes, they occur outwith the normal cycle of events, which means that some of them will make decisions with which Margo MacDonald and I will perhaps not agree. They will make their decisions in the light of their commitment to their career and of their particular situation.

We want to capitalise on any successes that we achieve. The success of our curlers at the previous winter Olympics has led to an upsurge of interest in winter sports more generally, rather than curling specifically, which is interesting. We are considering ways of capitalising on our successes and I have been encouraged not least by the work that the members of our winning Olympic women's curling team have undertaken as sporting ambassadors. They have visited our schools and worked with active schools co-ordinators to encourage young people to become involved in sport.

VisitScotland promotes Ayrshire as a tourist destination using a wide range of marketing campaigns and activities to  highlight specific tourism products, themes and events in the area, in other areas of Scotland and further afield.

As I think the member is aware, I have been very interested in the development of that project. We have now established an advisory committee that works to ensure a range of events and other opportunities to encourage tourists to come to Scotland and, specifically, to those areas associated with Robert Burns. Some of the members of the advisory committee are drawn from EventScotland and VisitScotland. By developing their work, which is at an early stage, with the full co-operation of local authorities and other agencies in Ayrshire and in other parts of the country that are associated with Burns, we can make 2009 a success.

I work closely with my colleague Tavish Scott to consider how we can support airlines coming into this country. We are aware of the benefits that accrue from direct European flights that come into particular parts of the country. It has been reassuring to see the benefits that have come from direct flights from Sweden, for example, which have increased by 200 per cent the number of golf tourists who come to our country, usually but not exclusively through Ayrshire. I am always happy to work with my colleagues in tourism as well as my colleague in transport to ensure that we maximise all those opportunities.

"Scotland's Culture", the Executive's response to the cultural review, sets out a new vision for cultural policy that will deliver more and better cultural opportunities throughout Scotland. We are committed to providing additional support to the arts at local as well as national level. I have no doubt that Fife Council and local arts organisations in the area will want to take full advantage of the opportunities that my statement presents.

As Mr Brocklebank no doubt knows, the Byre Theatre in St Andrews has been in deficit for several years. In 2005-06, it received £443,000 from the Scottish Arts Council and I understand that the SAC has committed to giving it a further £454,000 in 2006-07. It is not for me to pre-empt the decisions of the Scottish Arts Council or its successor body, but I hope that it will work with local authorities and other agencies in the area to try to safeguard as far as possible facilities that are of that kind of importance.

If I may say so, that was a very creative question from Mr Matheson. A number of points are important for local arts provision. I hope that with my statement last week  and the central place that it now occupies in Executive policy, we send out a signal to the rest of Scotland and to our local authorities that culture and the arts must be at the heart of everything that they do. I said that explicitly in my statement last week and we intend to develop it. I will work with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the Voice of Chief Officers for Cultural, Community and Leisure Services to ensure that we are able to put in place a range of entitlements that will respond best to particular local circumstances. We will also make a point of ensuring that minimum standards apply to ensure that provision throughout the country is as equitable as possible, although we realise that different localities will require and be able to support different activities. In addition, I will consider ways in which to fund pilot schemes for local authorities to implement the agenda. I will also consider how to incentivise local authorities to keep up with the agenda.

The answer to that question is yes, and I expect that the Minister for Communities will make a tangible contribution to that debate when he releases his statement on regeneration in the near future.

The Scottish Executive fully recognises the importance of staging major sporting and cultural events, as witnessed by the publication of "Scotland's Major Events Strategy 2003-2015: 'Competing on an international stage'"  in 2002. As members know, that strategy led to the formation of EventScotland in May 2003. EventScotland's role is to attract, develop and create events that generate economic benefit to Scotland. In carrying out that role, EventScotland works in partnership with others to provide significant investment in events.

EventScotland has a role in working with festivals such as Celtic connections, and will continue to do so, as too will the proposed new body creative Scotland. The Scottish Arts Council already funds Celtic connections, and that will continue if the festival meets the criteria that the council has in place. The same arrangement will continue with creative Scotland. I want to ensure that organisations such as EventScotland and creative Scotland work together more closely in supporting organisations and events that are of cultural significance to our country.

However, I do not think that I will qualify for a grant. Film makers have all sorts of reasons for choosing one location over another. In any event, if a film is about a Scottish subject, people presume that it has been filmed in Scotland and the resulting impact on our tourism economy is good rather than negative. We want to encourage as much film making in Scotland as possible, as with all the creative arts. We hope that the proposed new body creative Scotland will have responsibility for elements of work that are  undertaken by Scottish Screen, with an extra emphasis on development to make inroads in this area.

On St Andrew's day 2003, the First Minister said: "I marvel when I see what a fantastic country Scotland is for cultural expression ... we need a greater sense of ambition in our approach to culture ... we can set a course that will, over several years, make a huge difference." My message today is that the enthusiasm of that occasion, when the Executive celebrated its passionate commitment to our nation's culture, is not reserved only for our patron saint's day. Our commitment is for all seasons. We remain ambitious for Scotland's cultural life—ambitious to promote our twin aspirations of excellence and access. Today, I will share with members how we plan to invest, as never before, to make our aspirations a reality. On St Andrew's day 2003, the First Minister outlined the Executive's vision for culture. Today, my statement and the document "Scotland's Culture", which we published today, set out a new cultural policy for the years to come. They define the infrastructure and legislation to deliver it. They also describe our investment, which we are proud to make. Scotland as a nation is blessed with immense creative talent. Let me start by briefly reaffirming why the Government has a passion to see that talent flourish. The importance of that talent could easily be overlooked because of its very centrality—but not by this Government. The artists whose work delights and touches us in turn help to articulate our experience of life—in pictures, words, music and movement—by adding their personal vision in ways that are immediate, universal and timeless. Therefore, it is fitting that we should define a cultural vision that seeks to provide creative expression and opportunity for all as "the next major enterprise for our society". The Scottish Government believes that culture is a vital ingredient in the country's success, both here and overseas. Culture is also central to the well-being of Scotland's citizens. Its inspirational qualities defy measurement—just as there is no adequate way to define the confidence and pride that culture's myriad works stir up in those who participate and in those who look on in admiration.  The First Minister proposed a fresh policy of cultural rights for every citizen to access high-quality provision. He said that the then impending review would examine whether the infrastructure was in place to realise our hopes for Scotland's cultural life. Today, we announce our decisions on the cultural review. I think it fair to say that the Cultural Commission's report, which is one of the most comprehensive examinations ever undertaken of Scotland's cultural life, received a mixed press. As I said in Parliament in September, I welcomed the enthusiastic contributions from people who hold our culture dear and want their aspirations to be realised. The commission was asked to produce a route map to implement the ambitions that the First Minister had described. It was asked to suggest practical and efficient ways that would focus the resources available on producing culture, not on fuelling bureaucracy. I do not propose to dwell on whether that is what the commission did. My task today is to say what I think is the best course for policy, infrastructure and our strategic direction. In policy terms, the Executive's objectives for Scotland's future cultural development are those that I suggested during our September debate. We seek to celebrate the country's cultural and creative talent and to develop it to the highest levels possible. We aim to maximise practical opportunities for all citizens to access culture of real quality. All the changes that I am announcing today are focused on those goals. In November 2003, the First Minister said that Scotland should embrace the concept of cultural rights, to ensure that people have an equal chance to participate in the nation's cultural life and heritage. The starting point was to examine ways of ensuring rights of access for citizens and communities across Scotland, so that people can have more opportunities to take part in cultural activity. We have studied the commission's proposals on rights and entitlements. The action that we shall take seeks to make a real difference in helping everyone to gain access to the arts. We believe that there are two elements to that. First, there is the framework of international and European rights that already exist, such as those that are laid down by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation. In the policy document that is published today, we endorse the international provisions unreservedly. Secondly, there is the issue of how those rights are made real locally—in other words, entitlements. We see responsibility for such entitlements falling to local government, as part of its cultural and community planning responsibilities. Local authorities already play a major role in delivering cultural services, so it is entirely  appropriate that they should play a pivotal role in widening opportunities as part of our new vision. Legislation will require local authorities to develop cultural entitlements and cultural planning, as part of their lead community planning role. That will ensure that the needs and wishes of people and communities can drive cultural provision in their local areas. I believe that this represents a powerful package of rights for communities to access and enjoy the best and widest possible range of cultural activity. The opportunities provided through entitlements could include access to information about a local area's cultural heritage, free access to a live performance or the chance to take part in a community art project. We shall work with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities to find effective and practical ways to fulfil that duty, reflecting high-quality standards of provision. We shall look to local authorities and their community planning partners to demonstrate the rich and invaluable contribution that culture can and will make to the lives of everyone living in Scotland, across the widest range of local services. The approach that I have described mirrors very much what the Executive is doing in light of the First Minister's 2003 speech, when he announced the Scottish Cabinet's collective ambition to place culture at the heart of the policy-making agenda. As a response to the cultural review, all Cabinet ministers have pledged to consider how their future portfolio policy and financial initiatives might be assessed for the contribution that they can make to supporting and developing the Executive's cultural agenda for Scotland. Other portfolio contributions can impact in many ways, such as the Education Department's support for literature and arts in the curriculum and the Health Department's funding for projects improving mental health and physical activity through the arts. That shared commitment demonstrates my belief that, if we work together, we can make a real difference and bring culture into many more lives than it touches now. As I indicated in September, I believe that the clarification of roles is vital if the change that we plan is to be effective. The new cultural infrastructure for delivering our policies is focused on what I see as the Scottish Executive's responsibilities for support and development. Beyond that, we shall act to encourage our principal partners and other providers to develop their contributions, to ensure that Scotland as a whole can enjoy the results. We have an important opportunity to establish the right cultural landscape and to reorganise activities to deliver our goals. I intend to explain how the Government's top cultural objectives will be served by the delivery arrangements that I am about to describe.  We have an obligation at national level to do three crucial things: first, to ensure that cultural talent in Scotland is recognised and nurtured and that excellence is developed as a national resource, recognising and advancing Scotland's outstandingly talented artists and their achievements; secondly, to promote the best of Scotland's rich cultural treasure trove, maintaining and presenting, as openly and accessibly as possible, Scotland's superb national galleries', museums' and library collections; and thirdly, to make the best of the nation's performing activity available, right across the country, providing national performing arts companies that produce excellence in and for Scotland. The organisations that form part of our present cultural infrastructure have achieved much, and my ambition now is to build on that success. We must ensure that our future cultural achievements, and those of our partners, are delivered in ways that boost participation, access and enjoyment. As I have said, the first thing that we must do is help Scotland's cultural talent develop to the highest possible levels by taking what I shall call the escalator approach. Too often, the success of talented performers and Scotland's creative community is more the result of good luck rather than good planning, of serendipity rather than support. We think that ambition and talent deserve a helping hand. We need to link up the stages in artists' career journey from the early discovery of cultural talent through education and training and into the world of work in the creative community. The education and outreach activity that we shall expect from all nationally funded cultural organisations will help to give younger and older people right across Scotland a wealth of top-quality opportunities to learn and develop. As far as the pre-school stage is concerned, we shall aim to build on—and perhaps extend the focus of—the successful bookstart programme. In schools, cultural engagement and creativity will have an important role to play, and we will bring together programmes such as cultural co-ordinators and active schools co-ordinators to work with teachers in dynamic teams to maximise pupils' experiences of culture. In developing the curricular framework, we intend that culture should be not just a context but a vehicle for learning, and we will want to build on the successes of our youth music initiative. After school, further and higher education institutions will have an important part to play. The Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama, the recently launched Scottish Screen Academy and other initiatives involving Scotland's renowned art colleges all have a role in facilitating access, developing talent and equipping their students to take advantage of creative opportunities.  Of course, it is not enough to develop talent through the formal education system. We also need to sustain it and to provide an environment in which it will flourish and be appreciated. As a result, we will establish a new cultural development agency called creative Scotland, which will be formed by merging the Scottish Arts Council and Scottish Screen and which will have the key task of developing talent and excellence in all branches of the arts and in the creative and screen industries. In establishing the new agency, we will ensure that we put in place the right support package to enable Scotland's creative industries to thrive. We will also promote the parts of the creative sector that deserve a new focus, such as publishing, literature and contemporary music. Creative Scotland will lead the development of national standards for the creative sector and advise on cultural entitlements. It will also draw up national guidance to maximise the contribution of all parts of the cultural sector and other partners, including the private and voluntary sectors. Moreover, through Arts & Business Scotland, I will make available from April new funding to encourage wider sponsorship of the arts. It is no secret that I am also particularly keen to ensure that we celebrate the role and contribution of our best creative artists. A new scheme to recognise their achievements will be launched later this year. The Government's second key role is as the custodian of Scotland's rich cultural treasures, maintaining and presenting our superb national collections. I am keen to make those collections truly accessible to us all and to present them as widely and effectively as possible to domestic and international audiences. We will expand the cadre of national collections bodies to help to maximise the presentation of their world-beating contents. As a result, to the National Galleries of Scotland, the National Museums of Scotland and the National Library of Scotland, we shall add the National Archives of Scotland, the Scottish Screen archive and the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland. We want to ensure that resources are directed not to where they will be wasted on unnecessary bureaucracy but to where they will make most impact. Although we will maintain our institutions' independent status, we will take this opportunity to explore how joint approaches can best improve delivery. Joint exhibitions and combined support functions and outreach activity are just some of the aspects that could deliver real benefits. The national collections bodies will also play a part in delivering the cultural rights agenda. They  will be responsible for developing national standards for their sectors and will help to develop and, as appropriate, provide cultural entitlements. Of course, a range of other organisations throughout Scotland also hold collections of national significance and make a major contribution to the achievement of our national cultural priorities. Scotland's local museums and galleries will therefore benefit from increased national funding with the launch of the new recognition scheme developed by the Scottish Museums Council. Industrial museums will also benefit from increased funding. In collaboration with the Scottish Library and Information Council, I will also be making funds available to promote the maintenance and improvement of standards in public libraries throughout Scotland. The third key role of Government is to support the national performing arts companies that are producing work at the highest level. As members know, our national performing arts companies are currently Scottish Opera, Scottish Ballet, the Royal Scottish National Orchestra, the Scottish Chamber Orchestra and the National Theatre of Scotland. We are proud of our existing national companies and we want them to flourish. We have decided to establish explicit criteria to define the status of a national performing arts company so as to include adult and youth companies alike. Organisations that qualify for national performing body status will have to meet exacting criteria, including achievement of the highest artistic performing standards. Those standards will provide the target to which all budding arts companies should aspire and then continue to meet. In future, it will be open to performing companies—adult and youth alike—that are not presently counted among the national companies to join if they meet the qualifying criteria. We will expect the new national companies to co-operate with one another on joint projects and productions and to collaborate on common administrative functions. To underline its commitment, the Executive plans to increase its funding to the companies that qualify beyond the level currently made available through the Scottish Arts Council. In future, the Executive will fund the national companies directly. That is consistent with our relationship to the national collections. We will therefore work with the companies and the Scottish Arts Council to put the necessary funding arrangements in place as soon as possible and to provide for the transfer of relevant Scottish Arts Council staff to the Executive. Nothing in those new arrangements will affect the artistic independence of those companies. That must not, and will not, be compromised. Like the national collections, the national performing bodies will also be expected to contribute to the cultural rights agenda and the  development of standards and entitlements for their respective sectors. The Executive currently dedicates 1 per cent of its total budget directly to culture—£187 million in the current financial year. That figure increases significantly when our contribution to local authority cultural expenditure is included. That contribution amounts to approximately £200 million, and it is supplemented by a further £200 million committed by Scottish Executive departments that use the power and creativity of culture to help to achieve their objectives. By 2007-08, the Executive's annual cultural spend was already planned to increase to £214 million. In order to implement the decisions laid out in the policy paper, I have secured an additional £20 million per annum from April 2007 onwards. That is an exceptional increase of almost 10 per cent in the Executive's annual spending on culture in advance of the 2007 spending review. We will channel that new investment to bolster the ability of our national cultural organisations to develop and present for Scotland the best creative and cultural talent. We will bring the necessary budgetary revisions before Parliament later this year. Today marks the start, not the end, of a new journey towards achieving our ambitious aspirations for Scotland's cultural life. That journey began on St Andrew's Day 2003 and Scottish ministers are now determined to continue it to reach a Scotland that values and celebrates its culture and its experience of culture. The commitment has been made, the ambition to achieve excellence has been stated and the vision is now coming into focus. What I have announced today will ensure that all Scots can share in the fruits of the culture that inspires and defines us. I invite members to support Scotland's cultural future, which I have outlined, and to endorse the means of achieving it.

First, I apologise to Mr Matheson if he did not get the entire version of the speech. We will ensure that he receives it in due course. We will obviously have to enter negotiations with a number of organisations in order to make what I outlined in my statement a reality. We will do that very quickly. A series of meetings is already in place for the next couple of weeks and we will work to ensure that people and organisations are not left in limbo for any time. We want to ensure that the transitions happen just as quickly as we can arrange them. The money that is currently given to the national companies to allow them to operate is actually Executive funding, channelled through the Scottish Arts Council. We will fund the companies at a level that is appropriate to the work that they are required to do. We will enter negotiations with them to ensure that we are coming to the kind of totals that we think are right. We are aware that a number of the companies have deficits and we are  working very hard to ensure that they are not burdened with such deficits in the future. As far as leaving money with the Scottish Arts Council is concerned, obviously we are talking about setting up an entirely new agency—creative Scotland—to replace the SAC. We will have to negotiate and work with it to assess the levels of funding that it will need to do the tasks that we ask it to do. That negotiation, too, will begin relatively quickly and I will obviously be keen to report back to Parliament as soon as it has concluded.

The member asked several detailed questions. The governance arrangements for the national companies will largely continue as at present. They will have their own boards and operational systems, but we will encourage them to work together to share back-office functions wherever that is appropriate and possible and to ensure that they programme comprehensively so that we do not have clashes. We believe that a number of steps can be taken. We are putting the national companies on a footing that is similar to that of our  national collections, which is entirely appropriate. Creative Scotland will have Exchequer funding through the Scottish Executive and will also hold the lottery funding that the Scottish Arts Council currently holds, which is an important principle to establish. The body will not be audited in the formal sense of the term that Mr Fraser perhaps meant, but it will certainly be the subject of funding negotiations with the Scottish Executive. As always, we will ensure that those are as transparent and open as possible. The other questions that Mr Fraser asked about creative Scotland may be answered in the Executive's response to the cultural review, to which I referred. If not, I will make a point of writing to him with the answers.

The mechanism that we plan to put in place will address the issues that Donald Gorrie raises. We see local authorities as spearheading the citizen-led approach to the development of cultural rights and entitlements throughout the country. We recognise that those rights and entitlements will be developed in ways that are appropriate for the local level, and I hope that local communities will participate actively— [ Interruption. ]

My apologies, Presiding Officer. I never like to be rude to Mr Gorrie, but on this occasion perhaps I shall have to be. As I said, we recognise that rights and entitlements will have to be developed in ways that are appropriate for the local level, and we hope that local communities will participate actively in the development of those schemes through the cultural and community planning network. We will work with COSLA and its sister organisation, the Voice of Chief Officers for Cultural, Community and Leisure Services, to produce guidelines and quality assurance tools to assist local authorities in reaching that goal. I hope that that will be helpful to local communities.

On public libraries, as I am sure that the member is well aware, the organisation of which she is chair has worked out a helpful matrix for improving standards. We intend to fund a pilot to assist some 10 public library authorities to develop those standards and evaluation criteria. We wish to ensure that, having piloted that, checked that it works and confirmed the data, it is something that we can take throughout the country. As far as the community planning partnerships are concerned, I hope that we can manage not to restrict people to the community planning area in which they happen to live. I am conscious that because of history, size or geography, some local authorities are better endowed with wonderful collections, exhibits, theatres and so on than others. I hope that where there is more cultural  provision in one local authority or cultural planning area than there is in another, partnerships will develop across those boundaries and that people will work to ensure that they are achieving the appropriate set of rights and entitlements for the communities in their area, while not restricting them to that area for participation purposes.

I am glad that Mr Ballance asked that question. I want to put on record that what the Cultural Commission said was that it saw the figure of £100 million as largely symbolic and that that was the amount of money that should accrue to culture across two to three spending reviews. It also identified eight sources of funding, only one of which was the Scottish Executive. In addition, I point out that the figure that the commission used was based on the 2003-04 figure of £138 million as the global budget for culture in the Scottish Executive. By the time that the Cultural Commission reported, that figure had increased; by 2007-08, there will have been an increase of £76 million to £214 million. The £20 million that I have secured will be a baseline figure and I can use it to lever in additional funds at future spending reviews. In addition, my colleagues throughout the Executive are identifying an additional £200 million from their portfolios to contribute to our ambition. That is not necessarily the end of the story, but it is a good way of taking forward the First Minister's ambition.

I do not think that today is the day to go into the individual funding details of any particular company. Obviously, those funding arrangements are being discussed between the Scottish Arts Council and the company that Rosemary Byrne identifies. The Scottish Arts Council, quite rightly, carries out reviews of the organisations that it funds to ensure that they are achieving best value for money and that the money that they spend on behalf of the citizens of Scotland is used to further access, excellence and the other remits that we have given them. The SAC has to make funding decisions. Those decisions are not always comfortable or popular but I believe that when the SAC makes them it has all the information and considers all the facts. We will have to wait and see what its decision is on the company that Rosemary Byrne identified.

I thank Susan Deacon for welcoming the statement. She is absolutely right and I agree entirely about where our focus needs to be. The early years are vital, because habits are formed even before one gets to primary school. It is important that young children at nursery school are given as much exposure to the arts and culture as is possible and sensible at their age. In the document, I give a rough idea of the milestones that we envisage as we make the policy a reality. I hope that that information will be helpful. Obviously, we have already been working behind the scenes on our implementation plan. As I said earlier, we intend to move quickly. We have  in place a range of meetings with various organisations that will be affected by the policy and we will ensure that we make the handover and the changeovers as quick and painless as possible. However, we will not rush, because we do not want to miss important points and important elements of what we are trying to do along the way. We will move as quickly as we can, but we will try to follow a rational path.

I emphasise that we see the development of cultural talent as being part of an escalator approach, and we will try to ensure along the way that we put in place as many safeguards for people as we can. I am encouraged by the work of the Dewar arts awards in providing instruments and additional educational help to young people with talent, but we will see whether we can supplement that with a range of bursaries that might also be worth while. We see both those elements as part of a package of measures. We already have the creative Scotland awards, which are welcomed in the artistic world, and Mr Neill probably knows that I am keen that we should recognise the outstanding contribution of our artists over a long period. We hope that there will be such markers throughout the development of an artist's experience and talent.

We are well aware that there is a range of local museums and facilities that house items and collections of national—sometimes even international—significance. That is why, working with the Scottish Museums Council, we have developed the national significance scheme. We hope to have that scheme rolled out during 2006, and it will be through that scheme that bodies such as the  Scottish Maritime Museum will be able to apply for funding, and I am sure that funding will be granted if they meet the appropriate criteria. That will be done flexibly, and we will consider the needs of those organisations and the applications that they make.

As I have said in response to previous questions, I cannot get dragged into the specifics of whether or not a particular institution would qualify, but it would obviously be open to that organisation to apply for funding from our national significance scheme. If it qualified for that funding, it would receive it.

I am aware of Mr Gibson's interest in those endeavours. In fact, I have shared one or two experiences of listening to them with him in the recent past. Creative Scotland's remit will include support for nationally important arts bodies that meet minimum standards and the development of national standards across all art forms. I see the function of creative Scotland as being about nurturing and developing the very organisations and art forms that Mr Gibson has mentioned.

As I said to Mr Gibson, we envisage creative Scotland having the key role in ensuring that such art forms are supported. However, it is also important to say that the escalator approach that I outlined is very much about developing individuals with talent from their pre-school years through school and further education until they start their careers. As I said to another member, we will consider a system of scholarships and bursaries to assist the transition from FE to higher education and into employment—perhaps self-employment—and will build on existing ideas and schemes. It is important to recognise that the idea of rights and entitlements means that there will be much more demand at local level for access to such art forms and I hope that, in the longer term, that will help to support the artists and people who want to pursue them.

That is a very good question. I have said that I understand the difficulty that is often experienced by people who do not live close to a museum, a gallery or a theatre and who want to access such provision. What is important is that the cultural planning elements of the proposals that I have outlined should happen at the most local level and that local communities themselves should make suggestions and demands about their rights and entitlements so that they can access the kinds of art forms that they wish to. Some people's requests might well be met by the availability of one of our national collections in digitised form, or they might wish to seek assistance with travel so that they could go a little further afield to access their preferred art form. We must be flexible in considering a range of locally driven ways of meeting communities' rights and entitlements.

Mr Swinburne is right. The point that I made to Jamie Stone was that access might sometimes have to be provided through digitisation. Digitisation is a highly useful tool because it allows us all to access examples of artistic excellence from all over the world. If we were to go down the route that Mr Swinburne suggests—I have a sneaking suspicion that what he proposes may already have been done, but I could be wrong—I hope that we would not restrict availability to people in Scotland, but would export that wonderful creativity around the world as an example of the great things that we have in Scotland.

No, not at all. I meant that we could have national performing arts companies in any sphere and for any art form. Given some of the fiddle music that I have heard in recent times, what Maureen Macmillan describes cannot be that far off. Obviously, we expect any body that aspires to that status and to being funded in that way to reach the very highest levels of artistic endeavour. They will also have to meet the criteria that we will put in place.

Obviously, we will work with the local authorities to assist them in this important endeavour. It will be important for local communities to identify to their local authority, in the way that I outlined earlier, the kind of  experience that they want. It may be that that would be provided by a theatre or gallery, but it may also be gained through more local means, such as the opportunity to participate in a community performance. The cultural rights and entitlements that we are putting in place will mean greater opportunities for the local authorities to work with the Executive to achieve that kind of outcome. Again, I do not want to talk specifics. I am well aware of the difficulties at Pitlochry Festival Theatre and that Mr Swinney has been trying to assist it. In the longer term, I believe that what we have outlined today will be a better way forward for some of our theatres and venues around the country. We must be creative in how we take forward these rights and entitlements. The local authorities will want to find out what works. One of the things that the Executive will do is help to fund the pilot scheme that is being undertaken as part of the year of Highland culture in 2007, part of the planning for which is to give particular entitlements to young people. We will see what works before either rolling out those entitlements across Scotland or suggesting to the local authorities around Scotland that they take them up. We will pilot some things and see how they go. I hope that the strategy that we are putting in place means that people around Scotland will have greater access to all that is excellent about our arts.

It was inevitable that we would get bids from the airts and pairts, as they say, but I do not want to be that specific. Obviously, if the local community were to identify that as a priority, the local authority might want to consider the proposal. I encourage Mr Johnstone not to wait for anything new to happen. He should try to explore existing mechanisms to see whether his project could become a reality rather more quickly than he envisages at the moment.

The criteria that we will put in place will be about the quality that a company will have to aspire to and achieve in order to be called "national". We want those companies to be truly national. In addition, they will have to participate in educational and outreach work. Any company that manages to meet the criteria that we will set down could, after negotiation, be considered as part of our national companies. However, we would have to take a serious, hard look at any organisation that aspired to join that elite band.

I understand the frustration that has arisen because Scottish Opera has not been able to tour main-scale opera to Aberdeen and Inverness in the past year or so and is in fact unlikely to be able to do so before 2007. I hope that everyone will appreciate the need for Scottish Opera to stick to its stabilisation plan and balance its books in future. The transfer of support for Scottish Opera from the Scottish Arts Council to the Executive will involve an increase in funding in return for minimum standards of performance, touring, education outreach and governance—all the things that I outlined to Mr Monteith. I hope that in future we will see Scottish Opera appearing again, magnificently, in Aberdeen and Inverness.

I presume that Lord James is talking about the master plan that has been developed for the museums. We welcome the heritage lottery fund stage 1 approval of £16 million funding for the £45 million redevelopment of the Royal Museum. We have already funded a £9 million project of improvements at the museum and linked developments at the Museum of  Scotland storage site at Granton. We have also awarded a development grant of £800,000 to match the heritage lottery fund's development funding. We are scrutinising the option appraisals for the project with a view to seeing whether we would be able to contribute further.

Mr Peacock and I have had long and detailed discussions on that and a number of other issues connected with my statement today. It is important to stress that we value the work that is being done by the active schools co-ordinators and the cultural co-ordinators in our schools. They make an extremely valuable contribution where they operate. Our desire is to have them embedded in the school structure and to see them working with dynamic teachers to ensure that we have a team approach to the kind of developmental work that we want to happen in schools. We are involved in discussions on that and are committed to it for the short and long term.

We are committed to using the 250 th anniversary of Burns's birth as one means to encourage Scots worldwide to return to Scotland. A project director for the year of homecoming has been appointed and an advisory board will help to guide the project. The redevelopment of the Burns national heritage park by the National Trust for Scotland will ensure that the year of homecoming will help future generations to appreciate Burns's contribution to Scottish culture.

The project advisory board has been tasked with considering how we should celebrate 2009, but we certainly intend to ensure that the effect of the celebration is felt as widely as possible throughout the length and breadth of our country and beyond. We will look for ways to do that internationally as well as locally and regionally. I am encouraged by the model that is being used for the year of Highland culture in 2007; we will learn lessons from that project too.

I am sure that colleagues around the chamber will celebrate that particular anniversary in their own ways and that some will be more imaginative than others. My colleagues at Westminster are considering how the anniversary can be celebrated and we will remain in close contact with them to see whether there is any added value that we can give to those celebrations.

Like many others, and like the trustees of the museum, I was very concerned about the condition of many of the objects that were still on display. One of the things that the Executive has done is put in place curatorial support for the Burns museum to make sure that the precious objects that it holds do not suffer any further deterioration. Mr Gallie is absolutely right to say that the Burns collection is very much dispersed. Our first step in that connection was to conduct a survey of the  dispersed collection so that we knew where it was. There will be a new museum at Alloway as part of the 2009 year of homecoming. However, we want to ensure not only that the objects that were originally in Alloway are returned there once their safekeeping can be assured, but that people throughout Scotland have the opportunity to enjoy those items that have spent most of their existence in Alloway. We also want to ensure that people in Ayrshire will have the opportunity to enjoy the objects that might have been scattered around Scotland in the 250 years since Burns was born.

The 10-year youth football action plan will radically overhaul the structure and organisation of youth football, from recreational to elite levels. The Executive will invest more than £12 million in the implementation of the plan, which will increase the quality and quantity of coaches and youth development programmes in football generally. In addition, other programmes such as active schools will help to increase children's and young people's opportunities to participate in football and other sports.

Mary Scanlon raises an interesting point that is very dear to my own heart. However, it is important to see the issue in the context of the regional and national facilities programme that we put in place just over a year ago. This week, sportscotland announced that it would provide £2 million to improve sports facilities in Scotland, of which £1.19 million is dedicated to football-related facilities across the country. That gives us optimism that such facilities will be available in future. In Mrs Scanlon's own area, the Highland football academy, which is a joint venture between the local authority, Ross County and Inverness Caledonian Thistle, is a successful and worthwhile enterprise. The future of youth football is in very good hands.

There will be some football academies across the country, but it is not solely the role of Government to make them happen. It is important to remember that it is not just the Executive that is involved in putting facilities in place; local authorities and other partners are involved too. We are monitoring progress on facilities to ensure that they proceed; it is certainly our intention that they should, because they are part of what supports our overall intentions for football and other sports. At the same time, it is important that members know that, at a more local level, just this week £2 million was announced for a variety of projects across the country. Some of them are directly football-related; others are related more to other events and sports. That is good progress.

The active schools programme is one of the ways in which the Executive wants young people to be able to participate in a range of sports in their own areas. As my colleague the Minister for Education and Young People said earlier, more than 600 active schools co-ordinators are in place across the country. We hope that that will lead to the kind of participation that I am sure everyone in the chamber would like to see.

I am certainly happy to look into the matter further on behalf of Mrs Macmillan, and also to speak with her further about the issue. It is important to recognise that, during the past year, there has been an announcement of an allocation of £100,000 to the Camanachd Association, which will allow it to employ development officers, who will link their work to the active schools programme. That money will also be used to develop further the association's coaching programme.  Since 1999, around 16 new shinty clubs have come into being. At the same time, about 1,180 young people have been enjoying shinty across Scotland. Over the past five years, the figure has doubled. It is fair to say that the level of participation in shinty is increasing. That is of course a good thing, but I am certainly happy to look into the specific matter that Mrs Macmillan has raised.

I, too, congratulate Des McNulty not only on the work of the cross-party international development group, of which he is the convener, but on securing this debate at a time when, as he said, we are approaching Christmas and the anniversary of last year's tsunami. As a number of colleagues have pointed out, this year has seen an unprecedented number of natural and man-made disasters such as the Asian tsunami, the on-going food crises in Africa and the earthquake in Kashmir. Those terrible tragedies have not only shattered many communities but affected many people in Scotland. I am grateful to Des McNulty for this opportunity to discuss the matter in the Parliament and I know that all members will want us to express our condolences and sympathy to those who have lost loved ones in, or are otherwise suffering from the impact of, those disasters. Although we have been horrified by the scale of the disasters, we have also been overwhelmed by the response of the Scottish people, who have not  only taken part in demonstrations of public sympathy and grief but shown unprecedented levels of generosity. Although I take on board Des McNulty's comments, I should point out that, as a result of people's pledges to the earthquake appeal, the Disasters Emergency Committee has now raised over £40 million, which makes that appeal the third most successful that it has organised. Throughout the year, the people of Scotland have continued to show their generosity and concern by donating significant amounts of money and time to help those who have been directly affected by the horrendous events. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton was right to highlight the efforts of the organisation of which he is president, because UK organisations were responsible for 14 of the 24 live rescues that were carried out in the earthquake's immediate aftermath. Such small but significant acts of life saving can be enormously helpful in boosting people's confidence and morale when they might be at their lowest ebb. The media should also be applauded for their sensitive coverage of the earthquake and the year's other disasters; for the support that they have given to the appeals that have been launched; and for their efforts in raising awareness among the Scottish public. The Executive's experience of responding to last year's tsunami disaster has taught us that international development organisations are best placed to co-ordinate responses to natural disasters. I have met representatives of Scottish agencies that are involved in disaster response to identify ways in which we can work together and prepare for future disasters. We are committed to continuing our support for those organisations and their hugely worthwhile work. As with the tsunami last December, we have offered secondments of staff to the Disasters Emergency Committee to help to relieve the administrative burden of the fundraising appeal. Immediately following the Asian earthquake, I met organisations undertaking emergency response activities and families in Glasgow who had lost relatives in the disaster. We will continue to work closely with those organisations as reconstruction work continues and will support their work wherever possible. I might not have time to do so in the debate, but I am happy to speak to Susan Deacon about her comments on the sustainability of work that is being carried out in the areas in question and on how we help smaller organisations and charities. We are taking that kind of work forward and will continue to do so. On Des McNulty's specific points about Kashmir, he knows that, a week or so ago, I indicated to the  cross-party international development group that we were considering extending our funding stream to include areas that have been affected by the earthquake. We have now agreed to do that and my officials are in contact with the non-governmental organisations that are involved to ensure that they are aware of our decision and that we can get funding to them as quickly as we can. This year's disasters bring home to us the importance of meeting longer-term development goals, such as the millennium development goals. Although the earthquake is a natural disaster, the ability of nations to respond to such events is very much constrained and dictated by how poor they are. Unfortunately, it is no surprise that the world's poorest people are also its most vulnerable. In that respect, I very much agree with Frances Curran. John Home Robertson talked about enabling teachers and perhaps other professionals to go and work in Kashmir. I am very sympathetic to the idea, which we have pursued in other parts of the world through our work with VSO. In one of my conversations with the earthquake victims' relatives, we discussed the fact that a number of the people who would normally administer civil society in the affected areas were lost in the tragedy and we spoke about the possibility of seconding people in such circumstances. A difficult balance needs to be struck in that respect. We have to be guided by the people on the ground on when it is appropriate to make those kinds of interventions. We do not want to be sending in extra mouths to feed and additional people to be looked after at a time of crisis. However, we are happy to work on the issues and to take forward the proposal. We will work with VSO to allow such secondments to take place at the appropriate time. I recognise the fortitude and nobility of the people in the disaster area. I also recognise the support that the Indian and Pakistani communities in our country have given to their compatriots. The way in which that has been done has been entirely appropriate and very much to be welcomed. In 2005—the year in which the G8 leaders met in Gleneagles to discuss the ways in which the wealthiest nations can do more to assist the poorest—we have had an opportunity to address world poverty. In every one of the disasters to which members referred in the debate, poverty was a significant factor. The commitments that were made will make a significant difference to the lives of the poorest. We also acknowledge that much more can be done and needs to be done. We need to continue to build on the generosity, enthusiasm and understanding that developed this year. We also need to capitalise on the public and political desire to fight the injustice of global poverty and, hopefully, change the world for good.  Meeting closed at 17:47.

I congratulate Helen Eadie on securing the debate and congratulate the members who have contributed to what I think has been an interesting, informative and worth-while debate. I, like others, am pleased to be here this evening to contribute to a debate that honours the memory of a young man who achieved much in a career that was cut short tragically and who continues to hold such a special place in the annals of our national game. As Trish Godman said, many of us heard about him at an early age from fathers, grandfathers and other family members who perhaps remembered the tragic day when he died. Fortunately, accidents such as that which befell John Thomson are extremely rare in football. Only two other people have died as a result of injuries received playing top-level football in Scotland: one in 1890 and one in 1909. The motion recognises the high esteem in which John Thomson was held by Celtic Football Club and its supporters in the mining community in which he was born in Fife and in Scottish football generally—an esteem that is remembered to the present day. His great skill and ability earned him representative honours as well as success at club level and there is no doubt that he would have achieved further success and recognition if he had been able to enjoy a longer career in football. Bruce Crawford quite rightly told us the interesting story of how John Thomson began his career with Celtic almost accidentally. It is worth adding to that story by pointing out that times certainly have changed, because I understand that Celtic bought John Thomson for just £10. The motion refers to John Thomson's contribution as a role model for young people in his own and subsequent generations. By all accounts he was a quiet and unassuming young  man but, when he took the field, he impressed with his ability, agility and bravery. None of us had the pleasure of seeing him play, but one man who did was his manager, Willie Maley, who wrote: "His merit as a goalkeeper shone superbly in his play. Never was there a keeper who caught and held the fastest shots with such grace and ease. In all he did there was the balance and beauty of movement wonderful to watch." I think that it is excellent that we have sports halls of fame and rolls of honour that enable us to recognise great sporting achievements and let past champions motivate and inspire future generations to participate and excel at their own level. The Scottish Executive has been pleased to support the sporting champions scheme, for example, which assists and encourages the current generation of sportspeople to visit schools to promote the value of a healthy lifestyle, including participation in physical activity and sport. The motion calls on the SFA to induct John Thomson into the Scottish football hall of fame, but I understand that it is not the SFA that is responsible for deciding on inductees and that, in fact, the hall of fame is administered by the Scottish Football Museum. Nominations are made by the general public and the museum convenes an expert panel of football panellists and former players who reach the final decisions. The criteria that the panel uses to assess nominations include, for example, the person's contribution to Scottish football and the longevity of their career at the top level. It is not just about honours won, as that would of course favour old firm players. However, although I understand that the hall of fame needs to control the number of people that it inducts and ensure that its inductees are of the highest-possible level and that John Thomson's career was not as long as others—although there are few players who play until the end of their working lives—I think that the longevity that matters in this case is the longevity of his memory, which lingers to this day. For that reason, he should be inducted into the hall of fame. To reflect a point that one of my colleagues raised earlier, I understand that one of the criteria is that the person must have been born in Scotland. If it were not for that unfortunate requirement, I would also have wanted the induction of Sam English, who was equally a victim of this tragedy. Regardless of whether John Thomson is inducted, his name and his contribution to Scottish football are unlikely ever to be forgotten. Few players who played in that era are still sung about by the supporters of their club and have their grave visited by their fans. Of course, even fewer  are celebrated in a Parliament that did not even exist at the time of their death. I wish Helen Eadie success in her campaign. Further, I look forward to accompanying her to a football game in the near future.   Meeting closed at 17:42.

Support for the bid from all sectors is important. We plan to involve the private  sector in as many aspects of the bid as we can. Glasgow City Council has already held preliminary discussions with Glasgow Chamber of Commerce about how best to maximise the opportunities for business in Scotland. Scottish Enterprise is focused on co-ordinating the benefits to business of Scotland's bid and those of the London Olympics and Paralympics in 2012.

I am grateful for Mr Aitken's whole-hearted support for the bid. We will obviously take the best advice about every aspect of the work that we do on the bid, including marketing.

Tartan day is a celebration of Scottish influence and heritage that was originally conceived in Canada and is focused mainly in north America. The Scottish Executive works in partnership with VisitScotland, Scottish Development International and local authorities to make the celebrations a showcase for Scotland.

I am aware of Mr Welsh's personal interest in tartan day in Angus and the appropriateness of that, given the situation of Arbroath. The work that is being done by Angus Council is entirely appropriate to its area. If that proves to be a success, we may well find that the  interest that has been sparked in other local authority areas by that work and by the work that Parliament and the Executive have done will spread throughout the rest of the country and, perhaps, further afield. However, we must be careful to focus our attention where it is most needed. At the moment, that remains—for the time being, at least—mainly in north America.

As other members have done, I begin by congratulating Roseanna Cunningham on securing the debate on behalf of her constituents in Perthshire. Ms Cunningham was correct to say that broadcasting is reserved to Westminster, but I am keenly aware of the importance of broadcasting to cultural, economic and democratic life in Scotland. Television is important to the people of Scotland and is for many their main source of information and entertainment. Although broadcasting is a reserved matter, we have been proactive in engaging with United Kingdom Government ministers on broadcasting issues that are relevant to Scotland, including digital reception and digital switch-over. We engage regularly with them and with broadcasters to discuss potential improvements to the service that is provided to the Scottish public. Just two weeks ago, I attended the European culture council, at which digital switch-over was one of the main items that were discussed. Countries all across Europe are planning for digital television: they are examining the benefits and  opportunities that it presents and considering how they will make the switch. Countries such as Germany and Italy have already begun that process and are enjoying its benefits. The UK Government has decided that switching from the current analogue television system to digital terrestrial television is the best way to ensure that most people in the UK will have access to free digital TV services and get better reception. I appreciate the frustration of viewers in Scotland who cannot receive the BBC's digital services on Freeview. As Roseanna Cunningham rightly asserted, those viewers still pay for those services through the licence fee.

It certainly is, if that is a possibility, although I am not convinced that Mr Stevenson's understanding of the technology holds up on this occasion. The extension of digital terrestrial television will allow households to receive the Freeview services that they cannot receive at present. Although I support the objective of bringing the benefits of digital television to all viewers in the UK, I have made clear to the UK Government the importance that the Scottish Executive attaches to social inclusion. As Stewart Stevenson rightly said, social inclusion is a matter of interest to the Scottish Parliament. We have also made it clear that, when digital switch-over is complete in Scotland, digital terrestrial television services should be made available to as great a number of people as possible without any unnecessary financial burden. I am delighted that the United Kingdom Government has agreed with us on the matter. The coverage plan for switch-over means that households in the UK that are able to receive analogue services at present will be able to receive digital terrestrial television—Freeview—after switch-over. The UK Government has also announced proposals for an assistance scheme to ensure that the most vulnerable households are also able to benefit from digital TV. The point is one that Christine Grahame referred to in her contribution. That help will be available to households in which one person is aged 75 or over, or is in receipt of disability living allowance or attendance allowance. The assistance will be available free of charge to households in which the person who is entitled to the assistance also receives pension  credit, income support or jobseekers allowance. In addition, special provision will be made to help blind viewers to receive audio description services. In responding further to Christine Grahame's point, I will also say that Digital UK Ltd, which has been entrusted with the job of making switch-over happen, will introduce a digital log for properly certified aerial installers. I hope that that response helps to allay some of Christine Grahame's fears.

I am sorry, but I will have to press on. I am happy to discuss the matter with the member later. As we have heard, about 25 per cent of households across the UK cannot receive Freeview at the moment and one in five households across the UK still cannot get Channel 5 through their aerial. Brian Adam was absolutely correct on the matter. In the part of Glasgow in which I lived until some months ago, I could not receive channel 5. On moving to a new house, I thought that my problems would be over, only to find that I had to invest in a fairly expensive new aerial and a digibox in order to get a decent picture; although that said, the picture is still not great despite my being in a relatively central part of Glasgow. Never mind. The issues that are involved in the digitisation of broadcasting are complex. As Roseanna Cunningham rightly said, for technical reasons it is not possible to extend Freeview digital services until the switch to digital clears space for an increase in transmission power. I, too, have been assured that that is the case. That is not because of a lack of transmitters, but because digital services can, for reasons of interference, be transmitted only at relatively low power levels while the analogue signal is still being broadcast. It is unlikely that there will be any significant changes in coverage in each region until switch-over. I say to Alasdair Morgan that the power of the digital signal at that point means that the impact on outdoor aerials is likely to be minimal. Digital switch-over will begin in Scotland in 2008 in the Borders, as we have discussed. It will be completed in the UK by 2012, but Scotland will be digital by the end of 2010. That means that viewers in Scotland will be enjoying full digital services before other parts of the UK. I want to respond to Chris Ballance on the point that he made, although he is not in the chamber, so I will respond to the point if not to Chris himself. I confirm that the analogue signal will not be switched off until six months after the switch-over date. That back-up will be put in place. As well as increasing access to digital services, switch-over will greatly increase consumer choice and allow more services to be made available to  the public. Digital television also has the potential to serve the specific needs of older people and of people with disabilities by providing access services such as improved subtitling, audio-description, talking electronic programme guides and signing. Roseanna Cunningham has proposed that until such time as the BBC's entire broadcast output is available to all licence payers, a differential should be introduced into the licence fee. I understand the motivation behind that proposal, but the main aim of the UK Government's push to digital switch-over is to solve the problem of access to digital television. It is worth noting that that is a UK-wide problem—it is not just viewers in Scotland who are sometimes plagued by poor reception and cannot get digital TV—so I would have thought that the Government is unlikely to be open to arguments that Scotland deserves special treatment. However, there is considerable merit in giving special consideration to people who do not currently receive digital services and who will not receive them after switch-over. I have made that point. We will continue to work with the Department for Culture, Media and Sport and Ofcom to ensure that the impact of switch-over in remote communities in Scotland is fully considered.  Discussions about the licence fee are progressing in the normal way, through detailed and careful negotiations, to ensure that the BBC has the right level of funding to fulfil its public service obligations. In November, Digital UK began its public information campaign on digital switch-over. Two weeks ago, its representatives were in Edinburgh to meet relevant Scottish Executive officials and other interested organisations to discuss switch-over—what it means, how it will happen and what we need to do to prepare for it. I will continue to work with the UK Government and Digital UK to ensure that they are aware of particular Scottish concerns about digital switch-over, and I will ask my officials to ensure that the relevant officials in the DCMS are aware of the issues that have been raised in today's debate.  Meeting closed at 17:46.

Regular meetings and discussions take place between the Executive and sportscotland on a range of issues connected with promotion and development of sport.

Unfortunately, Mr Matheson has started off under a bit of a misapprehension about sport 21. Sport 21 is not only sportscotland's responsibility; its implementation is the responsibility of a range of partners. The important point about sport 21 is that we introduced it because we are aware that the trends  are downward and because we want to reverse them. We had to spend time in the first couple of years putting in place infrastructure that would help us to support developments in sport. We have done that: we now have 627 active schools co-ordinators in place across Scotland. In the years ahead we will see those figures climb to the kind of figures that we want to see, and perhaps we will even exceed the ambitious targets that we have set. Great progress has been made, and we will see that reflected in the figures in the future.

I find myself in a very interesting position: I do not disagree with a word that Jamie McGrigor said. It is imperative that we continue discussions with the governing bodies of sport, and that is done regularly. We hold discussions with other interests in sport, too. Mr McGrigor is absolutely right to say that the impact of the London Olympics—and, we hope, the Commonwealth games in Glasgow—could have an extremely significant effect on elite and grass-roots sport in Scotland. It is our intention to make sure that we capitalise on both events.

I am grateful to Mr McAveety for his interest. I know that he has a particular interest in the location that he mentioned and I am not at all surprised that he has asked that question. It is important to ensure that we have a way forward for sport in Scotland that makes sense, that is co-ordinated and that involves all the governing bodies, which Mr McGrigor rightly mentioned. Our ambitions for sport in Scotland are extremely high and we intend to ensure that support exists so that we can work towards our ambitions. We hope to make an announcement on  the location of sportscotland in the very near future.

There is no statutory protection for battlefields in Scotland. However, Historic Scotland is actively developing a strategy for their identification and protection. It has recently commissioned the Battlefields Trust to create a gazetteer of key sites and will liaise closely with planning authorities on its development.

When determining an application for consent under section 37 of the Electricity Act 1989, ministers are obliged to consider all material considerations, including the potential impact of development on historical sites. Historic Scotland is a statutory consultee in that process and will feed back its comments in due course.

I realise that the matter is the cause of some hilarity to some members, but Mr Fraser raises an important point. The situation at Ardoch causes concern in the archaeological and historical communities. I am not sure whether the Roman fort is a battle site or how relevant it is to the original question, but the matter is being actively considered and I will write to Mr Fraser with an update on the latest progress.

Cruise liners bring a significant number of visitors to particular areas of Scotland during the year. VisitScotland is commissioning research that will assess both the market and the economic benefits of cruise tourism to Scotland. The findings from that research should be available by the middle of next year.

The findings from the research will be acted on so that we maximise the benefit of such tourism for areas around ports where cruise ships can dock. Certain areas, such as Invergordon and Inverclyde, have already taken advantage of the opportunity by considering innovative ways in which they can make their locality attractive to people who wish to leave cruise liners when they come into port. I am more than happy to speak to Kate Maclean in more detail about what might be done in Dundee, but I would have thought that the work that is going on around the harbour in Dundee—particularly around Discovery Point—might, in the fullness of time, attract visitors to Dundee from cruise liners.

As I am sure Mr McGrigor is aware, the opportunity for cruise liners to dock at Tobermory depends on more than just the bricks and mortar of the pier. There are a lot of other issues, such as the depth of the berths that are available. The improvements that Mr McGrigor suggests are not a matter for the Scottish Executive to undertake on its own. They would have to be generated by local interest. I am not aware that any particular work is being done, but if he considers that the matter should be taken forward, perhaps he will write to me about it.

We understand the importance of young people having things to do and good facilities available in their area. The Executive is keen to promote all positive alternatives to offending and antisocial behaviour and to promote participation in sport as part of a healthier lifestyle. The development of diversionary activities for young people in our communities is a key priority and the local action fund is one example of how we are trying to achieve that. We particularly welcome partnership initiatives that bring together local services to find solutions to local problems.

I provide information; I cannot help Mr MacAskill with his level of wisdom, unfortunately. Obviously, we are keen to see any projects that are happening on the ground and to consider what support can be given to them. However, Mr MacAskill's original question was about methods of reducing offending and antisocial behaviour and not just about a particular football event. I point out  that the programmes that work best in reducing offending and antisocial behaviour are about more than just facilities or even the sporting programmes that happen there. The programmes that work best also offer opportunities for the development of the young people involved. To achieve that, good leadership is required. I am delighted to hear that that is being provided in the case to which he referred. Such projects have proven to be particularly helpful in several places around the country. In East Dunbartonshire we have midnight football and East Ayrshire has active steps. In my home city of Glasgow, we have the First football programme, whereby 2,500 young people take part in such events. In the Red Road area of Glasgow, in which I lived when I was much younger and where I kicked a ball about from time to time, operation reclaim is a model that engages young people through a range of sports and arts activities. The local police force has been very much involved in that. Figures show something like a 37 per cent reduction in youth crime in 2004, so such projects work. They need support, but that will not always come from the Executive; sometimes, it must come from other partners that work more locally on the ground.

As I said, such activity is often the result of partnerships on the ground. It is for local partnerships to decide whether to continue. Sometimes, it will not be appropriate to continue a programme. A different programme might take place, perhaps in a different area. Donald Gorrie is right to say that continuity is needed. I agree entirely. Continuity must go further than he suggested—it must give the young people who benefit from our active schools programme, for example, the opportunity to progress to club level if they have an interest, talent or ability in a particular sport. We are very much working on that.

None specifically, but through the implementation of the action plan for youth football we are supporting measures to raise the standards of football coaching at all levels in Scotland.

The Scottish Youth Football Association is committed to implementing best practice initiatives to ensure that young footballers are able to participate in a safe and well-managed competition. The SYFA has decided that the clubs that are affiliated to it have to have in attendance a coach at a certain level and, more important, a first aider at a certain level. At the moment, the SYFA is the only sporting body to have such a requirement but I imagine that, if Mr MacAskill's suggestion were implemented and adopted across the range of sports, the cost to the national health service would be bigger than the modest amounts that he has in mind in relation to the SYFA. Obviously, we are in constant touch with the Scottish Football Association, the SYFA and the other sports governing bodies. To date, however, I have not detected that there is a particular appetite for what Mr MacAskill suggests.

We will continue to work with all relevant parties to ensure that the many potential benefits of the Olympic games are delivered in Scotland. The London 2012 nations and regions group will be re-established and Scotland's interests will be represented by Julia Bracewell, chair of sportscotland, and David Williams, chief executive of EventScotland. In addition, Scotland's co-ordination group will be reformed. I will make an announcement on its composition soon.

Our colleagues at Westminster will put in place whatever mechanisms they see fit for the athletes who will represent England and Wales. As far as our own athletes in Scotland are concerned, the arrangements that we have in place are that we will work through sportscotland and the Scottish Institute of Sport. Obviously, in terms of any additional help that can be given to us by UK Sport, we are happy to work in partnership on that.

Absolutely. As I think I have done before in the chamber, I congratulate the navyblue design group and Hi-Fli Banners & Flags on the work they have done in this regard. It is important to remember that it was not just winning those contacts that was important for those companies; the kudos and knock-on effect of their success won them other orders around the world. We are very keen to work with all Scotland's businesses to make it possible for them to compete and to go for contracts that are related to the Olympic games in London. One of the purposes of Scotland's co-ordination group will be to make that process as simple as possible. We have discussed these matters with colleagues in Australia who were involved in the Sydney Olympics and we have learned some lessons from them. Obviously, we will put what we have learned into a Scottish context.

Mr Swinney makes a good point: one of the very attractive aspects of Hi-Fli's success is exactly the point he makes. In a sense, the question works the other way round: a key requirement of bids was that all contracts should be as environmentally friendly as possible and of  an environmentally appropriate standard. That will continue to be the case as we move forward with the Olympic plans. It means that companies such as Hi-Fli Banners & Flags, which provides a unique service, will have a good opportunity to compete with others on a level playing field.

No. The International Olympic Committee decides on which Olympic committees it will recognise. There are significant benefits for Scottish athletes with the talent to reach the Great Britain squad. The Scottish Executive has no plans to explore the possibility of Scotland fielding its own team in the Olympics.

I am always happy to at least try to ignore petty nationalism but, unfortunately, it is sometimes a bit too in your face to be ignored.

Mr Swinney feigns surprise, but I am sure that it is only a feint. Michael McMahon is correct to point out the disparities. The point is that athletes must be able to compete against their peers at a particular level, regardless of what country they come from. Our athletes make a significant contribution to the GB team and are happy to be considered in that way. As I pointed out this morning, a number of our athletes succeed in winning medals at various levels in the Olympics precisely because they are part of a team made up of others from the home nations. If we were to adopt the nationalists' idea, we would deprive people such as Shirley Robertson of the opportunity to win a gold medal. I do not think that any member would be in favour of that.

VisitScotland employs 68 members of staff to market Edinburgh as a world-class tourist destination and to deal with visitor bookings and inquiries. A further 12 VisitScotland staff are in support roles and an additional 12 people work in the Edinburgh convention bureau, which is the joint venture between VisitScotland and the City of Edinburgh Council that promotes business tourism in the city.

If we look at outcomes rather than inputs in this debate, we will get the answer. Recent figures for the first eight months of the year show that accommodation occupancy levels in hotels and self-catering establishments in Edinburgh are up compared with the same period last year. All our indicators point to the fact that  tourism in Edinburgh is booming. Further, last year, the Edinburgh and Lothians Tourist Board, in its previous guise, spent some £300,000 promoting Edinburgh. That figure increased this year to £2 million. Kenny MacAskill and I share an ambition for Edinburgh, but I also have an ambition for the rest of Scotland. The comparisons that he makes do not do Edinburgh's case much good.

Cannot Ms Fabiani understand that children in Scotland can be just as inspired by Kelly Holmes as they might be by Shirley Robertson? We do not need to pick and choose in the nationalistic way that Ms Fabiani has described; we can support our athletes already. Indeed, we can support and be inspired by successful athletes from any country.

My colleague George Lyon said that the previous debate was rather like groundhog day. I assure him that this debate was not like groundhog day; instead, the SNP has made a political volte-face and has suddenly decided that, for its own ends only, it will support the London 2012 Olympics. The debate has been interesting. Executive members and some Opposition members have taken the motion and the amendments seriously and have spoken to them, but the SNP—other than Michael Matheson—has given us more of the same. In that respect, perhaps George Lyon had a point. Jamie McGrigor is right: the debate was politically motivated. The SNP has made a cynical attempt to fill a policy gap with an idea that it thought would attract quick and easy headlines. I say to Jamie McGrigor and Lord James Douglas-Hamilton that the Executive's ambition does not stop at the Olympics or the Commonwealth games. We constantly work hard to bring major sporting events to the country. We want to and have spread the benefit of those events around the country—into the constituencies of Mr Ewing and others. Our ambition is for the whole of Scotland. It is that everyone in Scotland should enjoy watching and participating in games and that our young people should be motivated.

I will not as I am short of time. It is all very well for Mr Ewing to say that I should play the ball and not the man. I am sorry, but that will not do as a smokescreen for his trying to cover up the fact that the portion of my speech to which he referred simply quoted his comments and those  of his colleagues back at him. He cannot say one thing in The Press and Journal at one time of year and try in the chamber to portray his ideas, policies and principles differently.

I will not; the member has had his opportunity. Our challenge is to increase the number of Scots who participate and win in the Olympic games. Just having our own team to represent Scotland would not necessarily mean that the number of participants increased. The IOC sets a challenging qualifying mark in every event and it is up to athletes to qualify. In all cases, no matter for whom participants compete, they must still achieve that mark. We are conscious of that. We try to ensure that as many as possible of our athletes reach that mark. I am explaining to the SNP why its theory is redundant. I take issue with Colin Fox's point that perhaps rugby and the Commonwealth games did not have the mass participation of football or the Olympic games. However, if he considers that more than 70 nations compete in the Commonwealth games, he will realise that what he said does not apply to that. Bruce McFee and others have failed to understand the point about football and other sports. My colleague Scott Barrie made the point clearly and well in his speech. Of course we will compete whenever competitions take place. As I said in my opening speech, the fact that the devolution settlement means that we are responsible for some aspects of policy and that the Westminster Government is responsible for others is an analogy for how we can work in the same way throughout sport in competition. The two arrangements are not mutually exclusive. It is entirely possible for Scotland to compete on its own in the Commonwealth games and in football.

All sport is of course devolved, which is why our commitment is to all sport and why we want our athletes and those who play our sports to compete at the highest level whenever they can. The important point about the debate is that we will not be deflected by a narrow nationalist argument from our aim of more people participating in sport and more of our athletes competing internationally at every level. We will support our athletes, who have said that they want to compete in team GB, in their aspiration. We will also support them when they stand on podiums and win medals, whether they are for Scotland, for their region or for GB. We will support them all. I look forward very much to seeing several of our  athletes on podiums to receive medals in 2006 at the winter Olympics in Turin and at the Commonwealth games in Melbourne.

I warmly congratulate London on winning the right to stage the 2012 Olympic and Paralympic games. I was pleased to note the unequivocal support in the Scottish National Party motion for the London games. It might be said, however, that Michael Matheson doth protest too much. He must surely forgive the rest of us a little confusion, given some of the support that his party has given London over the past 12 months. Here is Pete Wishart showing support on 13 October 2004: "It is now clear to the Scottish people that this is another example of Scotland pays and London gains." Then we had Alex Neil saying on 17 January 2005: "This is Dome Mark 2." Even better, on 27 June we had Mr Neil writing to the IOC to suggest that Scotland would lose out if London won the games. He stated: "I hope that the IOC will bear Scotland in mind when making their decision." Within days of the IOC making its positive decision to host the games in London, the SNP was still desperately trying to undermine the UK's case. I do not dispute that the SNP is expressing support for the London games, but it has an odd way of showing its support. That takes us to the heart of the matter: in the world of the SNP, the term "London" is a metonym for England. The  SNP speaks of London politicians, the London Treasury and the London Government; it avoids the word "England", but no one is fooled. The real reason for the SNP's equivocation on the London games is the fear that strikes in nationalist hearts that a great British event will cement the unity in diversity and the collective national spirit of the nations that make up the United Kingdom. For the SNP, the issue is not a separate Olympic team per se. That is merely the vehicle to reduce the debate to a vain attempt to undermine the constitutional settlement, as the SNP does with every debate, from that on our evening news to the famed Sewel motion on the carriage of guide dogs for the blind in private hire taxis. The party that wants a separate state finds itself praying in aid the constitutional status of the British Virgin Islands and Guam in its quest to have fewer Scottish medallists in 2012. The London games are an opportunity for Britain and Scotland to enjoy on our doorstep the biggest and greatest sporting event. The games will allow athletes from throughout Britain to fulfil a lifetime ambition, not only of winning an Olympic medal as part of team GB but of doing so on home turf. The fact that Scotland is part of a British team does not mean that we do not have ambitions of our own. The Scottish Government wants Scotland to be a successful sporting nation that competes on the world stage with pride, honour and distinction. We recognise the role that sport plays, internationally as well as at home, in promoting understanding and co-operation, breaking down barriers and celebrating diversity. We have ambitions for our athletes—we want them to realise their potential and to attain success at the highest level, be that European, world, Commonwealth or Olympic competitions. However, we must be realistic about how and where those ambitions can be realised. There are many reasons why the Executive does not support the call to create a Scottish Olympic team, but none of them is to do with lack of ambition. Our ambition is demonstrated by our determination to bring the 2014 Commonwealth games to Glasgow. A combination of the strengths of all parts of Great Britain offers a greater chance of international success and the opportunity for athletes to train with a larger pool of world-class competitors. Scottish athletes with the talent to attain GB squad membership gain from competing with and against athletes of a similar calibre—it is good for their development. We certainly have exceptionally talented Scots who have given truly great performances on the Olympic stage. We come to the downside of the SNP's proposal. When Scots cheered for Kelly Holmes, they were sharing in the delight at the success of a compatriot. Are they to be denied that? The  majority of Scots' medal successes on the Olympic stage have come when they have been part of a team of athletes from the home countries. For example, Shirley Robertson's gold medal in Athens was won in a team event with two non-Scots and Chris Hoy's silver in Sydney was won in a team with another Scot, Craig MacLean, and Jason Queally of England.

I had a funny feeling that we might get to that issue at the end of the day. Scotland's sporting participation is rather like the devolution settlement: just as we determine health and education matters in Scotland and social security and defence matters in Britain, so we can participate in football and the Commonwealth games as Scotland, but in the Davis cup and the Olympic games as Britain. Just as with the devolution settlement, the only people who find that to be a problem are nationalist ideologues—the issue is not what is theoretically possible, but what is best for Scotland. Mr Ewing has said implicitly that he wants to deny Scottish members of teams the opportunity to contribute to the GB medal tally. Scottish athletes will contribute to strong GB teams in 2012 and in the future. Is the SNP really saying that we should deny Shirley Robertson the chance to win gold as part of one of those teams? I sincerely hope that it is not. Scots have done well through being part of strong GB teams at the Olympics and the Paralympics. Selection for a GB team means that athletes are of a certain standard—they are the best in Britain, not just in Scotland. Arguably, Scotland enjoys the best of both worlds, by competing as Scotland in the Commonwealth games and as part of the GB or UK set-up for the Olympics, certain world championships and other events. For all those reasons, the Executive does not support the move to create a separate Scottish Olympic team. However, the Scottish Parliament can rest assured that we and sportscotland will continue to work with our partners to ensure that as many Scots as possible are selected as part of a successful GB Olympic team. Mr Matheson was keen to quote from the IOC charter. However, we must not ignore the founding principles of the Olympic games. The point is that people of all races come together to observe the ancient concept of the Olympic truce. The Olympic games  are about pulling together, not about pulling apart. I move amendment S2M-3381.2, to leave out from "recent launch" to end and insert: "Scottish bid to secure the Commonwealth Games in Glasgow in 2014; recognises that these two events would provide an unparalleled opportunity within the United Kingdom for Scots to perform at the highest level, and notes that both events would provide a major impetus to participation and performance in sport at all levels, with all the health and other benefits that brings."

Historic Scotland plans to provide regular access to the property next summer. The delicate nature of the surviving historic elements makes guided tours the best means of access for visitors. Tours were arranged this summer on a pilot basis and proved to be very popular, as did doors open day in early September.

I am very much aware that the castle provides a much needed tourism resource for East Ayrshire. In fact, it will become Historic Scotland's only staffed property in the area. I know that Historic Scotland is keen to work with owners to ensure that access is realisable. At the moment, there is a plan for a development comprising an hotel, a golf course and leisure facilities on the site. Historic Scotland wants to  work in partnership with the estate managers to ensure that joint arrangements can be made so that the aspirations of both organisations can be complementary.

Last year, Historic Scotland dealt with 98 per cent of those applications within 28 days.

As members will have understood, given my answer to Mr McFee's original question, it is unusual for Historic Scotland to take this long to deal with an application. However, the case is a complex one that involves the proposed demolition of a 200-year-old listed building to allow the work at Nardini's to go ahead. That obviously cannot be entered into lightly—all possible avenues must be explored before permission to demolish that listed building is granted. Historic Scotland is involved in consultation and discussion with the developers and the local authority. I am sure that there will be a resolution very soon.

I am pleased to announce that I do not have to declare an interest in that regard, as I no longer live in a listed building. Historic Scotland is well aware of the issue that Maureen Macmillan raises. As one would expect from that agency, it constantly reviews and considers its policy and how it is implemented on the ground. I am happy to give Maureen Macmillan the assurance that she seeks: Historic Scotland will bear the issue in mind.

I am grateful to colleagues for their lively and enthusiastic contributions to the debate. The speeches have been wide ranging. If the Cultural Commission had done nothing else, one of the important things that would have come about is that we have had a proper discussion of this important subject. Christine May, Linda Fabiani, Roseanna Cunningham and Michael Matheson referred to rights and entitlements. I agree with the consensus around that issue. I do not think that legislation is necessarily the way in which to enshrine that kind of opportunity for the people of Scotland. With rights come responsibilities and duties, and against whom would someone make their claim if their right could not be fulfilled for whatever reason? We can work towards having rights and entitlements, but we do not necessarily need legislation. I reassure Cathy Peattie, in particular, that equality of access for people with disability will be a serious consideration when we consider rights and entitlements in the future. Michael Matheson also mentioned cultural planning, as did other members including Linda Fabiani and Roseanna Cunningham. That is an area in which we need to take work forward quickly. The community planning framework is beginning to come in in our communities, and we need to keep up with that. I said that in my speech, and I hope that people understand the importance that I attach to it. On education, I hope that Michael Matheson understands that the work that we are doing on the Highland year of culture and Burns shows that we are serious about promoting traditional Scottish culture and art forms, ensuring that they are seen  not just in Scotland, but on the world stage. Several members—Jamie McGrigor and Chris Ballance, in particular—mentioned the importance of tourism. I do not have any problem with Chris Ballance on that issue. To Jamie McGrigor, I say that I have been saying for more than a year that culture and tourism—and, indeed, sport—are inextricably linked, and I am delighted that we now have a convert on the Tory benches. Jamie McGrigor also talked about a decline in funding for the Scottish Arts Council, choosing to focus on lottery funding. However, since devolution, the amount of Government core funding for the Scottish Arts Council has doubled. Our commitment to making the Scottish Arts Council and the work that it does a viable operation cannot be questioned as Jamie McGrigor was questioning it. Donald Gorrie mentioned the excellent exhibition that I opened in Kirkcudbright. Glasgow's Kelvingrove art gallery allowed some of its Impressionist paintings to go there and the exhibition was a huge success. It gave people in Kirkcudbright and people coming into the area the opportunity to see paintings that they would perhaps not get to see unless they were able to travel to Glasgow. That will continue. Kirkcudbright is in conversation with the National Galleries of Scotland about doing something similar in the future, and I wish that initiative all the success that it deserves. Richard Baker also mentioned the importance of touring, and I said in my opening speech that I see companies and collections that call themselves national as having to meet a criterion to encourage them to go down that road. Linda Fabiani had a difficulty with the concept of culture. If we are honest, most of us can understand that. However, I ask her to cast her mind back to the excellent Scottish Ballet performances that she and I attended in the summer. At Motiv8, young boys from the age of five and some more mature ladies were participating in dance under the aegis of Scottish Ballet, which I think says a lot about what culture is. For small children, it can mean one thing; for older people, it perhaps means something else. However, that does not mean that they cannot work together and that it cannot be provided for in that way. Susan Deacon made a valid point about embedding culture in our lives. I point to one example of that. In Dundee, brave decisions about investing in the arts and culture were taken 10 or 15 years ago, and we are now seeing that investment paying off, with people wanting to live and invest there. That is what we need to see throughout our country. I was struck by Susan Deacon's comments about very small children learning about culture  and enjoying the arts for their own sake. At lunch time I was at an event at the National Galleries of Scotland, where nursery children were being rewarded for the artwork that they had contributed. I was interested in Tommy Sheridan's remarks. It is to Mr Sheridan's advantage that his storytelling does not have the same effect in the chamber as it does at home. Perhaps I can better his "Reservoir Dogs" story about the problems of licensing and being prescriptive about culture: I remember travelling to Edinburgh to see "The Life of Brian" because it was not available to those who lived in Glasgow.

Well, we did not discuss chivalry, I suppose. I agree with Tommy Sheridan that culture must not be prescriptive. We all have our own view on it, and we must all have the opportunity to develop our ideas. I had the novel experience this afternoon of being described as "encouraging" by a Tory. I thank Brian Monteith sincerely for that. However, I assure him that culture and the arts matter dearly to me, and they are not just of great importance to me; they are of importance across the front bench. However, more important, they matter intrinsically to the people of Scotland. That is why we are so passionate about taking forward this debate. Roseanna Cunningham spoke interestingly about a global vision, and she is right about that. That is perhaps where we could have hoped for a bit more encouragement from the Cultural Commission. However, there are many good things in its report, and we will continue to see the benefits of it as time goes on. Like Roseanna Cunningham, I attended the opening concert at the Perth Concert Hall on Friday night. Visiting it will be a wonderful cultural experience for the people of Perth because of its wonderful architecture and design, but its programme shows that the venue will provide an eclectic mix of opportunities not just on the opening weekend but right through. I congratulate Perth and Kinross Council, under whichever guise, on developing that enterprise.

I said in my opening remarks that we would have to cost whatever we plan to put in place, so we cannot give such commitments ahead of time. I question some of the arithmetic in the commission's report. I also  point out to Mr Ballance that the cash available to cultural bodies in Scotland has risen from £120 million to £180 million from 2000. That does not include the money being spent by local authorities. The Executive and I will reflect on colleagues' comments when finalising our response to the Cultural Commission's report. As I said, I do not intend that colleagues will have to wait beyond the end of the year to hear it. I conclude by restating the Executive's commitment to the cultural sector. Culture matters, art matters, heritage matters, and architecture and design matter, too. We are investing in them for their own intrinsic worth and because they affect so many aspects of our lives. Most of all, we are investing in them because we are a modern, forward-thinking, vibrant country at ease with its place in the world. All my colleagues in the Cabinet recognise that, and they are looking at ways in which cultural activities can benefit their own objectives. The First Minister said in his groundbreaking St Andrew's day speech on culture that the Executive was committed to "providing and valuing creative expression and opportunity for all." We want the best for our people, and we will deliver it.

I assure Mr Neil that I have it on good authority that there is no intention of appointing a deputy minister.

I am pleased to launch the debate and look forward to hearing members' views on the report, which was produced in June by the Cultural Commission. I am genuinely interested in hearing what members have to say, which is why there is no formal motion for debate. I believe that we should devote all the available time to discussing the way forward for culture and the arts in Scotland. That gives us collectively nearly one minute for each recommendation of the Cultural Commission and allows me approximately five seconds on each. Colleagues will not be surprised to hear that I do not intend to attempt to consider many of the recommendations specifically; I want, rather, to give them some idea of where our thinking is heading. I welcome the commission's report and am grateful to its members and all those who contributed their views to it. I can safely say that it was the biggest listening exercise on culture that has ever been undertaken in Scotland. I have been seeking and observing reaction to the report from the key players in the sector. As might be expected, reactions range from approval for selected elements and proposals through to opposition to other recommendations. However, I have not detected an overall consensus, other than that we need to move forward quickly to action. I intend to do that. The debate will mark the formal end of the listening stage. I will return to Parliament later this year to announce our plan of action for the sector. What do I see as being the big issues? We need to improve how the public sector supports the arts and culture. I refer not just to the Executive, but to key partners, such as local authorities. Many local authorities are doing great things for culture and I would like all councils to do the same. I will work with local authorities and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities to achieve that. We need to ensure that in all parts of Scotland people have the opportunity to participate in a wide range of cultural activities if they wish, and to see the best in the performing and visual arts. Our national companies will have a key role to play in that process. Whatever organisational structure is put in place, those companies will be expected to cater for audiences throughout the country. We need more co-operation and closer working between public bodies and with the voluntary and  private sectors, but we also need to be clear about what the responsibility of the Scottish Government is. That is the issue on which I want to concentrate. I believe that we have an obligation to do three main things at national level. The first is to provide support for bodies and individuals that represent the pinnacle of performing talent at national level. The second is to secure the means of developing and nurturing that talent by providing opportunities for participation in a wide range of cultural activities. The third is to support and enhance Scotland's world-beating national collections. I will say a little about each of those points. First, on performing talent, in 2003 the First Minister spoke of the links between culture and confidence. He also said much about aspiration and he said that all of us, especially our young people, must have something to aim for and emulate. The pinnacle of achievement that aspiring young performers should aim for is to be the best in Scotland, the best in the United Kingdom and the best in the world. I suggest that Scotland's national companies must aim to fulfil all three of those aspirations. We must think radically and look beyond the current definition of national companies. We have, of course, already started on that. In the National Theatre of Scotland we have a model that targets funds specifically at production rather than at support of structures. That is a great example for promoting performing excellence and for distributing arts funding to properly showcase the finest talent. I am determined that the Executive's future spending plans will target investment to programmes and delivery, rather than to unwieldy or unnecessary bureaucracies, which are a drain on resources. I am equally determined that our financial backing will support artistic and cultural activity and not stifle it. Scotland's current model of cultural infrastructure has grown up as an accident of history rather than through a consistent nationally agreed plan. Solutions that once served us well are no longer fit for purpose. We must develop an infrastructure that we know can do its job. That means change—perhaps even a radical overhaul—but I am not convinced that the commission's preferred solution is the right one. Of course, if we are to have world-class national companies we must nurture home-grown talent. My ambition is that the stars whom we see performing in our national productions should include Scots from all walks of life and all backgrounds. During this year's Edinburgh International Festival I attended—as did some colleagues who  are in the chamber—Scottish Ballet's Balanchine programme. Three members of the company came through the school of dance that is based in Glasgow's Knightswood Secondary School, which is very encouraging. Scotland has always been a hotbed of artistic talent, but I believe that we need a new approach to help people who have proven ability to realise their potential. The current structures are not designed specifically to support that. One of the strongest sections of the commission's report was on education. I intend to work with my colleague, the Minister for Education and Young People, to see which of the ideas would fit with and complement the Scottish education system. We will examine closely the evaluation work that the Scottish Arts Council is currently undertaking into the role of cultural co-ordinators and we will work with COSLA to see whether mainstreaming of cultural co-ordinators is the right way forward. We should provide a ready route for the development of flair and talent that leads from the formal education system to levels of international performing excellence. The supporting role of schools should be pivotal in the early stages. Further progress should be developed through bodies such as the Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama and the new screen academy, which should take proven talent on to the highest level. That must apply to all art forms; not only the performing arts, but to literature, design and film which, frankly, have in my view been overlooked in the past. I am interested in identifying ways to recognise and honour Scotland's major creative artists and cultural icons; I have asked the Scottish Arts Council to explore proposals for such a scheme. We set up the Dewar arts awards to help nurture up-and-coming talent. Additionally, the Scottish Arts Council's creative Scotland awards currently promote great ideas from established artists. It is a unique scheme that has been well received by the sector. Other countries celebrate their greatest artists; I believe that ours deserve the same recognition for their outstanding contributions. We have already given Edwin Morgan the title of Makar—a role that he deserves and which he has filled with distinction. I want to build on that and, over time, to create a roll-call of Scotland's cultural excellence that can act as a source of national pride. The third responsibility of the Government is support and enhancement of our superb national collections. Those should be innovatively presented and made accessible to as many people as possible throughout the country. The collections must be used to excite, inform and educate not only Scots at home but people  throughout the world. A common factor in all three of the national responsibilities is access. I argue that there is no shortage of opportunity to enjoy culture. In fact, in Scotland at the moment it is constantly festival time. We set up EventScotland to help and support new and existing events around Scotland and it is doing just that. It is about to announce financial support for another 17 events around Scotland. If we secure the Commonwealth games in 2014, that will be a festival of culture as well as of sport. We can do more, however. Our desire to boost access led us to ask the commission to explore the notion of rights and entitlements. The commission's report gives a comprehensive account of developments in this area and proposes legislation as the route to establishing such an approach. I am looking carefully at those proposals. I believe that we need to be practical and clear about what we are trying to achieve and about whether legislative change can contribute to that end. I am interested in testing and exploring initiatives, which seems to be the best way of making certain that what is implemented will actually work. I will be particularly interested in learning lessons from the cultural pledge that Highland Council—inspired by the celebration of Scotland's year of Highland culture in 2007—is developing for young people. I am also considering whether cultural standards and entitlements can succeed in developing an appetite for culture. I want to explore the reasons for participation—and for the lack of it—and I want to look more at how community planning can be used to encourage communities to plan for their cultural requirements. I want to ensure that we exploit new technologies as a means of promoting Scotland's culture and developing audiences. I am therefore looking carefully at the commission's proposal for a national box office. VisitScotland is developing a pan-Scotland what's-on database for culture and sport that will help visitors to plan their trips. We may extend that online support to provide electronic ticketing for events around the country. I believe that the venues and companies that receive public subsidy have a special responsibility. It is not enough for them to focus only on the audiences that they have already; they need also to reach out to others. It is not only the public sector that can play its part. Some private sector businesses already do a lot to sponsor and promote the arts. Given that all businesses benefit from the cultural life of the places in which they operate, the question is what more the private sector can do to support culture. Another crucial question is how the many  thousands of volunteers in the arts can be helped. I would particularly like to hear colleagues' views on that subject. In considering the issue, we will be mindful of the report that the Enterprise and Culture Committee produced earlier this year. Since the commission reported, acres of newsprint have thundered with comments about future funding for arts and culture. I have certainly been impressed by the scale of the figures that have been suggested, but that is easy for someone to do when they do not have to make tough and sometimes unpopular decisions on prioritising Government funding. Only when we have determined our final response to the review will we know what to cost. Clearly, a detailed assessment of the financial implications will be necessary. We will look at that as we deliberate on our implementation plans.

That is a big subject at which Arts and Business Scotland is adept and at which it continues to work. We will have to examine why people give their money in that way. Usually it is because they have some interest in a particular institution or in a project that an institution happens to run. We need to look at the subject in terms of all our institutions and to find out whether there are ways of supporting culture better or of taking matters forward in more detail. However, I can tell members that our ambitions are based on the presumption that others will join us and that they will meet their respective obligations. Because we are committed to culture, we plan to take decisive action. A lot of uninformed comment has been made about the Executive's approach to culture. It has been said that we are devoid of ideas and that we are averse to taking risks. Vicky Featherstone at the National Theatre of Scotland would not agree with that. It has also been claimed that we are philistines. It is strange, in that case, that the incoming director general of the National Galleries of Scotland said on his appointment that the Executive should be applauded for showing an interest in culture, particularly at a time when many other European Governments are doing the reverse. We are lambasted for not providing enough money. I do not think that the National Library of Scotland would have agreed with that when it came to acquiring the Murray archive, or that the  National Museums of Scotland would have agreed when it came to securing a Concorde for Scotland. That we do not care about our heritage is another claim, yet we have taken decisive steps to secure the future of the Gaelic language and Gaelic culture. In addition, we are investing heavily in Scotland's year of Highland culture and the 2009 year of homecoming, which will celebrate the enduring legacy of our national bard, Robert Burns—a true national and international icon. Of course, we have also been accused of not listening. I assure members that we are listening and that we are taking action. The Government cares about culture. We want to do all that we can to make Scotland a hotbed of cultural talent and a nation that celebrates its cultural achievements. I hope that everyone here today can sign up to that ambition.

EventScotland is our national events organisation charged with delivering our major events strategy, which aims to make Scotland one of the world's foremost event destinations by 2015. Any bid to stage an international climbing event at Ratho adventure centre would be considered by EventScotland.

The Executive watches with interest the progress that the City of Edinburgh Council is making in its bid to acquire Ratho adventure centre and we are in close liaison with it. Any further comment from me would be premature at this time. However, I point out to the member that climbing is not an Olympic or Commonwealth games sport, so the likelihood of having it included in either of those major events is probably not good.

I am well aware of the points that Lord James Douglas-Hamilton makes and have no problem with him reiterating them for the benefit of the chamber. In fact, it was just that set of circumstances that encouraged me, having been approached by Margaret Smith, to convene a meeting of all those with a possible interest in  the centre almost a year ago, and I am watching the on-going talks with a great deal of interest.

I repeat that climbing will probably not be an event in the Olympic or Commonwealth games—I can say that with some confidence. However, EventScotland would be happy to discuss any bid by the Kinlochleven centre in relation to any event that might take place in the future. It is our intention that our major events strategy should cover the entire country, which is why I have been pleased to support events such as the UCI mountain-biking event that took place in Fort William a couple of weeks ago.

Scotland is just one relatively small destination within the global tourism market, and we compete with about 200 other countries for visitors. The integrated VisitScotland network is about growing the value of tourism across the whole of Scotland but, of course, particular areas have their own attributes, which contribute to the rich diversity of Scotland as a destination. VisitScotland will continue to market those attributes strongly in response to customer demand.

Ms Radcliffe makes a valid point, and I know that VisitScotland is conscious of it. In fact, its own international tourism expo has been held in Aberdeen in the north-east in the past two years. Also, our wider events strategy, of which VisitScotland is an integral part, has very much seen events being sponsored in the north-east. In particular, I draw attention to the castle trail that is being promoted in the north-east, which has been successful. As described to me, VisitScotland sees the menu that we have to offer as a national dish with local flavours. Ms Radcliffe can rest assured that we will continue to ensure that all parts of Scotland are marketed.

It is important to point out that while we now have an integrated network—as called for not just by members of the Scottish Parliament but by the industry—that will work to great effect for tourism in Scotland in the years ahead, 95 per cent of VisitScotland's staff are still based outwith Edinburgh, where the head office is. The member can rest assured that the entirety of Scotland is being marketed and that we look for opportunities to promote particular local areas, whether by allowing them to benefit from our events strategy or through direct marketing. I take Alasdair Morgan's point.

The Scottish Arts Council established a dance department in 2000. The key aim of its strategy for dance is to encourage an environment that supports a wide range of high-quality dance activity with opportunities to create, perform, participate in and enjoy dance. The Scottish Arts Council currently funds eight dance companies and organisations across Scotland.

I certainly share Marlyn Glen's sentiments. The Space in Dundee, which is the home of the Scottish school of contemporary dance, is a facility that all MSPs should be very proud of, not least members who happen to represent the area. It is worth noting that as little as 10 years ago there were no purpose-built buildings for dance in Scotland and we now have both Dance Base and The Space in Dundee as well as the other dance agencies throughout the country.

HM Revenue and Customs is working with Supporters Direct to develop guidance for trusts on how they can best organise their activities, in particular to help to develop and run their community activities by registering as a charity or as a community amateur sports club. The Executive has arranged for 80 per cent mandatory rate relief for community amateur sports clubs. The Executive also provides financial support for the activities of Supporters Direct in Scotland.

I am certainly aware that fundraising efforts are going on at Raith Rovers and I would be happy to meet the member to discuss what might be the ultimate conclusion of those efforts. Obviously, it is worth emphasising that, when there are difficulties with a particular football club, the Executive cannot necessarily step in and bail it out as it is, in effect, a business.

We are investing about £12 million annually in active schools which, in time, will increase the number and range of opportunities for young people to participate in sport and other physical activities, both in and around school.

I am always gratified to hear Scottish National Party members supporting our ambitions for sport and physical activity. The member might be interested to learn that we have someone working on precisely that idea in Learning and Teaching Scotland.  I noted Mr Gibson's attitude—which was correct, in my view—towards the development of our young athletes. That was in stark contrast with what was contained in the SNP's general election manifesto from earlier this year, which said: "sportscotland currently concentrates policy and spend on Olympic-related sports and medal winning opportunities. However, we believe that public money should primarily be used to promote health and fitness in our communities." That contrasts even further with the comments of the SNP's front-bench spokesman, Mr Ewing, on 1 September. He said: "unless born into a wealthy family the pursuit of sporting success for young athletes is an expensive, arduous and frustrating business. Financial support is not forthcoming from the quango sportscotland in many instances." It is about time that those on the front bench of the SNP got their act together and decided what their policy is.

As members will know, and as I mentioned in my response to Marilyn Livingstone, it is now possible for community amateur sports clubs that are registered as such to be eligible for 80 per cent mandatory rates relief. If trusts are to be wound up, to which Mr Canavan alludes, it would be open to the local authority to revoke the relevant part of that arrangement, and it would also be necessary for the club to pay capital gains tax. Furthermore, any money that might have been invested by sportscotland in that club could be reclaimed. I hope that the member will accept that we understand the problem and are working hard to ensure that the situation that he described does not transpire.

I am delighted to have the opportunity to endorse the Paisley choral festival 2005. Like colleagues, I congratulate Annabel Goldie on securing the debate. I also congratulate her on setting the tone for the evening and putting down a marker that this would not be a participative singing event. I once chaired a debate in the chamber on Robert Burns at which members sang—it has been remarked to me on a number of occasions since that it is surprising that my enthusiasm for Burns is still as strong as ever. Launched by Voices in Paisley, the festival will do much to support the attempts by Paisley to claim the title of Scotland's choir town and it promises to be a nationally prominent event. Paisley will resound to performances by prestigious, internationally recognised professional choirs and by local choirs with wide-ranging experience and abilities. In Scotland today, there is a real buzz in our music industry, particularly in our traditional music. We know that we all enjoy music, whether listening to it or taking part in it. I agree with Chris Ballance that the enriching experience that we get from music makes it paramount that we provide the right atmosphere for music to flourish. I am not quite the right person to judge whether Donald Gorrie is correct in saying that choral singing is a particularly Liberal Democrat undertaking, although I think that the writers of the "Little Red Songbook" might have had something to say about that. An example of how we help to support singing and other musical initiatives to flourish is our youth music initiative, through which we have invested £17.5 million over three years. The core aim of the initiative is to ensure that by 2006 all schoolchildren should have had access to one year's free music tuition by the time they reach primary 6. Of course, that includes vocal tuition. The initiative is a tremendous undertaking. I am pleased to say that we have invested another £10 million a year for the next three years in youth music. The Scottish Executive, through its funding of the Scottish Arts Council, is committed to making music accessible to all. Indeed, the SAC allocates around a third of its budget to nationally significant organisations and festivals. As the lottery  distributor in Scotland for the arts, the SAC has provided funding to Voices in Paisley through the awards for all programme. As Wendy Alexander indicated, the festival has also been supported through EventScotland's regional events programme and was awarded a total of £7,750 to help it to develop and grow. Of course, it is not just the Scottish Executive and the SAC that provide support to our musicians and artists. Local authorities and the voluntary and private sectors are also important in that respect. Indeed, it is estimated that local authorities provide more than half of public sector arts funding in Scotland. The difference that an enthusiastic and supportive local authority can make to cultural provision in its area is immense, as is demonstrated through the depth and breadth of local arts organisations in Renfrewshire. Due to extensive upgrading and an attractive townscape, Paisley now has a collection of good venues for an event such as the choral festival. As Annabel Goldie indicated, it is important to remember that a great deal of cultural activity in Scotland is undertaken by the voluntary sector. The voluntary sector is a source of tremendous experience, energy and talent and voluntary groups such as Voices in Paisley are ideally placed to help to ensure the broadest possible access to cultural activity in Scotland. I am pleased to note that the private sector has played a key role in the provision of business sponsorship to the Paisley choral festival. I firmly believe that a joined-up approach across the sectors and at national and local levels, providing seamless support, has to be the way forward if we are to make our mark internationally. The Paisley choral festival is also a good example of how cultural activity can be the springboard for other activities. The Paisley Festival Company now promotes a range of concerts by visiting and local choirs, together with educational and training activities and events for community participation. The company aims to build on the strong musical tradition in the area and I am sure that it will also do much for the wider economic, social and cultural regeneration of Paisley and the surrounding area. As Ms Goldie will know, we aim for Scotland to become a major events destination by 2015. However, we do not wish to attract just major events from outwith our shores; we also want to encourage local festivals and events to flourish. It is in that context that it is particularly encouraging to hear that Renfrewshire Council and its partners are proposing to develop an events strategy for the region and are aiming to draw in external funding to support cultural networks.  It is important that Voices in Paisley and the Paisley Festival Company ensure that all other viable sources of funding are being utilised and that as much community engagement as possible is built into the festival. That will broaden the festival's appeal, draw in audiences and participants to the world of choral singing and, we hope, inspire young people to get involved, too. Chris Ballance spoke about the benefits that he saw in the arts and culture; I believe that those benefits are beyond doubt. The Executive's response to the Cultural Commission's report will be underpinned by our belief in the absolute necessity of providing all our citizens with access to cultural provision and by a commitment to recognise and nurture excellence. We and our partners in local government and the voluntary and private sectors all need to work together to support our festivals as they face the challenge of adapting to the future cultural needs of our country. Scotland is now world renowned as a country of festivals and I am delighted that the Paisley choral festival will continue to contribute to our blossoming festival reputation at home and abroad. We should all take every opportunity to thank and congratulate those performers who raise the profile of Scotland around the world and contribute to the richness of our musical life. Indeed, I look forward to having the opportunity to thank the Paisley choral festival organisers when I attend the celestial voices concert on 9 October. Like Ms Goldie, I hope to see many members there on that or other evenings.  Meeting closed at 17:37.

The Executive has made no specific assessment of the impact of public service obligations on tourism in the Highlands and Islands. However, PSOs are imposed to support regional development and tourism is a key sector in the economic base of the Highlands and Islands. The Highlands and Islands strategic transport partnership has carried out detailed work to appraise the impact of improved services.

I am happy to confirm the Scottish Executive's commitment to the PSO principle in the Highlands and Islands. I am sure that my colleague Tavish Scott, the Minister for Transport and Telecommunications, and I will be happy to work with Alasdair Morrison to secure the new air link between Aberdeen and Stornoway.

Major events bring significant benefits to Scotland's economy. For example, research on Edinburgh's summer festivals that was published earlier this year found that the festivals are worth more than £125 million to the city's economy.

Ms Boyack is right to emphasise that the festivals are not just advantageous to the towns and cities in which they take place. If my memory serves me correctly, I think that about 28 per cent of the people who visit the Edinburgh festivals spend at least one night outwith Edinburgh. We very much want to develop the possibility of using Edinburgh, Glasgow and our other major cities as a gateway to the rest of the country. That is part of our tourism strategy. VisitScotland and EventScotland work closely together when major events are planned to ensure that all the benefits that such events can bring can be realised.

I think that the member presumed that his question was for a different minister. Not only do I not deal with the specifics of the matter that he raises, but I am certainly not a "he". It is important that events such as the royal highland show should be able to operate, but it  would be best to raise such issues through the consultation that is going on elsewhere.

London 2012 has already decided—and proposed in the candidate file that it submitted to the International Olympic Committee—that the mountain biking event should be held in the Weald country park.

As the member will no doubt be aware, such matters are for the local health authority and, ultimately, for the Minister for Health and Community Care. However, I can point out that, so far, the possibilities of medical cover do not seem to have been an influencing factor for Fort William, given that the town staged the world  mountain biking championships this year and last year and is due to host the 2007 world championships, which will take place before the qualifying stages for the 2008 Olympics in Beijing.

On behalf of the Executive, I, too, congratulate Christine Grahame on securing the debate. I also congratulate all the women who have participated in it—the fact that it involved only women is probably another first that we must chalk up for our relatively new Parliament. It has probably been one of the best debates that we have had so far. Like other members, I thank Lesley Riddoch for coming up with the idea of the conference and for bringing it to Edinburgh at what I hope will be an important and memorable time. Members have alluded to the fact that although women around the globe have an enormous impact on the well-being of their families and the societies in which they live, their potential is often not realised. Their status may have improved in recent decades, but gender inequalities remain pervasive. Women constitute half of the world's population and perform nearly two thirds of its work, yet they earn only a tenth of its income and own less than 1 per cent of its property. We, in the Scottish Parliament, know the difference that almost 40 per cent of our members being women has made, whether in raising awareness of issues such as domestic abuse or in ensuring that equality issues have been recognised when we have passed legislation on local government and housing. Trish Godman is correct to say that getting women into positions of power and influence must be one of our goals. In that respect, we must remember that we have much to learn. In preparing for this debate and for the speeches this morning, I discovered that 49 per cent of the parliamentarians in Rwanda are women, so we do not always lead the way. The importance of giving women power and influence has been made clear in the debate. In its many recommendations, the Commission for Africa report mentions the fact that women account for some 70 per cent of food production. They prepare the food, gather the firewood and fetch the water. They also carry out most of the child care and care for the sick and the elderly, yet they have fewer opportunities to generate income  and are often subjected to harassment and violence. Scots have long recognised that education is a way to self-fulfilment and a route out of poverty, and the UN development goals concentrate on education—especially the need to educate women. In sub-Saharan Africa, 19 countries have female literacy rates of below 30 per cent, and less than half of six to 11-year-old girls are estimated to be in school. It is thought that, in some areas, female illiteracy can be as high as 90 per cent, yet studies show that getting girls into school is crucial for development. Through educating girls, economic productivity is raised; infant and maternal mortality rates are lowered; nutrition and health are improved; and the spread of HIV is reduced. Providing girls with one extra year of education boosts their eventual wages by 10 to 20 per cent, and a strong investment is then made in the education of the next generation. The removal of school fees would help girls, in particular, as poor parents often choose to educate their sons first. Free school meals and school attendance grants would also help. We know, from statistics, that the removal of school fees in Uganda almost doubled the number of very poor women in education there.  The G8 summit has given us a new awareness of the issue, but it is not only the members of the Scottish Parliament who are focusing on Africa: others throughout Scotland are doing so, too. On Monday, I visited Albert Primary School, in Airdrie, where the pupils were joined by their colleagues from Clarkston Primary School. They have been involved in a scheme that has been going on throughout Scotland, whereby children have made small representations of their friends in Africa. These buddies, as they are called—and I have several hundred of them, if anyone wants to see them—will make their way to the G8 leaders, and there is a very simple message on the back of every one: "Please send my friend to school." In the six years since devolution in Scotland, the Government here has worked hard to raise our international profile for the benefit of the Scottish people. It is now time for us to accept our responsibility to participate in a worldwide effort to close the gulf between rich and developing countries. We hope that our efforts will encourage other countries and, especially, the leaders of the G8, to do the same.  Meeting closed at 17:54.

Yes. The home of golf would be an ideal venue for what would be the first ever Olympic golf tournament held in the United Kingdom.

It is obviously up to individual members how they conduct themselves and on which issues they decide to major. However, it is certainly wrong to underestimate the potential benefits to sport, business and the health of our communities of a successful Olympic bid. Given that golf tourism is worth some £300 million per annum to the Scottish economy, any action that damages our reputation as a friendly, welcoming golf destination is of course unhelpful.

We recognise that youth festivals are an important part of Scotland's cultural sector. There are also a number of events and festivals held across Scotland that contain significant youth or children's elements. All those events attract visitors and media attention to the area concerned. That is why EventScotland supports the Aberdeen international youth festival and other regional events such as big in Falkirk and word, which is the University of Aberdeen's writers festival.

I am grateful to Nanette Milne for giving me the opportunity to recognise the good work that goes on both in Aberdeen and elsewhere and, in particular, the contribution made by volunteers, trustees and patrons such as Nanette Milne. The event to which she refers is a particularly important one, which is why I am so pleased that EventScotland was able to support it this year by giving some assistance. I have also been interested to hear about the Aberdeen storytelling and theatre festival. I understand that, this year, it is hoped that the festival will be even bigger than it has been in  previous years. We can be confident that a number of cultural activities of particular interest to young people and children are happening this year. Diary permitting, I would very much like to attend.

The statutory responsibility to ensure that there is adequate provision of and access to leisure facilities lies with local authorities. It is for them to determine local needs and priorities.

Pauline McNeill makes a valid point. I agree with her about the need to involve young people in the decision-making process on this issue and on a range of others. I hope that the new community planning process might give them such a voice. A couple of specific examples have worked particularly well. The Executive has a particular strength with regard to our cross-cutting approach and I have been able to work with the ministers with responsibility for justice on the twilight basketball and football leagues, which have been popular with young people in Glasgow and have diverted them from other activities that they might otherwise participate in. I am also aware that Glasgow City Council has recently undertaken an audit of its facilities, and it occurs to me that Pauline McNeill might like to  raise with the local authority the possibility of running a complementary exercise that would discuss those facilities with young people and find out where any gaps might be.

In areas where the costal path network is a high priority, for example in Fife, VisitScotland has entered into a partnership agreement to promote the coastal path in conjunction with local partners.

I was not aware of that aspect of the project and am obviously very pleased to hear about it. I know that the Fife coastal partnership is currently funding marketing activities such as brochure production, website promotion, direct mail and press trips to locations. Local businesses have also been encouraged to adopt the walkers welcome scheme, which is also part of such a partnership. That said, it would be entirely sensible for the partnership to consider the possibility of providing additional information on access for people who have disabilities or who use aids to mobility. I will certainly take the matter up with VisitScotland.

As I understand it, there are already a number of what could be called core paths, which should link up to provide a core path network. However, I would be more than happy to consider any possibility for the Executive—or, at least, this part of the Executive—to become  involved in helping and encouraging such a project. Perhaps Mr Morgan might like to discuss the matter with me after question time.

The Executive is fully committed to improving the nation's health and well-being and regards sport and physical activity as playing a key role in achieving that aim. We are determined to play our part in helping to meet the targets of sport 21, which mirror those set out in the report of the physical activity task force.

As Mr Arbuckle knows from previous debates, a big move is currently under way to encourage an increase in the number of PE teachers. I should also point out that the University of Strathclyde and Glasgow City Council are running a course that allows existing primary teachers to develop PE specialisms. The Education Department has had discussions with the deans of faculties of education at higher education institutions and is considering how that course can be rolled out elsewhere.

The Executive does not monitor how funding from sportscotland is distributed to each local authority area. Sportscotland operates a range of application-based programmes, and funding is awarded against set criteria.

I agree entirely with what Karen Whitefield has suggested. In fact, there was an application from her own local authority in Lanarkshire for funding under the regional sports facilities programme and an award of some £5 million was made. The local authority is currently working with sportscotland to take that project forward to the second stage. Local authorities should take the opportunities that they have under that programme and a range of others operated by sportscotland. Sometimes those programmes cannot be broken down by individual local authority area because they may have a more cross-cutting nature. We also wish to encourage local authorities to operate across boundaries, where that is appropriate and where they wish to do so, because it often makes sense to do that in the provision of facilities. As Karen Whitefield said, it is important for local authorities to think creatively, and there are partnership managers in place at sportscotland who will facilitate that process if local authorities wish to access it.

I join members in congratulating Mike Watson on securing this debate on an issue that continues to stimulate a great deal of interest among members. When he lodged his motion, Mike Watson may not have realised that the issue is dear to my heart, because one of my first constituency duties when elected to the Parliament was to appear before a reporter's inquiry concerning the proposed loss of some playing fields connected to a school in my constituency. I make clear from the outset that the Executive is fully committed to the protection and enhancement of the land that is required for Scotland's sport and physical recreation. We are equally committed to improving the health and well-being of the nation, especially of young  people. Members have raised a number of issues and I suspect that I will not have the time or opportunity to cover all of them. However, I have listened carefully to what has been said, especially in relation to issues that may come before ministers as planning matters. It would be impossible—and, possibly, illegal—for me to comment specifically on those issues, but I have listened carefully to the points that have been made. Dennis Canavan said that he wants to meet me to discuss the generality of the issue about which he is concerned. I would be happy to do that. The Executive has invested significant funds in the active schools programme, which has been embraced by all 32 local authorities. We are working towards implementing our commitment to provide more time for physical activity—not just PE—and more PE teachers. It is essential that, as a nation, we become more active. However, we must remember that many of the activities in which we encourage young people, in particular, to take part do not require specialist facilities. The motion refers to the continuing diminution in the number of sports pitches and open spaces across Scotland. Mike Watson was right to say that, since NPPG 11 was published in June 1996, there has been a net loss of 112 pitches. However, since the start of 2004 there has been a net gain of four pitches. It should be recognised that many of the pitches that were lost were old mineral pitches that are deemed unsuitable for modern-day use. In their place are synthetic pitches, sevens pitches and multi-use games areas that can be played on at all times and in any weather.

I will address Margo MacDonald's point shortly. Although there has been a net loss in pitches, there has been a marked increase in the quality of playing fields, which can often sustain a significantly higher level of usage. As I said earlier, the Executive is committed to the protection of playing fields and open spaces and to their improvement. The planning system performs two key functions in relation to open spaces. It protects areas that are valuable and valued, and it ensures the provision of appropriate  quality in or within easy reach of new development. Members recognised that primary responsibility for the issue lies with local authorities. The Executive's role is to provide the legislative framework, plus guidance and advice to local authorities on how to fulfil our commitment. "NPPG 11—Sport, Physical Recreation and Open Space" aims to safeguard playing fields and sports pitches by discouraging development where that is likely to conflict with local needs either now or in the future. Adam Ingram referred to PAN 65, which, as he knows, was published in 2003 and sets out the Executive's advice on the role of the planning system in delivering high-quality open space. The note specifies a method for local authorities to adopt and adapt when preparing open space strategies. It also gives examples of good practice in providing, managing and maintaining the open space resource. Crucially, it encourages partnership between local authority departments with open space responsibilities and the active participation of local communities, amenity bodies and developers in achieving quality open space. I hope that members are aware that, as I have outlined, measures already exist to protect playing fields. When proposed development would affect such fields, sportscotland has the right as a statutory consultee to object formally to that development. Cases in which its objection is maintained must be notified to ministers, to give them the opportunity to decide whether to call in an application for their own determination or to allow the planning authority to determine the application itself. Between January 2000 and this April, 11 such cases have been notified and two planning applications that affect playing fields have been called in. Although that figure might appear low, that is simply because sportscotland is prepared to enter into negotiations about the provision of alternative sports pitches for the area. When that aim is achieved to sportscotland's satisfaction, it will often withdraw its objection and thereby remove the need for the planning authority to notify the case to ministers. Members raised the issue of private clubs. Obviously, the Scottish Executive cannot intervene on such matters, but one condition of tax relief is that clubs must not limit their membership in the way that Dennis Canavan indicated. If they do, they can lose relief. Moreover, if sportscotland has invested in those clubs, it can seek to recover its investment at that stage. Our partnership agreement states that the Executive will review planning guidance to set strong minimum standards for including public open space in new developments. We commissioned research on minimum standards for  open space and have recently received the final report. That research will be published shortly and will feed into the revision of planning policy on open space later this year. I should point out that amendments to national planning policy do not need to be set out in primary legislation such as the proposed planning bill. Furthermore, we have started a review of NPPG 11 to examine the framework around which local authorities consider planning applications that impact on playing field provision. In that respect, we will certainly examine Mike Watson's point about the minimum size at which that NPPG kicks in. Indeed, in discussing the issue, we will perhaps consider reductions in that minimum size. As Margo MacDonald pointed out, the management, maintenance and promotion of facilities are all equally important. Local authorities have been encouraged to produce sports development plans, a key aspect of which is a strategy to maximise use and impact. Although we can support and sustain the development of facilities, we need drive at the local level to ensure that facilities are used imaginatively and wisely and provide a wide range of opportunities to the immediate community and beyond.  I am very aware of the time, Presiding Officer, but I will say that, following the recent completion of a study that was commissioned by sportscotland, the Scottish Arts Council and the Executive on the impact of management regimes on the use of the school sports and cultural facilities, sportscotland and the SAC will shortly issue guidance for local authorities on a range of issues connected with improving local communities' access to school facilities. I realise that I am overstepping my time, but I want to thank members, particularly Mike Watson, for bringing this important issue to our attention. As I have said, it is very close to my heart. I hope that our review of the existing rules and guidance on this matter will strengthen them to the benefit of all our communities.  Meeting closed at 18:18.

We have had an important debate about Scotland's tourism industry and the restructuring of the support structure. I will deal with some of the points that have been raised in the debate. I apologise to members if I do not address the point that they raised, but I suspect that I will be a little bit short of time. Both Brian Adam and Jamie Stone spoke about the challenge fund being too bureaucratic. The first round of the challenge fund was a pilot scheme, and many lessons have been learned from that. From now on, a team of locally based business relationship managers in area offices will be in place to work with businesses and to support good applications to the challenge fund. I was very impressed by the excellent work that has been done by some of the businesses that are already involved in the challenge fund, which I met earlier this week.

Very briefly.

I accept the point that Mr Adam makes, but I point out to him that that is not the only way of attracting marketing moneys. There are other mechanisms that can be used. If the member writes to me with a specific problem, I can try to help him to address it. Like Fergus Ewing and other members, I do not recognise the argument that Jamie McGrigor put forward. It is important to remember that the approach that we have taken to restructuring has taken account of international expertise. In fact, a recent report that was commissioned by Fáilte Ireland, to which Richard Baker alluded, prepares the way for an integrated structure that is similar to ours to be put in place there.

I am sorry, but I do not have time. To Mr McGrigor, I say that I accept entirely—as other members have said—that there have been  difficulties with visitscotland.com. Nevertheless, it has generated £27.7 million of business so far, and many of the early problems have been ironed out. The site will continue to be monitored so that any residual problems can be addressed. I was surprised by some of Chris Ballance's comments about green tourism. VisitScotland works closely with the tourism environment forum to promote the green tourism business scheme. That is Europe's largest green tourism accreditation scheme, and the aim is to raise the environmental performances not just of green tourism businesses, but of all tourism businesses. VisitScotland aims to increase the membership of the scheme by a third each year for the next three years. Alasdair Morgan was right to mention the importance of business tourism. As well as being very lucrative, business tourism has a spin-off as far as the business incentive element of it is concerned. In that context, Susan Deacon was entirely right to mention the fact that Edinburgh is a gateway to the rest of Scotland, although there are other important gateways.

I am sorry, but I am really tight for time. Susan Deacon made the point that there are no women in the cadre of directors at VisitScotland. However, six of the 12 area directors who have been appointed so far are women, and six of the 17 heads of department are women. I am hopeful that we will see those women progress. I would add that the minister with responsibility for tourism is definitely a woman. Margo MacDonald asked what our strategy for tourism was—whether it was for short breaks, budget breaks or luxury holidays. The member is no longer in the chamber, but I say to her that Scotland has a range of attractive offerings and VisitScotland has segmented its marketing strategy to appeal to a range of visitors. VisitScotland's current city activity campaign emphasises the role of cities as gateways and encourages city break visitors to enjoy rural areas through the easy accessibility to the countryside from our cities. I just have time to address Fergus Ewing's point about year-round businesses. That is where EventScotland comes in. It is important to attract such events as the mountain bike championships that will take place in Fergus Ewing's area; it is also important to have local festivals and use them to market Scotland. In response to one of Jamie McGrigor's earlier points, I point out that that is the cross-cutting element of my portfolio, which is very important. We cannot take the cultural and  sporting aspects out of tourism in this country. They contribute hugely to the tourism businesses that we have. Everyone in Scotland has a part to play in making our guests welcome: every restaurant and hotel worker, every shop assistant, every cab driver and, indeed, every MSP. Our visitors think that this is a great country to visit and they value the contact with local people. Tourism is everyone's business and we all have a part to play in its success.

Will the member take an intervention?

I find it hard to put together the two opposing arguments that Mr McGrigor seems to be making at once. He argues both that everything is being centralised and that we have replicated 14 ATBs with 14 hubs but, regardless of what he thinks, it is a fact that 90 per cent of VisitScotland's work takes place outwith the centre.

I am very glad to take part in today's debate, which provides us with an ideal opportunity to reflect on the great things that Scotland's tourism industry has achieved over the past year. I thank Alex Neil's committee for its very careful consideration of the matter; I thank Alex Neil in particular for his fine advert for Scottish tourism at the beginning of his speech. We can look forward with confidence to another year of growth for the wide range of businesses that make up the industry. As they grow, they will be strongly supported by VisitScotland's integrated tourism network. After the outcome of the ATB review was announced in March 2004, much hard work went into ensuring that the tourism network would be ready for business in April. I congratulate everyone who made sure that it was ready. Looking back for a moment, I should make it clear that the decision to merge the 14 ATBs into an integrated network was largely based on what people told us during our consultation exercise. Whatever else they thought, most respondents stressed the need for much better integration of national tourism policy with local delivery. Another important issue for the Executive was that, when taken as a whole, the ATB network was in a precarious financial state. Change was needed. However, that change was to keep the best of what was already there while providing a  seamless service to visitors and businesses that was based on a sound financial footing. I am glad to report that, after some hiccups last year, the transition to the VisitScotland network has been relatively smooth. That success is due to the huge commitment of all the partners and their staff who have been working together to deliver it. The early performance of the network is encouraging. VisitScotland's 2006 marketing opportunity package was sent to businesses throughout Scotland at the end of February and the current 39 per cent response rate is fully in line with the level of response at this stage last year. In fact, the number of businesses buying into the package, which is the replacement for ATB membership, is ahead of the rate at which businesses bought into ATB membership in previous years. So far, so good. Another very encouraging aspect is the important role played by the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and local authorities in supporting the development of the VisitScotland network. Indeed, the funding commitments that VisitScotland has now received from local authorities for this year are in excess of the budgeted level. That augurs well for the future, although future funding from local authorities will depend on the development of good tourism partnership plans in each area of Scotland. It goes without saying that all of that has been achieved at a cost. The Executive provided additional funding to VisitScotland last year and this year to cover the costs of planning and developing the network. As I have already confirmed to the committee and as Alex Neil pointed out in his speech, the final figure for those costs is £6.5 million over the two years. I can also confirm that substantial additional funding was not diverted from the VisitScotland marketing budget, but was secured from elsewhere within the Executive's budget. The tourism network is expected to achieve savings from next year, and VisitScotland will retain that money for marketing. The VisitScotland network has made a strong start and tourism businesses are seeing real benefits from our increased investment in VisitScotland's marketing budget. Last year, Scotland experienced a 20 per cent increase on the previous year in the number of overseas visitors. Furthermore, occupancy figures for almost all types of visitor accommodation are at their highest levels for the past five years or so. We are getting the message out there that Scotland is the best small country in the world and is a must-visit, must-return destination. As I said in my recent letter to the convener of the Enterprise and Culture Committee, I very much welcome the committee's report to the Parliament on the restructuring of the ATBs.  Although there are lessons to be learned, I was pleased to note that the committee supports the general principles of an integrated support structure for the tourism industry in Scotland. I have already made a commitment to the committee that I will regularly report to it on the outcomes. I am absolutely convinced that the decision to merge the ATBs with VisitScotland was right and that it will underpin our shared ambition to grow the value of tourism by 50 per cent over the next decade.

Direct expenditure incurred by the Scottish Executive to promote the United Kingdom's bid for the 2012 Olympics to be held in London amounts to £653.71, with no further commitments planned. Sportscotland and  EventScotland have jointly spent £36,075 and have committed, but not yet incurred, a further £17,365, excluding VAT and staff costs.

I am aware of the report to which Mr Neil refers. I say to him and to the Parliament that the amount of money that is spent on good causes in Scotland as a result of lottery funding is guaranteed until 2009 and consultations will take place shortly on where lottery money will go thereafter. I also say to Mr Neil that it is clear that sporting interests in Scotland back the bid and so does business. Last time there was a poll on the matter, we found that 71 per cent of Scots support the idea of the UK bid. Unfortunately for Mr Neil, less than 18 per cent of Scots decided to vote for his party last week. It is clear that Scotland backs the bid; it just does not back the Scottish National Party.

I would not want to indicate that our support for rugby sevens would be restricted to any one part of Scotland. We are keen to ensure that sports in Scotland are given the support that they need and we also want to ensure that they have the proper governance in place to allow them to go forward. Rugby sevens is one of the sports in which Scotland excels. I had the pleasure of watching our youth team compete in the Commonwealth games and although it was not particularly successful on that occasion it shows a great deal of potential for the future. We should applaud it and watch it with interest.

The Executive is committed to promoting equality of opportunity for all people in Scotland. The announcement earlier this week of an award of £138,000 to the Scottish Football Association to help the continued growth of women's and girls' football is a clear demonstration of that commitment. In addition, the recent appointment of a women, girls and sport officer by sportscotland will lead to a comprehensive programme of positive action to encourage participation, leadership, performance and excellence among women and girls.

Marlyn Glen is right to highlight women's and girls' football as one of the growing areas of sport in Scotland and the United Kingdom. The Parliament will want to join me in encouraging our women's team and wishing it well for its game against Finland. The national physical activity task force's report highlighted the fact that teenage girls in particular are not physically active enough. We must ensure that barriers real and perceived that deter teenage girls from participating in sport and physical activity are removed. That might be achieved by offering teenage girls activities that they particularly want, such as dance, yoga or aerobics in single-sex classes. It is hoped that the active schools programme will help to tackle that.

Tartan week this year provided an excellent opportunity to reach our most important overseas tourism market. This year's event generated more than £1 million of media publicity for Scotland as a place to visit and do business. VisitScotland's Scottish village in New York's Grand Central station was especially impressive. An in-depth analysis of tartan week is being undertaken and I look forward to reporting the results to Parliament as soon as they are ready.

Several statistics are available, not least the fact that the Minister for Health and Community Care managed to knock one minute off his personal best in a run through Central park. I am sure that he would regard it as being remiss of me if I did not mention that. We know that 250,000 people visited the Scottish village during its short stay in Grand Central station and that about 74,000 individuals visited the website and inquired about VisitScotland's tartan week website. In addition, 22,000 people participated in competitions that VisitScotland organised. All the names of those people and all that interest will help to inform a database that will allow VisitScotland to market our country to people who have expressed an interest in it.

I join other members in thanking Des McNulty for bringing the debate to the Parliament this evening. As others have pointed out, he has been committed to the issue for as long as some of us have known him—which, for some of us, is probably longer than we would like to admit. I also join other members in congratulating the make poverty history coalition on the effort and resources that it has put in to building one of the UK's biggest movements committed to tackling poverty. I welcome its work in bringing issues of poverty to the forefront and in stimulating debate in Scotland on trade, aid and debt. As we know, this year offers an unprecedented opportunity to make a real difference. Not only has the Commission for Africa published its report and not only will the UN summit take stock of progress on the millennium development goals, but this is the 20 th anniversary of Live Aid, when the grim reality of the suffering and death of our fellow human beings in Africa was brought, perhaps for the first time, into the living rooms of millions of people in this country. Moreover, this year Britain holds the presidencies of the EU and the G8 and the most influential leaders of the prosperous world will meet in Scotland for the G8 summit. This is both a challenging year and one of great opportunity—I believe that Scotland must seize the opportunity to play its part in the fight against world poverty. In passing, I have to say that I was very interested in Richard Lochhead's remarks about Robert Burns. I understand that a humanitarian award will be made at this year's Burns an' a' that festival, which is entirely appropriate for the man who wrote "The Slave's Lament". The song's  depiction of the way in which the developed world treated the developing world at the time was a foretaste of the problems that we now have. It is unacceptable that, in our world today, one in five of the population lives in abject poverty and that malnutrition, illiteracy, conflict, AIDS and death from hunger and preventable diseases are a reality that millions of people around the world have to struggle with on a daily basis. For progress to be made, prosperous countries such as Scotland must be more responsive. As members know, foreign policy is reserved to the UK Government, but the Scottish Executive strongly believes that all levels of government have a role to play. We are playing our role by supporting the UK Government's programme and by taking forward our own international development policy, which the First Minister launched last month. The immense response of people in Scotland to the Asian tsunami is just one example that demonstrates that people in this country care deeply and actively about the suffering of their fellow human beings in developing countries and that they want to help to make a real difference. The tragic tsunami disaster also showed us that, as Richard Lochhead said, impoverished people already living precarious lives tend to be the most vulnerable. Our international development policy sets out the part that Scotland will play in tackling world poverty and our contribution towards achieving the millennium development goals. As we know, the UN summit that is to be held in September will discuss the millennium development goals. The summit will throw up both positive stories and negative ones. I believe that Scotland shares the concerns of many in the international community about those countries that are falling behind. We know that Africa, unfortunately, will be one of the regions that will need more support in meeting the goals. We want to target our efforts to ensure the best possible impact, which is why sub-Saharan Africa will be one of the main focuses of our long-term efforts. Scotland already has strong and well-established ties with Africa, so it makes sense to use those relationships in making our contribution. The Commission for Africa report highlighted, among other things, the importance of tackling HIV and AIDS and the tuberculosis that can accompany those conditions and is often the killer disease. It also talked about boosting health and education capacity in Africa. Scotland has specific skills in those areas and we intend to put them to use. As we have heard, the First Minister will travel to Malawi next month. He will use that visit to build links with the leaders of that country and with other  stakeholders and to develop a relationship based on partnership working. As Sarah Boyack said, he will be accompanied by children from Sanday Community School in Orkney and by five Malawian children. They are the winners of our schools competition, held both in Malawi and in Scotland, which aimed to encourage children to think about the value of education. That trip is not just about building relationships; it is also about raising awareness. I have been struck by the contribution made by a number of colleagues emphasising the role of women and the necessity of assisting women wherever we can. In the debate that Margaret Ewing led on the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association's trip to Malawi, I had the opportunity to mention Bottom hospital in Lilongwe, where one women in 27 dies in childbirth—a figure that is quite unacceptable. The Scottish Executive warmly welcomes the strong lead that the UK Government is taking through its presidencies of the EU and the G8 in calling on the rest of the international community to tackle poverty. We also support the emphasis that the UK Government is placing on Africa. The G8 summit is significant and it comes at a significant point in our journey towards alleviating world poverty. By publishing our international development policy, we hope to build on the momentum that will be generated by the G8 summit this summer. However, our work is aimed at the long term; it is the responsibility of us all to ensure that international development issues do not fade away into the background once July has come and gone. We must ensure that the momentum is sustained and we must continue to raise awareness of the issues. We must also continue to press ahead with actions that will bring about positive change for our fellow human beings who live in poverty in developing countries. I commend the international development sector in Scotland for its dedication, its professionalism and its tireless efforts to tackle the problems that are related to poverty. Since I took on my current role, I have become only too well aware of the kind of work that is going on. It is often not lauded and it is often not heard about. The make poverty history campaign is a good example of how individuals and groups with various backgrounds—NGOs, faith groups, trade unions and celebrities—can come together to use their collective voice to bring poverty-related issues to the public arena. The campaign shows the strength of force that a collective voice can have. It is important that the discussion continues, that the debate continues to rage and that the momentum continues to be built on over the coming years.  Sarah Boyack, along with other members, mentioned the idea of Scotland becoming a fair-trade country. I am keen to work with colleagues in the Parliament who have already indicated an interest in taking forward that idea, which I believe we can make a reality.  The Scottish Government is committed to supporting that process and to playing its part in making poverty history.  Meeting closed at 18:15.

A thriving and attractive retail sector is part of what makes Scotland a must-visit destination for our United Kingdom and overseas guests, who spend nearly £400 million every year in Scotland—considerably more than that when day visitors are counted. VisitScotland's Scottish retail study of 2004 identified retail areas that are particularly appealing to our visitors and ways in which that appeal can be further increased. One important outcome of the study is the accreditation of retail outlets under VisitScotland's quality assurance scheme.

The planning of any supermarket is a matter for the local authority and the local communities involved. I am aware of Castle Douglas's great efforts to establish itself in the way that Mr Ballance has outlined—last summer, I was fortunate to experience that for myself. Castle Douglas and other areas can take some comfort from the fact that there are now 107 retail outlets that are accredited by VisitScotland, which are the kind of places that visitors will want to come to see. The specific Tesco proposal is, however, a matter for others.

I will take the hint—as Mr Stone does not want to mention cheese directly, I will do it on his behalf. Our indigenous food products are important to us. Food outlets are also accredited and many of our restaurants are now making a virtue of the fact that they use local produce—indeed, they are marketing themselves in that way. That is something that visitors to our country want to see. One of the popular features of the Scotland village that we had in Grand Central station during tartan week was a culinary exhibition at which people were able to sample some of the best Scottish produce. Our indigenous food products are an area that we are keen to see grow.

It was announced on 18 February that PMP Consultancy has been appointed by the bid assessment group, chaired by David Mackay, to help to assess the feasibility and winnability of a bid by Glasgow to host the 2014 Commonwealth games. David Mackay is expected to present the findings of the group to Scottish ministers in the summer.

It is fair to say that economic benefits would come from tourism and visitor expenditure in Glasgow and throughout Scotland, as well as from the employment that would be generated by the organisation and staging of the games. The games might also provide opportunities for Scottish businesses to enhance trade with the Commonwealth countries that participate. In addition, the games would provide an impetus for sports development in Scotland, and Scottish athletes would benefit from competing on home soil. The benefit of holding the games in Glasgow could be spread around the rest of the country, and we would encourage other local authorities, organisations and businesses to get fully behind the bid if it is to go ahead.

A range of internal and external stakeholders were consulted as our international development policy was developed. There were meetings with the Department for International Development, the British Council, the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, a number of Scottish local authorities and a range of Scottish based international aid agencies. NIDOS—the Network of International Development Organisations in Scotland—also conducted an informal consultation of their members on our behalf.

I thank Mr Swinney for his helpful question. One only had to be present on the evening when we discussed the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association delegation's trip to Malawi to understand the scale of the problem that is faced by aid agencies around the country. It is fair to say that the impact that we can have should be seen as complementary to the impact that DFID can have through its leading role. We have tried hard to focus our resources so that we get maximum impact from them. For that reason, we have decided to focus on a particular region, sub-Saharan Africa, and on Malawi specifically. We will also work hard to increase the capacity of non-governmental organisations in Scotland. In that way, we think that we can make a direct impact in Malawi as a first step.

The Executive does not think that its international development policy is a static piece of work; it is a living document and it will evolve and change with time. We will enter into more negotiation with the general business community in Scotland about the efforts that it can  make. At a very good seminar on Monday, the Secretary of State for Scotland, Gareth Thomas of DFID and I talked to a wide range of contributors, such as NGOs and aid agencies, as well as businesses, about the work that they might want to do. Organisations throughout Scotland such as local authorities, schools and education providers, and businesses are willing to take part in and contribute to what we are doing. We will talk to anyone who has something to contribute to this process.

Since 1997-98, sportscotland has invested in excess of £1 million of Exchequer and lottery funding. It has committed a further £400,000 to support the Scottish Women's Football Association's current four-year development plan. Women's and girls' football has also benefited from facility awards and our substantial investment in initiatives such as active schools. Implementation of the action plan for youth football will also deliver a step change in the development of women's and girls' football.

Sylvia Jackson is correct to say that the sport of women's football is growing. Some 4,000 players are now registered, in addition to the 20,000 girls who we know are playing football in schools. This is a growing sport that is to be encouraged. The governance arrangements that have been put in place for women's football are a model that could be used by other sporting organisations and governing bodies. We have recently appointed in sportscotland a new women, girls and sport officer, who will lead the implementation of the organisation's women, girls and sport action plan. I hope that that will contribute to the continuing increase in the number of women playing football.

As I am delighted to congratulate anyone who is helping to encourage excellence and participation in sport, I join Jamie McGrigor in congratulating the SSFA. As for his other question, some bodies that are involved in sport have perhaps been a little overzealous in some of their precautions over and arrangements for insurance. The best advice that I can give is that anyone who is concerned about such issues should contact sportscotland, which will provide  very good and expert guidance about how to manage such issues.

I, too, must congratulate Margaret Ewing on securing this debate on behalf of the CPA. I also congratulate her on her moving and informative article in The Herald last week. I very much welcome the opportunity to hear from the delegation about its visit to Malawi and South Africa and I look forward to studying its report and meeting the delegation members to discuss what they have learnt in more detail. I welcome the report because I believe that the issues facing Africa should be close to the heart of the Parliament and rightly deserve to be discussed in this chamber. The Scots have always been an outward looking people and our new Parliament has given us the opportunity to refresh Scotland's connections with the world and to consider our place in it. As modern Scotland is part of the rich and prosperous world, our people have seen improvements in their income, their health care and their prospects. However, we are determined to play our part in supporting countries whose development is far behind ours. As colleagues know, responsibility for foreign policy and international development in our country lies with the United Kingdom Government; however, we believe that all levels of government can and should contribute to tackling the misery of global poverty. On Tuesday, the First Minister launched our new international development policy for Scotland, which sets out the contribution that the devolved Scottish Government can make and our responsibilities towards developing countries. The policy builds on our long-standing historical role of looking beyond our borders and acknowledges Scotland's collective efforts and aspirations as a prosperous but caring nation to play its part in tackling global inequality. We in Scotland are determined to make a difference for Africa and to do our bit as part of the UK's effort. We will focus our efforts and resources to ensure that they have the best possible impact. We will look to support the good work of Scots who are helping the world's poorest people to tackle those vicious circles that trap them in poverty. Malnutrition, AIDS, conflict and illiteracy are a daily reality for millions of people around the globe; however, we have a real opportunity to change that reality. As much of our work will centre on Malawi, I was very interested in Mike Pringle's comments about the Bottom maternity hospital in Lilongwe, which the delegation visited on its trip. I understand that the hospital has some of the worst conditions in the world: it is dirty, crowded and lacking in basic equipment, and it appears that only the enthusiasm and dedication of its small number of staff hold it together. If we distil his statistics, it  appears that a woman who gives birth there has a one in 27 chance of dying. In comparison, the figure for Scotland is virtually nil. As Mike Pringle said, there is real cause to hope that the situation at the hospital could get better soon. A group of doctors and nurses from the Simpson maternity centre at Edinburgh royal infirmary is already planning to travel there and to revitalise the hospital by using their knowledge and skills to offer the staff first-class training. Like Mike Pringle, I welcome that dedicated team of Scottish medics to the chamber. They have an opportunity to make a difference and they are seizing it; they are taking the best Scottish knowledge and sharing it with the world. I am pleased to note that their visit is likely to coincide with the First Minister's visit to Malawi. I envisage that the international development policy will support such good work. It will focus on Scotland's key strengths and values, and we will aim to transfer Scottish knowledge, skills and expertise to the areas where they are most needed. Our priorities of education, health and civil society development are designed to contribute to meeting the needs identified by the millennium development goals. Moreover, with our proud record of women's representation, we can play a particular role in building the capacity of and supporting women's engagement in development and change. We know that women around the world often get the worst of what is already a poor deal. In sub-Saharan Africa, they produce up to 80 per cent of the basic foodstuffs, yet the same women often get little recognition for that. In fact, many go unpaid, while their daughters are even less likely to go to school than their sons. As a prosperous nation, rich in talent and skills, we have a clear obligation to help to tackle those problems. We will back the policy with a development fund. We will increase the capacity of Scotland's non-governmental organisations and charities that work in developing countries or in disaster relief. The policy will also focus on helping us to raise awareness of international development issues more widely. In particular, in our schools, the aim is that future generations of Scots will become more aware of the diversity of our world and our place in it. As colleagues might know, the First Minister recently launched a competition for Scottish schools that will culminate in the winners visiting Malawi with him. By publishing our international development policy now, we hope to build on the momentum that will be generated by this year's G8 summit, but it must not end there; our involvement must continue.  We welcome in particular the publication of the commission for Africa report last Friday. The report challenges us all. It is an important step, but it is only a first step. In the months leading up to the G8 summit, we all have a responsibility to ensure that the issue is driven up the agenda and debated fully. Hosting the G8 summit is a major responsibility for a small country such as Scotland and for our local authorities and other public bodies. However, it is also a privilege and a great opportunity. We all know that Africa is the foremost development challenge facing the international community today. The divide now between rich countries and poor countries is greater than it has ever been. The Parliament and the Executive have identified a common goal on which we have the opportunity to work together to change and make a difference. It is wrong, when so many have too much, that others have no access to education, medicines or clean water. There can be no excuse and there should be nothing that stands in the way of this generation doing something really remarkable to change things. In 2005, I believe that, by working together, we can do that.  Meeting closed at 18:13.

VisitScotland's business tourism unit exists to promote the facilities that the whole of Scotland has to offer for hosting conferences and incentive programmes. The VisitScotland integrated tourism network will maximise the considerable benefits of business tourism across the whole country. Previously, there was no dedicated convention bureau presence in areas such as Dumfries and Galloway and the Borders. The new network will be structured into northern, central and southern regions to serve the whole of Scotland.

I agree entirely with what Scott Barrie says. He is right to identify the possibilities that exist. We reckon that some £1 billion a year of business tourism income is spread around Scotland and that business tourists spend on average twice what leisure tourists spend. The market is, therefore, very lucrative. He is also right to recognise the role that the cities play. We want to encourage those who are booking conventions and conferences to incentivise other parts of their programmes so that people come to areas such as Fife and take advantage of what those areas have to offer. Fife is ideally placed to take advantage of business tourists who come to Edinburgh and I hope that the royal Dunfermline partnership, which is looking into regeneration and the promotion of Dunfermline in particular, will have a role to play in encouraging that kind of activity.

I do not agree with Jamie McGrigor that that will be a consequence of the reform of the network. In fact, I am hugely encouraged by the fact that VisitScotland has allocated some 97 per cent of its staff to positions outwith Edinburgh. There is absolutely nothing for the local and rural areas in which Mr McGrigor is interested to worry about in the transformation. The opportunities for them are immense. He is absolutely right to identify the fact that local knowledge is important. That is why I am encouraged by the steps that VisitScotland is taking to ensure that its staff are spread throughout the network and that there is expertise in local areas as well as at the centre.

The additional resources that have been made available by the Scottish Executive to increase the marketing power of VisitScotland are aimed at increasing the volume and value of tourism right across Scotland. However, each area has distinctive attributes and attractions, such as golf in Fife, which VisitScotland markets as part of its product portfolio.

I am aware of Mr Brocklebank's keen interest in promoting St Andrews and the surrounding area. Any decision on whether the city should be considered as a world heritage site will require the local communities to draw up character assessments of the area. We want to support the local community  in beginning that process as soon as possible, so that it can start to go through the many hoops that it will need to go through if it wants St Andrews to be considered as a world heritage site.

This year, Scotland is in a unique position and Perth and Fife will act as Scotland's showcase to the world. We are encouraged by the progress that has been made in ensuring that Scotland is top of the agenda in the coming year. The activities of local VisitScotland offices in Perth and Fife will be enormously helpful in ensuring that both areas are equipped to take best advantage of the opportunities that will be offered.

The integrated tourism network will build on the expertise of both VisitScotland and the area tourist boards to support the growth of tourism across Scotland. Each area has its own distinctive attributes and attractions, such as the adventure activities in Perthshire, which VisitScotland will continue to market strongly as part of its product portfolio.

I am grateful to Mr Fraser for bringing to the chamber an issue that has not been raised with me directly before. On the face of it, I see no reason why local firms should lose out under the new set-up, but I will take that up with VisitScotland and will be happy to communicate to Mr Fraser the outcome of those discussions.

I am delighted to have this opportunity to endorse what I think is our collective admiration for and delight at Franz Ferdinand's success and our support and enthusiasm for the vibrant music scene in Scotland. I congratulate Pauline McNeill on securing the debate and on leading the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on the Scottish contemporary music industry in the way that she has done, with support from Ken Macintosh and others, for almost six years. The past year has been phenomenal for Franz Ferdinand. Following a highly successful appearance at the south by southwest music festival in Texas last year, they were named the most influential band of 2004 by the US magazine "Spin". From there, the group went on to pick up a prestigious Mercury music prize and, more recently, best British group and best British rock act at the Brit awards. It hardly seems possible to pick up a newspaper or magazine without reading of another award that they have received or another tribute to the band. Long may it continue. It is well deserved.  Rosie Kane may be reassured—or perhaps not—to know that the ministers who share my corridor at Victoria Quay in Leith are a little bit more progressive than at least some members of the SSP. They do not object at all when I have Franz Ferdinand's album blaring out from my office. Perhaps we can discuss that some time. There is in Scotland today a real buzz in our music industry—not just in pop or rock music, but in our traditional music. Music is something that we can all enjoy; whether we are listening to it or taking part in it, music plays a role in all our lives. It is this enriching experience that makes it paramount that we provide the right atmosphere for music to flourish. A couple of colleagues have mentioned the diverting effect that music can have. I think that it was Mark Ballard who said that music can often be a safety valve for people. When I was thinking about my speech, I remembered various conversations with colleagues in the chamber about our shared love of music and our shared love of particular bands. When I was Labour whip, I remember talking to Scott Barrie about bands that we grew up with—even though I am slightly older than Scott. One conversation that we came back to time and again—perhaps during our more stressful moments—was on whether the band led by Fay Fife were more creative as the Rezillos or as the Revillos. Such discussions can certainly provide a safety valve for people in stressful situations. The Scottish Executive, through our funding of the Scottish Arts Council, is committed to making music accessible to all. Frank McAveety mentioned the youth music initiative, which has invested £17.5 million over three years, up until this financial year. The initiative's target is that, by 2006, all schoolchildren should have had access to one year's free music tuition by the time they reach primary 6. That is a tremendous undertaking. I am pleased to say that we have identified another £10 million per year for financial years 2006-07 and 2007-08. The youth music initiative reference group is in the process of drafting a 10-year national youth music strategy. One of the strengths of the initiative is that it responds to local circumstances and does not try to pigeonhole young people into one particular kind of music. We have to build on young people's natural enthusiasm for music. As we have heard, there are many examples in schools today of music departments developing projects to foster interest and develop skills. As Pauline McNeill said, she and I had the great pleasure of visiting one such project at Lourdes Secondary School. That excellent facility is designed not only to allow the students the opportunity to learn the arts of DJ-ing,  sound recording and engineering, but to provide teachers and tutors with a place to master the various arts of digital media. I would be delighted to visit James Watt College with Duncan McNeil to see the great facility that he described. From such opportunities, we grow the seeds of creativity. There is no shortage of creative ability in Scotland. When I leave Parliament this evening, I am going to the Scottish Arts Council's creative Scotland awards, which is an annual event that celebrates and encourages the development of creative talent. This year, five of the 23 finalists are musicians. I mentioned the south by southwest festival, at which Franz Ferdinand were so successful. Franz Ferdinand, of course, received a grant from the Scottish Arts Council towards their expenses in attending the festival. As others have said, this year another 10 Scottish bands are taking part—again with support from the Scottish Arts Council. In addition, the SAC, in partnership with members of the Scottish music community, will co-ordinate the Scottish presence at the convention's trade show. That will help to maximise the opportunity for promoting Scottish music to an international audience. There are a growing number of events at which we are able to showcase Scottish talent. One of the many examples of which we have heard is the annual MusicWorks convention, which is the UK's leading media and business convention. It took place in Glasgow last October with support from Glasgow City Council and Scottish Enterprise. The Scottish Arts Council, the British Council Scotland, the Musicians Union and others backed showcase Scotland during the recent Celtic connections festival, which supports traditional Scottish music. There has been a tremendous upsurge in local gatherings of traditional musicians throughout Scotland, many of which provide the opportunity to participate and to learn how to play traditional musical instruments. When I visited the music department at the University of Strathclyde recently, I met some young people who, after playing traditional music for me in the morning, went on to take part in a jazz concert. They told me that they play in Glasgow's pubs and clubs at the weekend, in rock, pop and other contemporary music bands. That shows that having an interest in one kind of music does not debar someone from having an interest—or even a competency or proficiency—in another kind of music. The SAC continues to consider the potential for having a Scottish presence at new events, such as WOMEX, the international professional trade fair and showcase event for world and roots music, which will take place at the Sage in Gateshead  later this year. Of course, it is not just our performers who need our support. The infrastructure of the music industry—which incorporates recording studios, promoters, record labels and distribution networks—must be in place if success is to be possible. Rob Gibson was right to mention Highlands and Islands Enterprise and the excellent support that it has provided in its area through enterprises such as the music industry development and support, or MIDAS, website and the Highlands and Islands labels, or HAIL, forum. It is evident that many things are happening that provide a base for development in the different genres or aspects of the industry. However, a joined-up approach that provides seamless support must be the goal if we are to continue to make our mark internationally. Pauline McNeill referred to the discussion paper that was published earlier this week, which was commissioned by the Scottish Arts Council and received funding from the Scottish Executive and Scottish Enterprise. The paper sets out the proposals for the development of an organisation that will be able to represent the interests of the entire music industry in Scotland. I look forward to reading the final report when it is published later in the spring. I thank Pauline McNeill for her contribution to that work. As I said at the beginning of my speech, Scotland has a vibrant music scene. In fact, it is positively bursting with energy, enthusiasm and talent. I agree whole-heartedly with the First Minister that it would be a wonderful endorsement of that state of affairs if the Brit awards were to take place in Scotland. To deal with Pauline McNeill's point, I know that EventScotland is taking that possibility very seriously. In the meantime, I am pleased to add my best wishes to the bands who are performing at south by southwest this year and to all our other performers who raise the profile of Scotland around the world and contribute to the richness of our musical life. If recent press reports are to be believed, I look forward to hearing them not too far from here in the near future.  Meeting closed at 18:03.

Like other members who have spoken this evening, I congratulate Robert Brown on securing parliamentary time for us to have this debate. The concept of a mini-Olympics is fairly novel. I note the example that Michael Matheson gave, but the idea of a Scotland-wide event is novel. However, I welcome any initiative that would promote interest and participation in sport and increase levels of physical activity among our young people. As Michael Matheson rightly pointed out, a mini-Olympics could provide opportunities for volunteering and encourage people who cannot compete to become informed spectators. Recently I attended the Scottish final of the Norwich Union sports:hall programme in Dundee. The event involved girls and boys in under-13 and under-15 categories, representing teams from as far apart as Shetland and Dumfries and Galloway. The young people took part in events such as speed bounce, standing long jump and the vertical jump. What impressed me most about the event was the enthusiasm of the young people who took part and the fact they were having great fun into the bargain. The initiative does not require expensive facilities or equipment; it demands only the imaginative use of facilities and a commitment to giving young people opportunities to express themselves and to test their skills in a variety of sports activities. It also offers opportunities for stimulating interest in sport, while providing a structure for developing skills through competition at regional, Scottish and UK level. What seemed like an ever-growing procession of young people who had taken part gained medals in the course of the day, about which they were very pleased, and the winning team went forward to the UK finals. I sincerely encourage Robert Brown and other colleagues with an interest in sport to investigate that model. I fully accept that we need to offer a wide range of opportunities to young people if we are to improve health and fitness in Scotland, but we have to encourage participation so that we can then develop successful athletes.  Although I fully support the sentiments behind the motion, I admit to having some slight reservations about the commitment of resources and staff time that would be required to plan, organise and stage such events, as well as the distraction that might be involved in a bidding process. Opportunities for young people to engage competitively already exist. I mentioned the sports:hall initiative, but individual sports governing bodies also have their own regional and national events, and there are the Commonwealth youth games, where our young athletes are able to test themselves against their peers from around the Commonwealth. I pay tribute again to the members of the Scottish team who were so successful at Bendigo last December. They are tremendous ambassadors for our country and I am sure that their experience will stand them in good stead for their future sporting careers. I sincerely hope that a number of them will go on to represent their country at the Commonwealth games in Melbourne next year. Some of our young competitors played bowls, which was mentioned as a sport that might not be of interest to young people, but we did very well and won a number of medals in the bowls events. Fundamentally, we must address the increasing problem of the sedentary lifestyle that is particularly prevalent among our young people. Improving physical activity levels brings health benefits that address the full range of serious health problems that we have in Scotland, including coronary heart disease, stroke and the rising epidemic of obesity. I have discussed that problem with my counterparts in Victoria, Australia, who are also working to address a problem that they only too readily recognise as being prevalent in their country, despite their reputation as a great sporting nation. By encouraging more people to be more active more often, we hope to encourage participation levels and ultimately to produce more sports stars. However, that will take time and commitment, not just from young people, but from teachers, youth leaders, parents, sports clubs and national and local politicians. Michael Matheson rightly mentioned an area that concerns me too—the need to form stronger links between schools and clubs, so that young people's participation in sport can lead to a lifetime commitment to their sport once they leave school. The active schools programme is an important part of the strategy, but we must also commit to increasing the level and quality of physical education. Both Margo MacDonald and Fiona Hyslop mentioned our commitment to providing an additional 400 PE teachers to enable schools to deliver at least two hours of quality physical  education every week for every school pupil. I advise Fiona Hyslop that the early indications are quite good. In fact, the University of Strathclyde has increased its intake of PE students this year from nine to 27. Later this year, the University of Edinburgh expects to take on an additional 15 to 20 people, whom it will train in a similar fashion.

I sympathise entirely with and take on board Margo MacDonald's point. In the context of something that Margo MacDonald said in her contribution, I was going to mention the fact that the University of Strathclyde, in conjunction with Glasgow City Council, is currently running a course for existing primary teachers to give them some PE training and allow them to become more skilled so that they can contribute to the life of their primary school. That is useful.

Our target is to have 400 PE teachers, but we are also considering as many innovative ways as possible of increasing the number of people in our schools who have some expertise and who can assist in the promotion of physical activity and PE in our schools. In that context, we should remember that, for many young women, dance offers a more attractive way of being physically active than does sport—despite the sporting achievements of Margo MacDonald and Fiona Hyslop when they were younger. Securing a teaching base is only one change that we need to achieve. Most important, we need to ensure that there is adequate space for physical education in the school week, which touches on a point that Fiona Hyslop made. A curriculum review programme board has been established and will review existing arrangements and make recommendations. It is essential that we instil positive, healthy attitudes to exercise in our young people when they are at an early age, which we hope will encourage them to be physically active throughout their life. Some young people might go on to become high achievers in sport, but participation matters first and foremost. Donald Gorrie was correct to identify the importance of coaching. Like me, he supports and encourages people who want to take part in the sports leaders programme.  As members said, competition is an integral part of sport. Competition exists in all walks of life and we should not shy away from allowing our young people to learn in and from a competitive environment. Winning and losing are part of life's tapestry and competitive sport is part of that process. Some people progress to a higher level in sport but many others do not, and they must not be made to feel that sport is focused only on competition. Taking part is the most important aspect. Nevertheless, we need to ensure that there are clear opportunities for people who have talent to develop their potential to the full. Sportscotland is working with sports governing bodies to develop coaching and competitive structures, particularly in youth football, golf and rugby, which are leading the way in developing regional arrangements. I encourage all sports governing bodies to organise events to identify and develop the most talented people as part of their development plans. I cannot let the debate end without paying tribute to the volunteers and others who organise and run events, who make an enormous contribution to sport at all levels. Their contribution is significant and their expertise makes Scotland an attractive location for major sporting events.  The debate has been wide ranging and I have not been able to touch on all the points that members made. However, I very much welcome the debate, not least because it has highlighted the varying views on competitive sport for young people. I am always interested in hearing about proposals that will improve participation in sport and, although I have reservations about the resource implications of establishing a Scottish mini-Olympics, I would be happy to discuss with Robert Brown how the proposal might be taken forward and how we might develop other ideas that would contribute to an aim that I think members of all parties share. We must bear it in mind that there should be no artificial barriers to participation in a future mini-Olympics or any other event. Such events should contribute clearly to meeting the targets that are set out in the sport 21 strategy and each competitor should be given the support that they need to allow them to perform at their best.  Meeting closed at 17:58.

The Executive has not received any representations recently on the sale of playing fields and other sports facilities.

I am aware of some cases that are similar to those to which Dennis Canavan referred. Obviously, where such facilities are in private ownership, it is entirely up to the owners as to how they dispose of their assets. That said, planning regulations could be used to mitigate against such loss. None of us wants to see facilities lost where that can be avoided. I will look at the petitions with a great deal of interest.

As I indicated, the matter is in the hands of those who are in ownership of the facilities. I assume that, if someone takes the opportunity of joining such a club, they should have an interest in the aims and objectives of the club. If so, surely they look to protect those aims and objectives. The Executive's intention is to try to ensure that, wherever possible, we retain playing fields for public use. There have been occasions in the past, in cases involving schools in particular, when sportscotland has been able to enter into negotiations and to provide, or help to influence the provision of, improved facilities. In those cases, other uses have been found for the less satisfactory facilities that the improved facilities replaced.

I am always willing to look at any opportunity that might arise to protect playing fields and open spaces in this country. The question whether the route that Mr Stevenson suggests is one that would be appropriate is another matter, but I am more than happy to look at his suggestion.

Nothing that I said justifies the accusation that Mr McGrigor has made. From 1996, when national planning policy guideline 11 came into place, to March of last year, some 397  planning applications for the development of playing fields were made. As a result, the overall net loss of playing fields in Scotland is some 115, a figure that should be compared with the 6,000 playing fields that are still in use. The majority of pitches that were lost were blaes or ash—facilities that we are trying to phase out— and many of those that were lost were converted to grass. The figure for the net loss of blaes and ash pitches was 137 and the figure for grass pitches was 37. The figure for replacements includes some 59 synthetic turf pitches, which, unlike the blaes and ash pitches about which I have just spoken, are available for use throughout the year. On many occasions, the other knock-on effect was that better changing facilities were provided, thereby giving the people who use the facilities a quality experience. It is not all doom and gloom as the member tried to suggest.

The G8 summit, coming as it does just before the Scottish open at Loch Lomond and the open championship at St Andrews, gives Scotland an unparalleled opportunity to promote itself on the world stage during July. We intend to take full advantage of that unique marketing opportunity.

The Executive is working hard with Scottish Enterprise, VisitScotland, Perth and Kinross Council, business organisations and others to ensure that we maximise the publicity that Scotland will get throughout the world before, during and after the G8 summit. In particular, VisitScotland is exploring a number of highly visible means of attracting the attention of the huge number of international media representatives who will attend the event. I suspect that we will not give individual funding to tourist boards, but an unparalleled level of marketing money has been given to VisitScotland. In addition, we may well get a great deal of free publicity from the various events, compared to a cost of about £300,000 for a television or movie theatre advertisement.

Through sportscotland, the Executive is taking forward a number of initiatives that have the aim of increasing the number of people trained as coaches and sports assistants.

There are a number of routes into coaching. I am conscious that Donald Gorrie has a particular interest in the role of young sportspeople and in encouraging them to pursue a future career in their chosen sport or in a related sport. He is right to highlight the importance of such continued involvement. Both he and I attended an event that I hosted at Edinburgh Castle last week, at which Sports Leaders UK was launched. The Executive and sportscotland already support that initiative and we hope to help to build on it. The contribution that was made last week by young people who are actively involved in that project bears testament to the idea that Donald Gorrie articulated. It is important to note that my officials are in discussion with officials from Jobcentre Plus to consider how the new deal programme may assist in the provision of sports assistance, which is  another vital area. The governing bodies of individual sports have a role to play in that, but of course we will assist and support them in their work.

It is worth my while to point out at the beginning of my answer that Scottish Screen does not have responsibility for the operation of local film offices, which act as independent partners in the Scottish locations network. The extent of any support that Scottish Screen might offer those partners is for it to determine.

Mr Ingram is correct to highlight the important work that film offices do, in particular that of the office that is based in Ayrshire, which has accrued a number of important commissions over the years. I understand that, following an evaluation of Ayrshire Film Focus, Scottish Enterprise Ayrshire has confirmed that it has approved three-year funding to support the Ayrshire Chamber of Commerce and Industry—which is currently involved in the original Ayrshire Film Focus delivery—in delivering a film information service over the next three years.

I obviously cannot speak on behalf of the new operation or that chamber of commerce, but the fact that the new office, like the previous one, will be rooted in the chamber of commerce indicates to me that it would make perfect sense for the same infrastructure, the same contact networks and the same linkages and databases to be used to carry out what is a very important job for Ayrshire.

It is—of course—for local authorities and local enterprise networks to decide on their priorities. Scottish Enterprise Ayrshire has funded the operation there for a number of years, and at least two of the three Ayrshire local authorities have made a contribution to its costs. It is not for me, however, to direct them in how they might wish to use the pot of money that is available.

The Scottish Executive actively supports the preservation of Scotland's maritime heritage by, for example, providing core funding to the Scottish Maritime Museum.

The Scottish Maritime Museum currently receives £160,000 in core funding and an additional £30,000 towards the cost of curatorial support. As the member will be aware, on-going discussions with the museum's  trustees on how we can ensure that items of national significance are preserved in a suitable and sensible way resulted in the decision, which was made some time ago, that some items will transfer to Glasgow museums on completion of the new riverside museum there. The trustees of the Scottish Maritime Museum recently wrote to me to ask for additional funding to help to safeguard some of the museum's important items in the meantime. I hope to be able to issue a positive response to them in the next few days.

I am always delighted when Mr Gallie welcomes at least some of what I say; that is a step forward from some past situations that we have been in. I hope that he will be able to give us more significant approval in future. Mr Gallie makes a valid point. An educational facility is a vital part of the work that any museum can and should do. That is one reason why the Scottish Museums Council wants to establish a national framework for funding decisions for museums, to safeguard coherently such national collections of extreme significance.

I am fairly familiar with the area, as I am located not a million miles from it. I am happy to oblige the member in the fashion that he outlines and I look forward to receiving the invitation.

I have to admit to some surprise at the tenor of Michael Matheson's contribution—not least because the questions that he raised, and others, were dealt with at the meeting of the Enterprise and Culture Committee earlier this week, at which this Sewel motion was considered. As far as I understand it, the committee was content that it had responsibility for scrutinising the motion. The comments that Mr Matheson made at the end of his contribution were gratuitous rather than exploratory. It might have been helpful if he had expressed his genuine concerns about this particular Sewel motion, as opposed to his—and his party's—manufactured concerns about Sewel motions in general. He might have found another way of raising any genuine concerns prior to today. The Enterprise and Culture Committee had due opportunity to consider the motion as part of the process that was requested by the Scottish National Party some time ago, when it asked that we consider such matters in committees and not always in the chamber. For those reasons, Presiding Officer, I am happy to press the motion.

The Executive is committed to tackling all forms of racist or bigoted behaviour wherever it manifests itself. We seek to work with a range of sports organisations, and our support for the Show Racism the Red Card campaign is a good example of our work to eradicate racist behaviour in football.

Richard Baker makes a valid point when he talks about other sporting activities and not only football. We need to keep our momentum going in that area and to observe carefully what is happening. He is also right to highlight the initiative in his local area, as such initiatives will help to make racism in sport a thing of the past. The Executive has supported the work of Show Racism the Red Card and has demonstrated that support by contributing some £75,000 over three years to help the organisation to develop its campaign and promote its work in Scotland.

I am aware that Christine Grahame has been in correspondence with the First Minister about her idea of an awards scheme. We must consider any opportunity to promote the issue in all sports in Scotland, which Richard Baker rightly mentioned. I am certainly happy to consider the idea and, if appropriate, to discuss it with any footballing or other organisation in the sporting world that has an interest in the matter.

Jamie McGrigor is right to identify such items as part of the problem, but I would not by any means say that they are the whole problem. Obviously, we want to try to change the attitudes of those who display those items, many of which are sold at a distance from grounds—as a result, it can be difficult for the authorities to do very much about things. However, they are part of what must be addressed.

The share of VisitScotland's budget for marketing Edinburgh this year is around £2.6 million, which includes £668,000 for business tourism marketing. Edinburgh will also benefit from VisitScotland's new city/rural campaign, which will equate to a further £2 million of marketing spend on Edinburgh and the surrounding area.

I would not for a moment want to underestimate the effect and impact that Edinburgh has as a gateway to the rest of Scotland, and we are keen to ensure that account is taken of the area. However, funding goes to the particular organisation that Mr MacAskill highlighted from a variety of sources. Tourism is not just about what VisitScotland does; it is about what a number of other partners and, indeed, all of us do to welcome people to our country. The money that I am talking about is that which VisitScotland is using to market Edinburgh. I think that that was the information that Mr MacAskill asked for.

We are working hard with all the partner organisations to make sure that the moneys available are maintained at their present level. So far, the indications that we have are very good. A number of local authorities have indicated that they plan to increase the amount of their contribution to the partnerships that will evolve. I am heartened by that and I hope that other local authorities will work in a similar manner.

The initiative to which Mr Swinney refers is not within my remit entirely; it is shared across a number of portfolios, as Mr Swinney will be aware from previous questions and answers. I am not aware of whether that particular report been submitted yet. I understand that Mr Milligan will not look at Edinburgh alone, but that he will look at how Scotland is perceived on first impression. I reiterate that it is not just Mr Milligan's responsibility to be aware of that; the responsibility rests with all of us.

I apologise for the delay in answering; I feel slightly schizophrenic jumping  from one part of my portfolio to another. Sportscotland, on behalf of the Executive, is working with local authorities throughout Scotland to develop, support and monitor the active schools staffing network across Scotland.

We have taken the issues into account. The way in which allocations were calculated for each local authority was not based on school population alone, but on the geography of the local authority area. That has meant that rural local authorities, such as Aberdeenshire, which the member mentioned, have received a proportionately bigger allocation than they would have done if school population alone were taken into account. In addition, every co-ordinator has a budget that can be used to assist with transport facilities and I hope that it will be used in that way in those particular areas.

The employment of performers, including future contractual arrangements for chorus members, is a matter for the management of the company.

I am sorry, Presiding Officer—I missed the very end of Ms McNeill's supplementary. However, I will say that, over the past year, I have attended several of the performances that she referred to and she is absolutely right to mention their quality. Indeed, not only were the performances of the greatest quality but the audiences found them greatly enjoyable. I understand that, to date, Scottish Opera has achieved approximately 50 per cent of its planned staffing reductions and that a number of posts have been identified for redundancy in 2005. However, the first stage of the redundancy process, which has been agreed by the company and Equity, is now complete. At the end of the day, this is a matter for the company itself.

I repeat that Scottish Opera's operation and management are matters for the company's team of managers. The current situation is of Scottish Opera's own design; after all, it has agreed that way forward after discussions with the Scottish Arts Council. That said, the SAC has established a monitoring group that will examine the progress that has been made over this period and which will obviously take all relevant matters into account.

I am not sure that the Jonas report said that. In any case, if Mr McGrigor is suggesting that money should be taken away from other areas of arts and culture in Scotland, I do not think that such a proposal would meet with much interest or applause in other parts of the artistic world. It is possible that Scottish Opera could come out  of its current situation in better form than it went into it. I think that it is an absolutely valuable part of Scotland's artistic life; I certainly take a very keen interest in it and will continue to do so. However, at the moment, I do not intend to interfere in the company's management.

The Scottish Executive has not commissioned an independent assessment of the likely costs and benefits to Scotland of a London games. However, we are committed to working with the United Kingdom Government and others to maximise the potential benefits in areas such as sport, tourism and business.

I find Mr Neil's inconsistency on this matter particularly interesting. Indeed, on Wednesday, he assured me and the members of his own Enterprise and Culture Committee that he personally very much backed London's bid for a UK Olympic games.

I am sorry, but Mr Neil did not qualify his comment at the time. I am more than happy to pass on Mr Neil's endorsement to Lord Coe and the bid committee in London; I am sure that they would be happy to use his endorsement in future. Perhaps if we produce a refresh of the document that Mr Neil referred to, we could have a quote from him to explain his views exactly. I draw Mr Neil's attention to the fact that, when Sydney hosted the Olympic games, the training camp used by the British team was some 500 miles from Sydney. That is the kind of opportunity that we should not forget. I also draw his attention to the fact that a very small company, also based some hundreds of miles from Sydney, gained a very important engineering contract. Four years later, when Athens was carrying out a similar exercise, it also took advantage of that company's strengths.  In the document that Mr Neil refers to, there is a quote from Iain McMillan, the director of the Confederation of British Industry Scotland, who says: "I wholeheartedly support London's Olympic bid. Bringing the biggest sporting event in the world to the UK will benefit the whole of the UK—including Scotland." If Mr Neil has read the document, he will know that that could be said not only for business but for arts and culture, for education and, of course, for sport. Not least—given my portfolio interest—it could be said for tourism. We should all be working to take those opportunities. That is what the Executive is doing.

Executive funding for sports' governing bodies is routed through sportscotland, the national agency for the development of sport in Scotland. Funding is awarded against a development plan for each sport and its ability to deliver across the three aims of sport 21: widening opportunities; developing potential; and achieving excellence.

If sportscotland wished me to be involved in an announcement that it wished to make, it would be churlish of me to turn down such an invitation. Similarly, it is entirely appropriate—as I am sure that the Parliament's guidelines indicate—for members' attention to be drawn to the existence of bodies such as sportscotland when they ask questions. I point out to Mr Matheson that, since 1997, the Scottish Rugby Union has received directly almost £5 million in development grant aid and that, under the current four-year agreement, which ends on 31 March, future funding will be set against that sport's plan for taking the game forward. In addition, Scottish rugby has benefited directly by  almost £1.5 million through a number of other programmes run by sportscotland.

I welcome the opportunity to close today's debate on the important issue of the Burns legacy in Scotland, and I thank Adam Ingram for bringing the debate to the chamber this evening. David Mundell referred to the debate that he sponsored in 2000, in which I was privileged—I think that that is the right word—to be the Deputy Presiding Officer. He correctly recalled that, at the end of the debate, I was presented with a cake bearing the effigy of Robert Burns. Most members would not be surprised to hear that my colleague, Cathy Peattie, sang in that debate; however, I am sure that even SNP members would be surprised to hear that Fergus Ewing also sang a solo. It was a memorable occasion. In recalling that debate, I hope that Robert Burns—whose effigy is sitting in the public gallery tonight—would regard this evening's debate as a little bit more dignified. I am fully committed to securing the long-term future of the Burns legacy. It is personally important to me, as I have a long-standing interest in Burns and, as some members will know, I once worked in both Dumfries and Ayr at the same time, which was interesting. That helped to foster my interest even more. I have been working with partners to address, as a matter of urgency, the poor state of the Burns cottage and museum and the difficulties that are currently facing the park as a whole. One point that Adam Ingram, unfortunately, missed out in his otherwise excellent speech, but  which was mentioned by David Mundell, is the fact that we need to secure the willingness of those who own the various elements of the Burns experience in Ayrshire in order to make the project work. Such issues concern me, and I reassure members that I believe that the long-term future of the Burns legacy in Ayrshire will be secured. We are moving in the right direction and, over the past couple of months, following representations that were made to me by my colleagues Cathy Jamieson and Sandra Osborne, I have instigated discussions with all the relevant parties that are involved in securing the Burns legacy in Ayrshire. I am fully supportive of the real partnership that is now forming with a view to bringing about change. As members know, the Executive has committed £50,000 for 2005-06 towards the running costs of the park. That will give us time to continue our efforts to secure the park's future. The Scottish Executive has also been instrumental in securing curatorial support from the National Library of Scotland and the National Museums of Scotland in supporting the upkeep of the collection until a new museum is completed. I take seriously John Scott's point about the items that are in collections elsewhere. Some of the distributed collections have a long and historic legacy in the place where they are to be found, not least because Burns moved around Scotland. I am conscious that, for example, the original manuscript of the song "Auld Lang Syne" was taken to Edinburgh with a view to conserving it for the future because of the conditions in which it was being kept. I hope that that will be one of the items that will be repatriated to Ayrshire, its rightful home, once we are able to put in place the facilities needed to look after it. I see the Burns national heritage park as the centrepiece of the year of homecoming for the Scots diaspora in 2009. That is why I agreed with the National Trust for Scotland that the park should be retained and managed holistically, keeping all its elements together, including the Tam o' Shanter experience. Recent research has thrown up a surprising set of statistics that indicate that 330,000 people per annum visit the Tam o' Shanter experience, but only 25,000 of them make it into the museum and cottage. We have a job to do to make sure that the people who visit the Tam o' Shanter experience do not just stop for a cup of coffee but have the experience that David Mundell was talking about. That is part of my ambition for the site. I welcome the National Trust for Scotland's interest in becoming involved in the ownership of the park and, subsequently, a new heritage lottery fund bid for a museum. Earlier today I had a very positive meeting with Robin Pellew, chief executive of the National Trust for Scotland, to  hear about the proposals for the development of the park and the wider perspective of a Burns trail in Ayrshire and Dumfries and Galloway. The trust's involvement is an exciting development and I remain confident that it would be best placed to take over the management of the park and to develop the Burns legacy into a quality product—something that is not just a tourism asset but which reflects the importance of Burns and gives our generation and future generations a good idea of his legacy and what he was about. I hope that we might be able to work in a comprehensive way with everyone involved in Ayrshire. I think that that is now beginning to take place and I applaud the efforts of South Ayrshire Council, East Ayrshire Council, North Ayrshire Council and others who are trying to make it happen. I am also aware that Scottish Enterprise Ayrshire has been part of our wider efforts to provide substantial support to the development of various aspects of the park. The Burns an' a' that festival, which was established by Allan Wilson when he was Deputy Minister for Environment, Sport and Culture, continues to grow and flourish and will become a showcase event for 2009. That is not, by any manner of means, all that will happen in 2009, but it will be an important event. I am therefore pleased to confirm to members that all the funding partners, including VisitScotland, have now committed funding to the festival for 2005 and beyond. I should say to Margaret Jamieson that I understand that this year's festival will run from the 21 st to the 30 th of May. I take her point that we are getting close to those dates and that we need to make a point of publicising the festival to everyone who might be interested in it. Donald Gorrie mentioned the idea of a movie. I understand that a movie is being filmed at the moment and that Scottish Screen is involved. It is not a musical—perhaps next time, and perhaps Donald will have some ideas about who can take part. I am also grateful to Phil Gallie's very constructive input. Given that I worked in Ayrshire at the same time as him—it was part of my job to make sure that he did not get re-elected—

I was. I remember that there were funding crises from time to time back then, too, and that we seemed to lurch from one crisis to another, as far as looking after heritage was concerned. I want to ensure that that does not happen again. I believe that the Burns legacy is alive and well and will be secured for future generations. The time is right to act to secure a long-term future for his legacy. I can reassure members that we are taking the initiative and being proactive in what is  a partnership approach that is beginning to bear fruit. Securing the long-term future of the Burns legacy is well within our grasp, if we continue to work together. That is my aim and I am committed to achieving it. I am grateful to members who have indicated their great interest and enthusiasm and their support during the debate. I hope that that is a message that we can collectively communicate to everyone in Ayrshire, Dumfries and Galloway, the rest of Scotland—we all have a connection with Burns somewhere—and the rest of the world.  Meeting closed at 18:15.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. My point is not at all a political point, but simply a procedural one. The easiest way to obtain consensus in the chamber is to have a debate without a motion. We all agree about what needs to be done, although we might disagree a little on nuances or on how things are done. I hope that the SNP will co-operate to make consensus a reality.

I draw to the attention of Mark Ballard and other members the fact that Learning and Teaching Scotland has produced a teaching pack that helps teachers to explain what has happened in south-east Asia and how schools can react to it. The pack will, I hope, help young people to come to terms with the enormity of what they are seeing on their television screens. That will be the first of many such projects and it exemplifies what Mark Ballard is asking for.

I am glad that we have the opportunity to reflect further on this important issue. The terrible catastrophe that has wrought such destruction in coastal communities from Kenya to Malaysia has been of almost incomprehensible proportions. Having said that, I am glad that Nicola Sturgeon chose to open her speech by referring to the natural disaster that has occurred in our own country over the past 48 hours. I echo her remarks, as I am sure everyone in the chamber would wish to do. Our thoughts and good wishes go out to those who have been affected, in particular the MacPherson and Campbell families, who have been so dreadfully bereaved. The tsunami in south-east Asia is a global disaster, which has rightly provoked a global response. In Scotland, there is a very real and discernible feeling of shared grief—a sense of solidarity with our fellow human beings across the world and, importantly, an aspiration that we should and must do something to help those whose lives and communities have been ripped apart. I am sure that all members will join me in expressing our deep sympathy and condolences to those who have lost loved ones and to those who are living with the terrible effects of the tragedy in other ways. In particular, I am eager that we should remember the millions of children who have been affected, many of whom have been orphaned or separated from their families.  While we have been shocked by the almost biblical proportions of the disaster, we have also been reassured by the magnificent response of the Scottish people. They have dug deep into their pockets and they have offered not just their compassion but their time and their skills. They have used their legendary inventiveness to come up with creative solutions to contribute to the relief effort. The Scottish public are on target to have donated around £20 million. The Scotland-based charities that I have visited this week tell me that they are overwhelmed by the unprecedented response. The whole of Scotland seems to feel a collective desire to help. No shop counter seems complete without a collecting tin. On hogmanay, a hastily organised collection by the City of Edinburgh Council amassed thousands of pounds from the revellers who had come to enjoy what Edinburgh had to offer. That groundswell was mirrored by Rangers and Celtic football clubs—old rivals acting in unison. Such generosity of spirit is being replicated across Scotland. I am proud of how we as a nation have responded to the disaster so far. The response from the business community, which has given to the appeal so generously, is also to be commended. Those donations will make a real difference to people in the communities that have been affected by the disaster. In particular, I very much welcomed Tom Hunter's pledge to help to rebuild the schools that were hit by the disaster; that effort will help to restore some normality to the lives of the children and will provide them with the education that is so important in the fight against poverty. I have been closely following the exceptional efforts of Scottish Water. The day after the tsunami hit, when most of us were still thinking about what we could do, Scottish Water was already working in collaboration with the Department for International Development and arranging for emergency supplies to be sent out to the devastated Maldives. Since then, Scottish Water has also donated five standby generators. Those generators are surplus to requirement in Scotland, but each of them has the capacity to generate enough electricity to power a field hospital in Asia. The important task now is to ensure that the cash that has been collected is turned into practical help on the ground, not only providing immediate relief to the people who are suffering, but contributing to the long-term reconstruction efforts. We in government have an important role to play in supporting the efforts of the Scotland-based charities that have the expertise and determination to take on that enormous task. In the days  following the disaster, I met a number of Scottish international aid organisations to hear about how they were responding and to discuss how best the Executive could support their efforts. When time was of the essence, that productive exchange enabled us to identify ways in which we could work together immediately to complement the work of the organisations and the UK Government. In the short term, the Scottish Executive has provided the charities with staff to give them extra support—a simple solution that has freed up resources for the emergency work and helped to ensure that the people with expertise can continue the vital work of supporting projects in other countries that are not affected by the tsunami. So far our civil servants have been helping the British Red Cross, the Scottish Catholic International Aid Fund and the Mercy Corps. I know that the charities have found the help invaluable, as with previous secondments to a number of such organisations. In the medium term, we will continue to support their efforts through secondments, providing information technology specialists and administrative staff where they are needed. My colleagues and I are committed to maintaining a dialogue with Scottish charities so that we are well placed to respond to their needs. In the longer term, my officials are convening a working group with representatives of the international aid agencies based in Scotland to consider crisis responses, so that in the future when tragedies occur we can respond as quickly and appropriately as possible. It is perhaps an irony of the situation that that work was under way before the tragedy struck; we had discussed it with the aid agencies at the end of 2004. The need to do that kind of work has been demonstrated starkly by the events of the Christmas and new year holidays. We also stand ready to provide further assistance to the relief effort as it becomes clearer what particular skills are needed. So far, for example, the Scottish Executive's chief medical officer has been collating Scottish offers of specialist medical help for the World Health Organisation. The Executive made an early offer to second senior specialist medical personnel and it can meet that commitment immediately if it is called on to do so. Similarly, our police force is identifying forensic and other experts who could be deployed to the region. We acknowledge that rebuilding the communities affected by the tsunami is a long-term challenge. Thought needs to be given to what distinctive contribution Scotland can make to the international aid effort. Over the coming months, we hope to identify other areas in which Scotland can make a special contribution. In particular, we  are keen to see whether we can assist in rebuilding the education provision in a number of countries. We are opening up discussion with agencies to see whether there is a way in which our education officials can help with rebuilding the education infrastructure or whether recently retired teachers can provide teaching services on the ground in some areas. Many children—perhaps millions—have been displaced and many more have been orphaned in this terrible tragedy. A structure to their lives that includes learning and play will be vital to their recovery and the future success and sustainability of the communities in which they live.

I am delighted to do that. It is important that we remember that in this tragedy, as in all such events, we must respond to the needs of the communities and not try to impose our ideas or structures on them. It is important that we take time to assess what tasks need to be done and what skills are needed to respond. We have been talking to a number of governmental organisations in Scotland, such as within the health service, and we will be talking to local authorities about what role teachers might be able to play once we have a clearer idea of how effective our helping in that way might be. It is important that we know where the skills are so that they can be deployed. For that reason, I was delighted that we arranged for someone who was seconded from the Scottish Executive to one of the aid agencies about a year ago and who is Sri Lankan to go to Sri Lanka, because she understands the culture and has knowledge of development issues and the network that will make work effective on the ground. We have had a preliminary report back, which has made me think that, in Sri Lanka in particular, education is an area on which we might focus. It is remarkable that the Sri Lankan authorities hope to have their schools back up and running by 20 January, because they understand the importance of putting that kind of structure back into the lives of not just children but the broader community. It would be good if we could support that kind of effort, so it is important that we consider the situation in that way.  While all that effort is going on, we should not forget that the ability of the affected nations to respond to such events is constrained and dictated by how poor they were to begin with. I am by no means the first member in the chamber to note that the world's poorest people are also its most vulnerable—as we have seen in this case—but surely we now have the will and the power to do something about that. In 2005—the year in which the G8 leaders will meet in Gleneagles to discuss how the wealthiest nations can do more to assist the poorest—we should be mindful that there is a real opportunity to address world poverty. I echo some of the sentiments that have been expressed in the chamber. I am conscious of the lead that the UK Government has taken on the issue and I am sure that we all support the efforts that are being made. To me, there would be no better memorial to those who have lost their lives than the fact that this terrible disaster might have inspired a spirit of generosity and a will to fight the injustice of global poverty and have provided an impetus to change the world for good. I move amendment S2M-2240.2, to leave out from "and encourages" to end and insert: "; notes that the Parliament will facilitate individual payroll donations to the appeals; recognises that long-term support is needed to restore the infrastructure of the countries of South East Asia and that Scotland is well placed to assist in this vital work; notes the meeting of Scottish aid agencies convened by the Scottish Executive to discuss and co-ordinate such activities; notes the continuing dialogue with Scottish aid agencies during this crisis; recognises that more than 200,000 people die of preventable causes every week and that more assistance is needed by the richer countries to tackle global poverty; supports the campaign to make poverty history, and notes the work being undertaken by the Executive with the Scottish aid agencies and others in the run-up to the G8 summit to support action on debt repayments, trade agreements and aid assistance to prevent people dying because of starvation and poverty."

I am very grateful for this opportunity to join other members in expressing a shared sense of shock and sadness at the magnitude of this terrible disaster. Indeed, I echo the condolences and sympathy that the First Minister and others offered earlier today and which  Rosie Kane and other members have offered during this particularly good and consensual debate. Given the topic under discussion, such an approach is entirely appropriate. Our condolences must go particularly to those communities that were hit by the tsunami, whose people have lost not just their homes and livelihoods but, in so many cases, their friends and families. More than our thoughts and condolences should be with those people as they struggle to rebuild their shattered communities. Scotland is rich in talent, skills and knowledge. We have much to offer the relief effort—and offer it we have. Through their immense generosity, the people of Scotland have clearly demonstrated their commitment to help their fellow human beings at this time of desperate need. As the First Minister mentioned, it is expected that the sum donated in Scotland will shortly be in excess of £20 million. I am pleased to note the commendable efforts of Scottish businesses in responding to the disaster, both through donations and offers of help. In particular, Scottish Water is to be commended for acting so quickly to get water and other vital equipment out to the region immediately after the disaster struck. A number of its staff are working in the region to provide much-needed expert assistance in the struggle against time to get vital sanitation services up and running again. In my visits this week to some of the Scottish charities that are contributing to the relief effort, I have been struck by the very real energy at work and by the shared desire in Scotland to reach out to and help the people who have been most affected by this disaster. As colleagues know, the UK Government has already pledged £75 million and is poised to contribute more money as it is needed. Chancellor Gordon Brown's proposals for a moratorium on debt for the worst affected countries are also welcome. At this point, I want to mention the froth to which John Swinney referred. I am amazed to find that, in all of this, people have overlooked the fact that the chancellor and the Prime Minister said exactly the same thing in separate speeches in different parts of the country. We need to get that message across. Our task now must be to turn that money into practical help on the ground and it is by supporting the efforts of Scottish-based charities that ministers and the Executive are best placed to help. To ensure that this happened, I met those organisations in the days following the disaster, and with my officials I have remained in touch with them to ensure that we can continue to offer them the most relevant support. In the short term, we have been able to provide timely administrative help through the secondment  of Scottish Executive staff, which has helped to free up the aid agencies' experienced staff to concentrate on disaster relief work in Asia and has ensured that they can continue their vital work in other parts of the world. In the coming weeks, we will continue to support them with specialist secondees, who will provide the administrative and information technology expertise that they can make best use of.

In fact, the giving in kind that people in Scotland have already committed themselves to has been immense. For example, I visited a Save the Children charity shop where people could not open quickly enough the bags of items that had been donated. We must also be careful that we provide the help that is needed on the ground and that, where possible, we support local industry to ensure that money goes back into those companies. I am certainly happy to look further into the area that Richard Lochhead has specified. Rosie Kane was absolutely right to say that our support has to be long term. It is not a short-term thing. Over the longer term, we will be looking across the skills and talent bank of Scotland to find ways in which we can play to our strengths in helping the reconstruction effort. The Executive is engaged in identifying specialist health professionals who have the skills to help to stem the spread of diseases that so endanger the recovery of these devastated regions. Likewise, as the First Minister mentioned, my colleagues are in discussion with the Scottish fishing community, to assess whether Scottish expertise might help to rebuild the fishing communities that were so affected by the disaster. Representatives of that industry and of the Scottish Executive are in discussions with the Department for International Development to develop an appropriate and co-ordinated response for the long-term reconstruction, and I look forward to hearing more from the joint tsunami fisheries task force once it has met. Rosie Kane was absolutely right to mention the plight of children. Save the Children estimates that, in Sri Lanka alone, there are at least 745 children who have lost at least one parent, 371 children who have been separated from their families and friends and another 46 children who are just unaccompanied and for whom there does  not seem to be any support. That is an area to which we will turn our attention in more detail in the days ahead. There are many challenges to which I hope Scotland will contribute as the relief effort progresses, but I want to conclude by reminding the chamber that there is yet another pressing challenge to consider; it is a challenge that has been referred to by some members this evening. I hope that we can build upon the very real spirit of generosity, of human compassion and of concern that has arisen from those terrible events, and take strength from it.  In 2004, many poor and vulnerable people died as a result of the tsunami disaster but also because of the poverty that was endemic in those countries to begin with and because they did not have the infrastructure to cope with the result of the disaster. People have also died in those countries, and in other countries throughout the world, from hunger and disease. In 2005—the year when the G8 summit will consider how the wealthiest countries might assist the poorest—I am sure that all of us in this chamber are committed to making poverty history. I believe that we have a real opportunity to make that vision a reality, and the Executive is prepared to play its part in that.  Meeting closed at 18:02

A bid assessment group that has been established will look at potential economic and social impacts on Glasgow and Scotland before, during and after staging the 2014 Commonwealth games. The group is expected to report next summer on the feasibility of Glasgow's bid to host the games.

Obviously, the Scottish Executive is closely involved in the assessment group and will be closely involved if a bid goes forward. A successful Commonwealth games has the potential to provide for Glasgow and Scotland a lasting legacy of improved transport infrastructure, housing and sports facilities, as well as to boost the image of the city. A successful games would not only heighten the profile of Scottish sport and deliver medal successes but develop volunteering in Scottish sport and potentially increase participation in sport, leading to improvements in health. All that would be a useful legacy for Glasgow and Scotland.

The bid assessment group will examine all available information, and will be interested in the work that has been done to secure other major events for Scotland. The securing of the mountain bike world championships is in line with our strategy of attracting major events to Scotland, and the success of Lochaber and the Highlands in that regard is welcome.

The Executive has more than doubled VisitScotland's budget since 2000, including the 28 per cent increase in its marketing budget that was announced in March. Some of that extra money is being matched by the private sector. The increased funding is being used to strengthen the promotion of Scotland in key United Kingdom and overseas tourist markets, particularly in the many areas in western Europe and further afield that are now being served by new air routes that are supported by our air route development fund. We have also set up EventScotland to raise Scotland's profile through support for major events.

I am interested in Cathy Peattie's supplementary question, not least because of the questions raised by others outwith and, sometimes, within the Parliament about the cross-cutting nature—as I prefer to think of it—of my portfolio and the importance of linking culture and sport to tourism. Cathy Peattie is correct to identify the potential of the traditional arts in Scotland. In that regard, I think particularly of Celtic connections as a potential way of attracting visitors. Thus far, the marketing of that event has been concentrated on the home market, but early discussions are now taking place with VisitScotland and Scottish Enterprise to identify other possible markets in which to market the festival. We know that the Hebridean Celtic festival is likely to accrue some £1 million of visitor revenue over a four to five-day period, so it makes sense to me to consider how the traditional arts can contribute more widely to our economy at the same time as ensuring that they receive a boost in participation and interest.

The member will forgive me if I do not know the absolute detail of the answer, because the question does not quite fall within the scope of question 4, the session or my portfolio. However, I will say that many opportunities will accrue from hosting the G8 summit in Scotland. Last week, I visited Perth, where Perth and Kinross Council and many tourism businesses displayed a positive attitude to the summit. They see it as a huge opportunity to showcase Scotland and Perthshire. Frankly, I think that Mr Stevenson and his party would do better to see it likewise.

I thank the member for her question and for her invitation to visit her area in January to talk to some tourism businesses about that matter and others. I am enthusiastic about the working that has taken place in Fife and other areas throughout Scotland and about the optimism that we share with the tourism industry over the potential for growth in the next 10 years particularly. I am aware of concerns that have been expressed about the issue that the member raises, which she and I have discussed. It is hoped that revamping the tourism network will ensure more partnership working, encourage businesses that are part of the tourism network to be part of such partnerships and recognise the strong role of local authorities in that network. I hope that partnerships will strengthen and I will encourage VisitScotland to work towards that.

The United States is Scotland's most important overseas market for business and tourism. In recognition of that, the Scottish affairs office, which is based in the British embassy in Washington, was established in October 2001. The office's remit is to promote contemporary Scotland, to act as a liaison for all Scottish agencies that work in the US and to be an outreach to the Scottish diaspora. In the course of her duties, the first secretary for Scottish affairs undertakes an extensive programme of speaking engagements throughout the US, advises those  who seek to establish connections with Scotland and has lead responsibility for the Executive's contribution to tartan day.

It is estimated that about 20 million US citizens claim Scots ancestry, so that market has major potential. We recognise that potential and we encourage people who have an interest in tracing their roots to visit Scotland. The website ancestralscotland.com can act as a first port of call for anyone, wherever they come from, who wants to find out about their Scottish roots and it will inspire them to travel to Scotland. I was aware of John Home Robertson's ancestry, because he mentioned it a few years ago during a member's business debate on tartan day. It is obviously of great interest to him and to others. I was interested to hear about the initiative that was taken by Governor Schwarzenegger to promote John Muir on the back of quarter-dollar coins in America. I understand that John Muir was born in Dunbar in the constituency of John Home Robertson, who obviously therefore has an interest. From what he said, it strikes me that there might be potential for further initiatives, not least because John Muir was one of the founding fathers of environmentalism. It may well be that we could examine ways of using John Muir to promote green tourism around the world.

I find myself in the fairly unusual position of being able to agree with Fergus Ewing, in that I feel that the debate has been interesting and good and that it has allowed us to agree—if we agree about nothing else—on the importance of growing tourism for the benefit of Scotland's economy and people. It has also been interesting in the sense that it has allowed us to see another two aspects of Fergus Ewing's character, other than the ones that he so ably described himself. I was surprised that he was able to be both self-deprecating and self-promoting at the same time but, given all his other talents, I should not have been. Given that a number of points were raised in the debate about the network restructuring, I will address them at the beginning of my speech. Although Brian Adam raised most of the concerns initially, they were echoed in part by Jamie McGrigor and other members. In the time that is allotted to me, I will try to answer them and make further comments on the issue. I am afraid that it is simply not true to say that the ATBs have been excluded from the key planning and decision-making processes of the project. As I mentioned in an intervention, an ATB chief executive was appointed as project director, is now a member of the VisitScotland management team and attends all the VisitScotland board meetings. In addition, ATB staff have been involved, and are still involved, in all parts and at every level of the project team. Several of the chief executives have led project groups and another has attended the fortnightly progress meetings that are chaired by the Executive.

No. I took a lot of interventions in my opening speech. Staff from the ATBs filled around 40 per cent of the places on the project teams that undertook the planning work and several are now involved in implementation. I am extremely grateful to them for the hard work that they have put in, which has helped us to get to the stage that we are now at. I intervened earlier on the subject of the business plan, which is an issue on which a number of members have raised concerns. It is important to remember that, taken together, the ATBs are running a deficit of £2 million in the current system. The project team is on target to produce its first-draft business plan for the network by 31 December, which is entirely on schedule and according to plan. A lot of work has yet to be done, but the indications are that once the efficiencies that are to be gained from network integration are achieved, the network will be sustainable. Members also made points about local authority funding. Mike Watson made the point that local authorities have to understand the importance of tourism to the economy of their local area. I hope that that understanding will help to influence them to maintain their tourism funding. I welcome the indications that we have had from some local authorities that they would like to increase their funding. I, too, am concerned about the situation of ATB staff. For that reason, I have asked VisitScotland to make a particular point of ensuring that ATB staff are given as much information as possible about what is happening in their ATBs. The objective behind the Executive's decision to integrate the network was to improve the effectiveness of the support for tourism growth at national and local area level. The intention behind the process is not one of cost cutting as such, although the integration of the ATBs into an integrated network will realise efficiencies. I appreciate members' concerns on the issue of jobs. I hope that we are able to keep the number of compulsory redundancies to a minimum. Alex Fergusson mentioned the on-going uncertainties that people at the local level are facing. I am sure that that is true, which is why I was so keen that VisitScotland should make a special effort in that respect. In many areas, including my home city, ATB staff are positive about the opportunities that the network offers. I hope that that feeling is one that will spread.

No. I do not have a lot of time to answer all of the points that were raised in the debate.  Iain Smith said that he hoped VisitScotland would devolve functions to network offices. I say to him that VisitScotland intends to do exactly that. The network is not about centralisation; it will play to the strengths of each individual area. A number of members mentioned visitscotland.com, which is an issue in which I take a great deal of interest. It has provided an effective shop window for Scottish tourism and promotes Scotland to a global audience. It is performing well against its business plan targets and is generating significant business for the industry in Scotland. Since its establishment, visitscotland.com has generated some £22 million-worth of business for the tourism industry across Scotland. It was always anticipated that there would be difficulties at the beginning until it came into profit, but the management of visitscotland.com is confident that it is on track to achieve the profitability that it indicated. Jamie McGrigor mentioned his belief that a single network could not do justice to Scotland's tourism diversity. The point about the network is that although it will apply a common standard and best practice, it will not stifle diversity. Frankly, I think that it would be silly for it to do so. It will market rural as well as urban attractions. Scotland's diversity is one of our key selling points.

No, I really must make progress. Mr McGrigor and other members raised a lot of questions. I was slightly surprised to hear Brian Adam indicating that the Commonwealth games might be a less attractive proposition than repeat events such as local activities. We do not intend for the Commonwealth games or other large events such as the MTV awards to be the only things that happen. We need a broad spectrum of events. We need to market different events to different audiences. Having the Commonwealth games in Scotland in the same year as the Ryder cup would be a magnificent achievement. Alex Fergusson raised a point about signage. A review of tourism signage is currently going on. I will keep him advised as to what happens with that. Adam Ingram raised some points about the important issue of Robert Burns, the collection of his work and the memorabilia and premises that, along with his poetry, immortalise him. I have taken a keen personal interest in the subject, which has been raised with me by a number of members representing Ayrshire. As recently as last week, I met some of those representatives, who brought their concerns to my attention. We  are working with the National Trust for Scotland and others to safeguard the collections, a number of which have already been dispersed. We have been having work done to catalogue the dispersed collection. When we get to 2009, having had Burns festivals annually along the way, we should not just have had a great year of homecoming; we should also be leaving behind a legacy for Ayrshire and the south of Scotland, where Burns is particularly important, which we can all be proud of. That is work in progress and we will continue with it. Elaine Murray mentioned the making tracks initiative. I would be happy to meet her to discuss it. I was interested in her points about equestrian tourism, given that some 18,000 UK residents undertake a horse-riding holiday in Scotland at some point. That area needs to be developed. [ Interruption. ]

I was intrigued by what Chris Ballance said. The Executive is not saying that growth in tourism should be achieved at any price. I agree with him that one of the things that brings people to this country is our fabulous scenery. Our scenery and our environment are very important to the image that we market. That is why VisitScotland has been encouraged to increase—in fact, double—the number of people involved in its green tourism network. We aspire to be one of the best small countries in the world. However, we are a small nation. We need to ensure that the many different tourism organisations and businesses work closely in partnership to maximise the benefits to Scottish tourism. We already have a good reputation throughout the world as a friendly and welcoming people, as Fergus Ewing said. We are also a country that can give its visitors the experience of a lifetime. I want us to build on that and to encourage our visitors to keep returning to Scotland. We cannot grow tourism on the warmth of the Scottish people and our fabulous scenery alone. We need to ensure that every single visitor receives great service, a clean environment and value for money during their stay here. That goes for taxi drivers and shop assistants as well as hotel operators. As Fergus Ewing rightly identified, that also goes for every single member of the Parliament. We must all recognise that tourism is everyone's business. Only then will we punch above our weight and compete with other successful tourist destinations. However, we are rising to the challenge. Scotland has many icons that are the envy of the world. I will not list them now, but they include our rural areas, vibrant cities,  contemporary architecture, culture, arts and festivals. Ted Brocklebank was right to talk about golf. Golf tourism is pitching high, with a 300 per cent increase in revenue over the past four years alone. We have good reason to be proud and to be ambitious for the future. People from all over the world recognise our success, and we have an excellent track record in offering our visitors the experience of a lifetime. I repeat my invitation to everyone interested in tourism to give us their views on the refresh of the Executive's tourism strategy. We think that that should be done in two areas: in making the most of information technology across the sector and in enhancing skills and training, an area that a number of colleagues identified. We will not be issuing a formal consultation, but we will work with VisitScotland and the Scottish Tourism Forum to seek the industry's views. I believe that revenue growth of 50 per cent right across Scottish tourism will be to everyone's benefit. I point out to the Conservatives that that is not the Executive's ambition but the tourism industry's ambition. We in the Executive want to work with the industry as Scotland's team to understand that Scotland has tourism as its key business. I am convinced that we can achieve that ambition and we will support the tourism industry in it.

As the member knows, the deadline for the business plan is 31 December. My contacts with VisitScotland indicate to me that it is absolutely on target to deliver that business plan, which will then be in the public domain. I reassure  Mr Crawford on that.

rose—

Will the member give way?

I simply want to make the point that an ATB chairman was appointed as a project director for the project and that he is working closely with VisitScotland on it. The process is by no means a one-way street.

I am pleased to open this tourism debate. It provides us with an ideal opportunity to reflect on another good year for Scottish tourism and to look forward to the future. Tourism is a crucial industry for Scotland. It is one of the largest contributors to the economy and employs a significant proportion of our workforce. We have certainly come a long way since the dark days of 2001, thanks to the huge efforts of people who work in the tourism industry. I am pleased to be able to say that the industry is thriving. In the first six months of this year, visitor numbers from overseas increased by about 12 per cent compared with last year, and a 25 per cent increase has taken place in the number of visitors from western Europe. That is enormously encouraging. Occupancy figures for almost all types of visitor accommodation are booming and stand at the highest levels experienced in the past five years. VisitScotland continues to do well. The statistics represent significant increases in turnover for many businesses throughout Scotland and increases in revenue for the Scottish economy. I am delighted to be involved in that work.

The member is right. The increase in the number of direct flights into the country—and not just those by budget airlines—has had a significant effect. I will refer to that later. The Executive's focus on tourism fits in with our wider strategy to grow the economy. The revision of the "Smart, Successful Scotland" strategy that was published in November sets out the direction for the enterprise networks and calls on others, including VisitScotland, to contribute to driving economic growth.

Mr Swinney is aware of my interest in the matter; we have discussed it on a number of occasions. It is important to point out that the historic environment is a crucial part of Scotland's tourism industry. Some 85 per cent of overseas visitors reckon that they will visit some historic monument or other during their stay. The Executive is committed to growing the economy and I am keen to see developments such as the one in which Mr Swinney is interested proceed, but as ministers we also have a responsibility to consider our historic environment and to act in its best interests. I understand that the application came to Historic Scotland on 10 November and that some information that is required from the developers is outstanding. As Mr Swinney knows, I have urged Historic Scotland to progress the matter as quickly as possible. I will keep the matter under consideration in the meantime. We need to work together across the Scottish economy if we are to contribute to driving economic growth. We in the Scottish Executive share the industry's ambition to grow tourism revenues by 50 per cent over the next decade. That is a challenge for everyone involved, but it is achievable if we work together. As an Executive, we have increased the funding that is available to VisitScotland by 28 per cent over three years. The recent spending review committed us to maintaining the record levels of investment in tourism marketing through to 2008. That is investment not just in tourism, but in Scotland's economic future. We have challenged tourism businesses to match our additional marketing funding, and I am heartened by their response so far. Another success story, to which I alluded in responding to Mrs May, is the route development fund, which has established 14 new routes, bringing more visitors to Scotland. People can now travel here directly from Prague, Dubai and Newark, to mention a few.

Yes. Our experience shows that it is occasionally the case that in the first year or two of the development of a new route the traffic might be more heavily weighted towards people leaving Scotland, but that as routes  develop and we market along those routes, the number of tourists coming from those countries also increases. It is a two-way street. Many more visitors every day are taking advantage of the opportunities afforded by the new routes. Even more routes are under consideration, and we have doubled investment in the fund to ensure that the previous success continues. Tourism is in good shape. I am determined that Scotland will not only continue to be a great place to visit, but will get even better. VisitScotland is proving to be extremely successful at enticing visitors to come to Scotland and should get at least some of the credit for our current position. However, I am determined to build on that success. With VisitScotland's increased funding, it will be able to use new and innovative marketing tools, such as the Scottish village, which will be used for the first time in Grand Central station in New York during tartan week to showcase the very best of what Scotland has to offer.

Not at the moment. I have taken quite a few interventions and I need to make progress. I have also asked VisitScotland to examine how we can use our proposed ban on smoking in enclosed public places as part of marketing Scotland—an element of our marketing that we may soon share with New York. We want to spread the message that Scotland is a must-visit, must-return destination. Our commitment to marketing is clear. However, if we want our visitors to keep returning, their experience while in Scotland must exceed their expectations, which is why we have given VisitScotland an extra £3 million over two years to strengthen and broaden its quality assurance schemes.

That is an interesting point that has not been raised with me before. My experience of talking to people who have come to this country is that nowadays people want a less fixed holiday. They want to be able to range much more freely throughout the country. I know that VisitScotland is interested in that, but I have not  had made to me the specific comments that Mr Fergusson made. I will chat to him about it later, if that is okay. In total, the public sector commits £90 million a year to promoting Scotland, but we need to work more closely together, joining up our efforts, to ensure that we get the most from that investment. The efforts of local authorities and the enterprise networks as well as VisitScotland are crucial to our ambition.

I will not at the moment. I have taken quite a few interventions, and I need to proceed. More funding is not the only way in which we can help to make Scotland the world-class destination that it deserves to be. I am proud to be involved with bringing major events to Scotland. We have proved time and again that Scotland is capable of hosting international events to an extremely high standard. We already host iconic events such as the British Open Championship and the biggest arts festival in the world, but we can do even more, which is why we set up EventScotland to deliver the Executive's major events strategy. We aim to make Scotland one of the world's foremost events destinations by 2015. EventScotland's remit is to attract, support and create major events that will attract international spectators, participants and media to Scotland. Last year's MTV Europe music awards were a wonderful success and generated nearly £9 million of revenue for the Scottish economy. I will continue to look for further opportunities to bring international events to Scotland. One such opportunity is our work to attract the 2014 Commonwealth games to Glasgow. I recently had the privilege of attending the Commonwealth youth games in Bendigo, which is in Victoria, Australia. The Scottish team turned in a magnificent performance and finished fourth in the medals table. While there, I found out more about the benefits that Melbourne's Commonwealth games bid has brought to that area. Let us not underestimate the benefits of international events in other parts of the United Kingdom. I was delighted to meet Lord Coe earlier today at Hampden park to offer strong Scottish support for London's bid to host the 2012 Olympic games. If that bid is successful, it will have important benefits for the UK's international profile and will bring more tourists to Scotland. I hope that many MSPs will make time to come to the reception that is being held in the Parliament building this evening, which Lord Coe will attend. We must ensure that such events are not all based in our cities. I am committed to promoting  events that are in our more rural and remote areas. Through its regional programme, EventScotland supports events throughout Scotland, such as the big in Falkirk festival, the Bowmore Blair castle international horse trials and country fair, the Edinbane festival and the wickerman festival. Rural areas can look forward to hosting more such events. The enterprise networks are working with the organisers of the Hebridean Celtic festival, which is expected to generate about £1 million of visitor expenditure during a four to five-day period.

I want to move on. The mountain bike world championships will be held in Lochaber in 2007; it will be the last major cross-country mountain bike competition before the Beijing Olympics in 2008 and a key event in the qualification process for those games. Such events are of huge significance for the whole of Scotland and allow us to raise our profile on the global stage. The image that we portray to our visitors affects directly our standing in the world. We all have a role in promoting Scotland to the world, but the tourism and hospitality sector has a particularly vital role in promoting Scotland internationally. We can never stop asking whether we are matching and exceeding the world-class skills and customer services for which many of our competitors are renowned. The success of tourism in Scotland will depend on meeting customer service expectations, which is why I want to focus even harder on skills and training. I want to work with the enterprise networks to improve the training that is on offer to staff. I fully appreciate the effort that the enterprise networks and the new skills council, People First, put into improving skills. Springboard Scotland also carries out good work and I was delighted to launch its career pack, which aims to encourage more people to enter the tourism and hospitality industry as a career, in Aviemore a few weeks ago. Another good project that is aimed at stimulating excellent levels of service is the pride and passion initiative, which aims to enthuse every part of the tourism and hospitality sector throughout Scotland; I hope that all Scots will get involved in it. Work to implement an integrated tourism network is well under way. I am pleased with the progress so far and confident that the network will support further growth throughout the tourism sector. From April next year, we will begin to see the results of all the hard work of those who are involved in the project in implementing an integrated tourism network that will offer a high-quality, seamless service to all our visitors and  tourism businesses. We must provide all our visitors with a high-quality information service that presents all that the country has to offer in an attractive and accessible way.

I do not have time. I am keen that visitors and Scots have the opportunity to experience what every part of Scotland has to offer, which is why I want rural tourism to grow at the same rate as that in the cities. It is encouraging to see the work that is being done by the enterprise networks to improve accessibility to rural areas, such as the new air and rail links into the Highlands and Islands. In a country as diverse as ours, there is every reason for visitors to take advantage of more than a few aspects of Scotland.

I will have to miss out some of my speech and go to the end of it. We need to engage with the tourism and hospitality industry as we take forward our reviews. I want to refresh the Executive's tourism strategy, which was originally published in 2000. At the moment, we are competing with 193 other countries for visitors and need to ensure that we are able to do that and that we encourage visitors not only to visit but to come back again and again. I move, That the Parliament recognises the economic benefits of promoting the long-term growth of Scotland's tourism industry; approves of the Scottish Executive's ambition, shared with VisitScotland and the tourism sector, of achieving 50% revenue growth over the next decade; notes that this will benefit the economies of rural as well as city and urban areas in every part of the country; appreciates that this long-term growth can only be achieved by ensuring that the marketing of Scotland in UK and overseas tourism markets is further strengthened and that the businesses that comprise the tourism and hospitality sectors are encouraged to compete even more strongly and coherently in this most competitive of global industries, and welcomes the additional funding given to VisitScotland to help achieve this.

I, too, congratulate Roseanna Cunningham on securing this evening's debate on an issue that is crucial to the Scottish Football League and its member clubs. The Executive is committed to working in partnership with the football authorities to ensure a prosperous future for Scottish football. Implementation of the action plan for youth football will ensure that more young people come into the game, which can only benefit clubs in the SFL—a point that was recognised by John Swinburne. The decision of the pools companies to stop payments to the SFL for use of the fixture list will have an impact on the SFL. Their decision is regrettable and I urge them to reconsider such drastic action. The SFL is not the only league to be affected by the decision, but the financial consequences here are possibly the most severe. To a club in the premiership in England, £20,000 may be little more than pocket change, but to the team that I  support—Partick Thistle—and smaller clubs, such as East Stirlingshire, £20,000 can, as members have said, help to balance the books. It is important that we understand the issue that is under discussion. The pools companies have been long-standing supporters of Scottish football for more than 40 years. As Roseanna Cunningham said, since 1959 they have made copyright payments to Scottish football for the rights to use the fixture lists. Similar payments have been made in respect of fixtures in the English leagues. In May 2004, the contract with the pools companies expired and the pools companies wanted to introduce a different formula for calculating the copyright payments, which would reduce their annual payments to the SFL from around £20,000 to £1,000 per annum for each club. The SFL and others have been in negotiation with the pools companies but, to date, no agreement has been reached. I sincerely hope that negotiations can continue and that we will see a resolution to the situation that is acceptable to both sides. It is important to recognise the fact that the negotiation is purely commercial and that it would not be appropriate for the Executive to seek to intervene, especially as neither party has approached us to do that. The pools companies have taken a commercial decision in the interests of their shareholders—a decision that has been repeated in a number of countries across the European Union. Like any commercial organisation, the pools companies want to adapt to the climate in which they operate. However, it is the responsibility of those companies to work out with football what their relationship should be. Inevitably, from time to time there will be pressures that the companies and football will have to face up to. Although I have every sympathy with the SFL in this matter, it has to make a judgment about how it should best respond. If it takes the view that its legal rights have been infringed, it has the right to take court action. In making that decision, it will—as members have mentioned—have to weigh up the chances of success against the cost, which will no doubt be considerable. Given recent developments in the European Court of Justice, court action may be a lengthy process. That is why I hope that a resolution that is acceptable to both sides can be found quickly through negotiation. Over the years, the pools companies have done good work in supporting good causes, especially football. However, overall, good causes in Scotland have benefited by almost £1.4 billion over 23,000 projects in the 10 years since the introduction of the UK national lottery in 1994. Football has also benefited greatly through the £126 million that has been invested in more than 2,700 sports projects in that period.  It is also important to see this issue in the context of the support that the Executive is offering to football. We are supporting the development of the game at youth level and the Executive is fully behind the Scottish Football Association in its implementation of the action plan for youth football.

That is a very interesting idea. As someone who advertises herself at Firhill, I will pass on the idea to my colleagues who are responsible for that aspect of the Executive's programme. We need to encourage more young people to come into the sport. A wider playing base and a single unified strategy with more and better coaching should bring more young people through the system. That can only benefit clubs at all levels in Scotland. Clubs in the SFL can also benefit through the action plan by becoming accredited clubs in the youth initiative programme. They can also become truly community clubs by enhancing the work that they already do and by working with other local clubs in offering young footballers clear pathways to fulfilling their potential. I look forward to seeing that plan being put into action. The Parliament is also playing its role. The Enterprise and Culture Committee has initiated a report on the financial information that is available to Scottish football and what contribution the Executive and others can usefully make. I understand that the report has been slightly delayed, but I am more than happy to assist with the investigation and I look forward to meeting Richard Baker to discuss the investigation in more detail.

I made the point that a commercial negotiation is going on and that, to  date, neither of the parties involved has asked the Executive to do that. The SFL has engaged the services of Football Dataco Ltd, and that is where the negotiation currently lies. It would probably not be particularly helpful if the Executive tried to intervene, but there might be other ways in which we can help, and I will mention those shortly. One area where I am delighted that the Executive has made a telling contribution is in helping to establish Supporters Direct in Scotland. As Christine May mentioned, that is a very important way forward for football. It has allowed a significant number of supporters trusts to be set up. It is a well-worn statement, but supporters are the lifeblood of the game. They invest a significant amount of emotional and financial support in their club. Recognition and acceptance of supporters trusts can offer many of the clubs in the SFL a sustainable future. I welcome the many contributions made tonight and I am more than happy to speak to my Westminster colleagues about any additional help that we might be able to offer.

The problem might be even more deep-rooted than that because it all comes back to what is negotiated on copyright and European judgments that have been made about this matter. This is not just happening in this country; it is happening in other European countries. Across the board, I am happy with the support that the Executive provides to football. We can never do enough, but what we are doing is right and is appropriately targeted. I understand that the situation represents a setback for Scottish football and I sincerely hope that that setback will be overcome and that the implementation of the action plan for youth football will also help to secure a prosperous future for football in Scotland. I have no doubt that this debate, which Roseanna Cunningham secured and in which many members have spoken eloquently and with passion, not only about their own football clubs but about football in Scotland more generally, will have helped to focus the minds of the parties who are involved in the dispute. I sincerely hope that both parties come to a helpful resolution in the near future.  Meeting closed at 18:05.

The 28 per cent increase over three years that we announced in March supports our ambition to grow tourism revenues by 50 per cent over the next decade. We will sustain that level of additional funding through to 2008, on the basis that it is matched by the private sector, thus doubling its effectiveness.

The member will know that the route development fund is not administered from my portfolio. However, I am aware that during the past two years the number of direct routes into Scotland from other parts of the world has increased by 18. VisitScotland's marketing campaign will be extended to include Northern Ireland and the midlands, as well as Sweden, Germany, France, Spain, Holland, Italy and Belgium. The member is right to regard quality assurance as vital and we are keen to strengthen that area. For that reason, we have given £3 million over this year and next year to strengthen VisitScotland's quality assurance schemes. Those schemes already reach about 80 per cent of the accommodation and visitor attraction market in Scotland and we have set a target of increasing that figure to 90 per cent over the next three years. The marketing of major events such as the under-21 rugby world cup, the Heineken cup and the mountain bike world cup is important to that effort. We also hugely value business tourism.

VisitScotland has always regarded the Republic of Ireland as an important market, so it promotes Scotland there in various ways. The increased level of marketing funding that the Executive made available to VisitScotland in March has allowed it to strengthen its marketing plans. As a result of that additional funding, VisitScotland plans to reach 75 per cent of the population of the Republic of Ireland as it works harder than ever to market Scotland there as a must-visit destination.

We try to market Scotland in a variety of ways, one of the most important of which is through VisitBritain. A number of visitors to the UK make their way from, perhaps, London to Scotland, and Scotland is the second most popular destination for visitors arriving in the UK. It is entirely appropriate for us to work with our colleagues at VisitBritain, because that is how we can ensure that the money that we put forward for marketing is used most effectively. We will not always market Scotland on our own. There are times when it is effective to do that, but in this particular instance that is not the case.

I read those statistics, but given that in the first six months of this year the number of visitors to Scotland from abroad increased by 12 per cent and the number of visitors from Europe increased by 25 per cent, I think that they might have to be looked at again.

The Scottish Executive has made no assessment of the impact of type 2087 sonar on marine wildlife tourism. The testing or use of military sonar is a reserved matter that falls within the responsibility of the Ministry of Defence. I understand that research by United Kingdom Government departments is on-going to investigate the effects of acoustic disturbance, including sonar, on marine wildlife.

The subject is a reserved matter, but I understand that there is no evidence that the system will have the effect that Mr Ballance claims. The Scottish Executive works closely with the UK Government on a range of matters. If we have cause for concern, we will take it up.

The Executive's major events strategy aims to establish in Scotland new events that will provide economic benefit and overseas profile. We will announce further details of the recent spending review implications for the strategy in due course.

I thank Elaine Murray for those kind comments. I reflected earlier that, as a minister, I have had only one question in the past three years, but I have five today. I do not know whether that is a good or a bad sign, but I will take it as a good sign. Elaine Murray is absolutely right about the place that architecture has in Scottish arts and culture. The programme that is under way in Scotland has recently been expanded to an international level and new Scottish architecture has been showcased in a number of countries during the past year. For Elaine Murray's information, I point out that Scotland is, for the first time ever,  currently being represented separately at the Venice biennale of architecture.

I am aware of the proposals for Liverpool and I will watch them with great interest. It is important to recognise that the arts in Scotland play an important role in what we do, as can be seen in the major investment that the Scottish Executive has made through the Scottish Arts Council. It is largely for the Scottish Arts Council to decide on priorities, but as time goes on I will come back to the Parliament with further proposals, as Elaine Murray prompted me to.

The Executive promotes Scottish arts principally through sponsorship of the Scottish Arts Council, which is the lead public body for the funding, development and advocacy of the arts in Scotland.

As a fellow Partick Thistle supporter, I will ignore the beginning of Mr Matheson's comments in the interest of consensus across the chamber. He has identified a specific problem that has not been raised with me in the past 48 hours. I know that the Scottish Arts Council works hard to assist artists who wish to sell their produce. It is important that we ensure that artists have a market for the items that they wish to sell, if they wish to make that a full-time profession. I would be happy to investigate the matter on the member's behalf. Once I have had an opportunity to do that, I will write to him with further details. I suspect that I may have to consult my colleague the Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform, who is responsible for local government, but I will get back to the member.

Our plans were announced in March, as I am sure Mr Swinney is aware, against the background of our ambition to grow tourism revenues by 50 per cent over the next decade. The project to integrate the area tourist boards is on track to deliver a tourism network to assist tourism businesses and other partners throughout Scotland in support of that ambition. We expect the network to be operational from April 2005.

Yes, we are determined that we will achieve the 2005 date; we are working closely with the organisations involved to ensure that we do so. The project team that has responsibility for defining the functions of the hub office is working to define the roles and structure of the integrated tourism network. That information will be available from the end of the month.

Obviously, the bed-and-breakfast market is particularly important to the tourism sector and is increasingly being accessed by visitors from abroad and from the rest of the United Kingdom. We are working to ensure that the operators are supported by the changes that we are making. One example of that is the importance that we are placing, in the new tourism proposals, on the role of local authorities. Because local authorities know their local areas and know  what is happening there, they can help to make decisions about what is provided locally to ensure that those small businesses can be supported.

I have not yet seen that item of correspondence—it has not yet passed across my desk—but I am happy to look into the matter for Sylvia Jackson and to respond both to her and to the association.

We certainly hope that local authority funding will be maintained under the partnership agreements that we are putting in place, because there will be a greater role for local authorities to be involved with the new set-up. Over the summer, officials have had a series of encouraging meetings with local authorities throughout Scotland. We have been able, through that mechanism, to dispel some of the anxieties that local authorities have expressed. We are certainly hopeful that such funding will continue. A number of local authorities have indicated their willingness to be part of the process and to be creative about the kind of financing that they can provide. I am certainly hopeful that that will be the case.

I point out to the Parliament that I am moving 14 motions to allow members of the Scottish National Party to be moved around committees, but only five members of the SNP are present. Although I acknowledge that the SNP members have legitimate business elsewhere—at their conference in Inverness—I congratulate the five who are here on making the best decision and choosing their location wisely. [ Interruption. ] Mr Swinney has obviously found the voice that he did not have at the conference. I wonder whether the SNP has left behind its hardier members: those who can tolerate a crowd.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that Mr Andrew Welsh be appointed to replace Mr Kenny MacAskill on the Audit Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Christine Grahame be appointed to replace Ms Sandra White on the Communities Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Linda Fabiani be appointed to replace Stewart Stevenson on the Communities Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Michael Matheson be appointed to replace Brian Adam on the Enterprise and Culture Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Alasdair Morgan be appointed to replace Fergus Ewing on the Finance Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Stewart Stevenson be appointed to replace Michael Matheson on the Justice 1 Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Mr Bruce McFee be appointed to replace Mr Stewart Maxwell on the Justice 1 Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Mr Stewart Maxwell be appointed to replace Nicola Sturgeon on the Justice 2 Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Ms Sandra White be appointed to replace Linda Fabiani on the Public Petitions Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Mr Bruce McFee be appointed to replace Bruce Crawford on the Procedures Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Linda Fabiani be appointed to replace Alex Neil on the Standards Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Mr Adam Ingram be  appointed to replace Alasdair Morgan on the Subordinate Legislation Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Fergus Ewing be appointed to replace Mr Bruce McFee on the Local Government and Transport Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Bruce Crawford be appointed to replace Mr Andrew Welsh on the Local Government and Transport Committee.—[ Patricia Ferguson. ]

I understand that Ms Leckie was at the Health Committee meeting yesterday, but I am not sure whether she noticed that the  committee had that conversation with our Minister for Health and Community Care at that meeting, which is right and fitting. In the past year alone, since we were re-elected to the Parliament—or elected for the first time in the case of some members—there have been eight Executive-led debates on health, the last of which was only a fortnight ago during the debate on the legislative programme. In the same period, there were only two Opposition-led debates on health, both of which were initiated by the Conservative party. No such debates were initiated by any of the other parties in the Parliament, including that of which Ms Leckie is a member. I hope that Ms Leckie, given her experience in the Parliamentary Bureau, now understands that, while the Executive determines what subjects are discussed in Executive time, it is for Opposition parties to decide what issues are discussed in their time. There will, no doubt, be further debates on health in the time to come. We on the Executive benches look forward to them.

Before I move the motion without notice to take the business motions, it might be helpful if I explain briefly their purpose. In line with yesterday's decision by the Parliamentary Bureau, I propose to move a motion to change the business that is scheduled for 22 September to allow Parliament to debate the report of the Holyrood inquiry. The revised business motion will seek Parliament's agreement that the meeting on 22 September be extended until 7 pm to allow a full debate on the report to take place. Before moving that motion, I am required to move two procedural motions, first, to suspend the members' business debate on Wednesday evening and, secondly, to change decision time to 7 pm.

Presiding Officer, I would like to move a motion under rule 2.2.6(d) of standing orders to ask that we should sit beyond our appointed time. I would also like to move a motion under rule 11.2.4 of standing orders to have decision time at 6.15 pm.

Before I move the business motion, I should lay out for members what will happen during tomorrow's business.

Tomorrow, we will resume after lunch at 1.30 pm. During the debate on the motion that the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill be passed, we will request an extension to give members one hour for that debate. I understand that that will require me to move two procedural motions, the first of which will seek to move decision time and the other to extend the debate. Depending on the progress that is made on amendments, decision time could be moved to 6.15 pm tomorrow evening. I move, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 23 June 2004 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 of the Local Governance (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 24 June 2004 9.30 am Committee Business 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.00 pm Question Time— Education and Young People, Tourism, Culture and Sport; Finance and Public Services and Communities; General Questions 3.00 pm Stage 1 Debate on the School Education (Ministerial Powers and Independent Schools) (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 30 June 2004  2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Executive Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 1 July 2004 9.30 am Final Stage of Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine Railway and Linked Improvements Bill 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.00 pm Question Time— Environment and Rural Development; Health and Community Care; General Questions 3.00 pm Executive Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Motion agreed to.

I will explain to the chamber exactly what was in the mind of the Parliamentary Bureau when it arrived at the formulation in motions S2M-1437 and S2M-1439, but first I will refer to Mr Davidson's contribution. Having heard my colleague Mr McCabe expound the arguments so many times before, I would have thought that Mr Davidson would now understand that the orders on amnesic shellfish poisoning are necessary. It is the fact that we have the regime that we do that has prevented difficulties from arising. Motions S2M-1437 and S2M-1439 are procedural motions that will allow additional time for consideration of amendments at stage 3 of the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill next week. The proposed timescale is in line with information that we have received from the clerks about what  might be required. Motion S2M-1437 seeks to move next Thursday's decision time to 5.30 pm. As a result, proceedings next Thursday might extend into the evening. The bureau therefore agreed to recommend that members' business on that day be dispensed with, and that is what motion S2M-1439 seeks to do. During the debate that the bill be passed, the Executive will request that that debate be extended if required. In addition to the two procedural motions before members, that will allow a maximum of an extra one and a half hours to deal with amendments and the debate to pass the bill. I hope that that is helpful to the chamber. I move, That the Parliament agrees under Rule 11.2.4 of the Standing Orders that Decision Time on Thursday 17 June 2004 shall begin at 5.30pm. That the Parliament agrees that Rule 5.6.1(c) of the Standing Orders be suspended for the duration of the Meeting of the Parliament on Thursday 17 June 2004.

I will take the issues in chronological order and begin with Scottish Opera. It is my belief, and the Executive's, that a ministerial statement at this time is unnecessary. Full disclosure of the Executive's position and the rationale behind it has already been made to all MSPs by individual letter on 7 June—as Mr Aitken was kind enough to acknowledge—and in the written reply to a parliamentary question on 7 June. As I think that most MSPs will recognise, the needs of Scottish Opera's staff and the legal obligations of its board to inform them of any decision were paramount in the consideration of how best to inform MSPs of events. The written information to which I referred was provided to all MSPs as soon as it was possible to do so. There is no further information that ministers could provide to the Parliament that is not in the public domain and that is additional to that held by MSPs. I now come to the Napier judgment. I can indicate to Parliament that the Lord Advocate and the Minister for Justice will jointly write to the conveners of the justice committees. In those letters, they will explain the reasons for the Executive's failure to lodge the appeal timeously; outline the action taken as a result of that failure; and describe the grounds of appeal. As the case is now sub judice, it will not be proper for me to discuss its details or the merits of the arguments.

I will move the motion, but I refer to the business motion that was moved yesterday, which showed that there will be Executive business at the meeting on Wednesday 9 June. Business managers have been advised of this, but I confirm to members that the business will be an Executive debate on promoting choice and good citizenship towards more smoke-free environments. I move, That the Parliament agrees— (i) that the Justice 1 Committee reports to the Justice 2 Committee by 4 June 2004 on the draft Advice and Assistance (Assistance by Way of Representation) (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2004; and by 11 June 2004 on the draft Advice and Assistance (Financial Limit) (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2004; and (ii) that the Justice 2 Committee reports to the Justice 1 Committee by 11 June 2004 on: the Crofting Community Body Form of Application for Consent to Buy Croft Land etc. and Notice of Minister's Decision (Scotland) Regulations 2004, (SSI 2004/224); the Crofting Community Right to Buy (Grant Towards Compensation Liability) (Scotland) Regulations 2004, (SSI 2004/225); the Crofting Community Right to Buy (Compensation) (Scotland) Order 2004, (SSI 2004/226); the Crofting Community Right to Buy (Ballot) (Scotland) Regulations 2004, (SSI 2004/227); the Community Right to Buy (Ballot) (Scotland) Regulations 2004, (SSI 2004/228); the Community Right to Buy (Compensation) (Scotland) Regulations 2004, (SSI 2004/229); the Community Right to Buy (Register of Community Interests in Land Charges) (Scotland) Regulations 2004, (SSI 2004/230); the Community Right to Buy (Specification of Plans) (Scotland) Regulations 2004, (SSI 2004/231); and the Community Right to Buy (Forms) (Scotland) Regulations 2004, (SSI 2004/233).  Motion agreed to.

I had indicated that I wanted to speak by pressing my request-to-speak button. I have heard the response to the points of order and I feel that I have to add something because it  is not just about process; it is about the courtesies of the Parliament, which are also observed in standing orders. The normal practice has been for business managers to bring their issues to the Parliamentary Bureau so that the bureau knows what is going to be discussed in Parliament. Unfortunately, on this occasion, the issue was trailed in the newspapers on the Sunday prior to the bureau meeting on the Tuesday. That point was made to the SNP business manager at the time. In spite of that, I understand that last Thursday the SNP held a press briefing on the issue and that that was followed by a press release from Mr Swinney. Perhaps it is no surprise that that was then followed by a press release from Mr Salmond. That was discourteous enough, but it was then followed by a phone call from the SNP that indicated that because of staff sicknesses, it could not submit its motion until Monday, which was a holiday. In effect, that means that the motion was not submitted until Tuesday and, as colleagues have said, it could not appear in the Business Bulletin until Wednesday. There has been a discourtesy to the Parliament and that is also covered by standing orders. I would be grateful if you could look into that matter, Presiding Officer.

A number of members have indicated a wish to speak on the motion on the Civil Partnership Bill, which is to be taken on Thursday 3 June. To that end, it is my intention to try to safeguard an hour for the debate on that issue. I will, if necessary, come back to Parliament with a revised business motion if it proves that that is the right course of action. I move, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 2 June 2004 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish National Party Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 3 June 2004 9.30 am Executive Debate on the Economy of the Highlands and Islands 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.00 pm Question Time— Environment and Rural Development; Health and Community Care; General Questions 3.00 pm Stage 1 Debate on the Tenements (Scotland) Bill followed by Motion on the Civil Partnership Bill - UK Legislation followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 9 June 2004 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Executive Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions  5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business

I thank those party leaders and representatives of parties who have spoken this afternoon and all those other members who have expressed their support and sympathy in recent days for those involved in the tragic event in my constituency. I know that those who visited the site of the explosion in Maryhill and who met some of those most affected by it will agree with the First Minister that the efforts of the rescue services, the police and all those involved have been a model of professionalism and sensitivity. I also commend the efficient and caring way in which they have responded to the tragedy and I recognise the dedication shown by social work teams, Red Cross members and, in particular, the staff and volunteers of the Maryhill Community Central Halls, who provided much-needed and much-appreciated support to the families of the victims.  Meeting closed at 12:25.

I am happy to move the motion, albeit a little belatedly.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees— (a) that consideration of the Local Governance (Scotland) Bill at Stage 2 be completed by 4 June 2004; (b) that the timetable for consideration of the Fire Sprinklers in Residential Premises (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be extended to 8 October 2004; and (c) that the Justice 1 Committee reports to the Justice 2 Committee by 16 April 2004 on the Police Grant (Scotland) Order 2004, (SSI 2004/120); the Police (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2004 (SSI/2004/121); and the Criminal Legal Aid (Fixed Payments) (Scotland) Amendment (No.2) Regulations 2004 (SSI/2004/126). —[Patricia Ferguson.]  [Motion agreed to.]

The issue has been discussed in the Parliamentary Bureau for the past two weeks. On each occasion, I have provided all the information that I could to the parties assembled there. I am sorry that that information appears not to have been relayed to Mr Lochhead.

I will deal first with the points that Carolyn Leckie made. As I said last week, the situation that she outlined is sad and tragic. However, as I did last week, I remind her that the matter is reserved and should be the concern of the local member of the Westminster Parliament, who, as Ms Leckie is no doubt aware, has made a significant intervention in the matter. I also say that it is important that anyone who has contact with the men who are involved should use that contact to encourage them to end their hunger strike as soon as possible. We had Scottish Socialist Party debates last week on the council tax and nursery nurses. Obviously, it is up to the SSP to decide what its business is and it is not for me to interfere in that; however, I point out that the party decided on and debated its priorities last week. As for the Conservatives' amendment, I will deal first with Bruce Crawford's points on it. It was clear at the Parliamentary Bureau's meeting yesterday that the Executive parties intend that at least half an hour be reserved for the Sewel motion that we intend to discuss tomorrow afternoon, because of its importance to all of us in Scotland. That was the intent of the business motion that was lodged on the bureau's behalf. However, I cannot make guarantees in circumstances that are out of my hands and those of the bureau. If Mr Aitken's amendment is agreed to, the length of that debate will in part be a matter for the Presiding Officers. Mr Aitken's amendment is especially interesting, not least because the First Minister has made his position clear and has given the Fraser inquiry his full backing from the start. Indeed, the inquiry is a joint initiative of the Presiding Officer and the First Minister. I cannot help but be somewhat perplexed about the involvement that the Conservatives wish, because they have consistently refused to take any interest in, or responsibility for, the Holyrood project for many years. The question why they have no representative on the Holyrood progress group remains unanswered. I suspect that that question would remain unanswered even if we were to have tomorrow the debate that the amendment proposes.

No. I thank the member but we have heard the excuses before—they did not hold water then and they have not improved with age.

The Executive has no wish to frustrate attempts to debate the issue. However, to seek to disrupt the business programme at this point is not sensible. I also point out that the afternoon of 31 March has been reserved for Conservative business: if the Conservatives want a debate on 31 March, having given members due notice and the opportunity to consider the matter, that might be the sensible time to do it. It might also give the BBC an opportunity to consider its position.

The business motion seeks to amend parliamentary business for the week to allow for the inclusion of two important ministerial statements—on GM crops and on the ministerial group on tourism. The Scottish Socialist Party is well aware that asylum and immigration are reserved matters. We have proposed that a statement be taken this afternoon on GM crops because we believe that it is important and topical. The minister wishes to discuss the issue in the Parliament at the earliest opportunity. Mark Ballard's assertion that I ruled out a debate at the Parliamentary Bureau yesterday is incorrect. I mentioned the fact that we have had debates on GM crops and I said that I did not doubt that we would have further debates in the near future. I pointed out that the minister has some important things to say and that he will come to the chamber today, with its approval, to say them. I find it quite distressing and disturbing that Opposition parties have again chosen to use time set aside for Executive business, rather than raising their concerns in their own time. The longer this exchange continues, the more it will impact on the time set aside for consideration of the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill this afternoon. Members on the Liberal Democrat and Labour Party benches happen to believe that antisocial behaviour is an issue that matters to the people of Scotland. This exchange is a smokescreen to  cover up the fact that the Greens and the SSP are completely out of touch with the people of Scotland. They have consistently failed to make a constructive contribution on this topic; I suspect that this will continue when the debate begins. I will not waste much time talking about the matter. Antisocial behaviour is worthy of even more time than we have been able to allocate to it today. I understand that the Tories are considering voting with the Greens this afternoon. I point out to Conservative members that the effect of doing so will be to ensure that the planned debate on tourism does not take place. Less than a month has passed since David Mundell stood up in the Parliament to say: "If the minister had the concerns for the tourism industry that he says he has, he would proceed with the review as a matter of priority".— [ Official Report , 12 February 2004; c 5856.]  I presume that the rest of David Mundell's group does not agree with him. Labour party members agree with the minister and we want to hear his statement.

The Executive and Her Majesty's Government have a continuing dialogue about the operation of the devolution settlement, which is working well. We have agreed that the Scotland Act 1998 should be amended to ensure that the Parliament remains at its present size.

The Executive is aware that the Scottish Affairs Committee recommended that the Electoral Commission should consider such issues, but Scottish ministers agree with the Secretary of State for Scotland that establishing an independent commission is the appropriate way to consider relevant issues. That commission will make its recommendations to the secretary of state and to the First Minister.

As an old hand in procedures debates, I reassure Iain Smith that the turnout this morning has been quite good. I have painful memories of an occasion on which we were so short of speakers that the Presiding Officer sent a clerk to ask me if I would like to speak. I agreed to do so, thinking that I would have a few minutes in which to scribble some notes, but heard my name being called as soon as the clerk had turned to walk away. I ended up having to stand and waffle for five minutes. Even more worrying was that no one seemed to notice. However, perhaps we can improve the nature of procedures debates in future; certainly, a lot of interesting points have been made that will be taken up in future. I acknowledge the work that has been undertaken by the convener and members of the Procedures Committee in producing such a comprehensive and creative set of reports. The Executive has welcomed the opportunity to contribute as the committee has considered the various issues that are under discussion this morning. I will mention first of all and briefly the report on emergency bills, which, as members know, considers the technical aspects of rule 9.21 of standing orders and suggests some changes to improve the emergency bill process. The Executive is happy to welcome those changes; they seem to make sense and will improve our procedure.  The Executive also supports the committee's report on oral questions in the chamber and the recommendations contained therein. We have welcomed the opportunity to contribute to those discussions during the inquiry and our views on the committee's recommendations are already well documented through the memorandum that was submitted to the committee last October and the oral evidence that I gave to the committee in November. The Executive endorses the committee's recommendation that the format of First Minister's question time should remain largely unchanged for the moment. One reason why the Executive and the First Minister were keen to extend FMQT from the 20 minutes that we used to have to 30 minutes was the recognition that back benchers did not always get an adequate share of the time that was available for questions and that, coming into the new session after the election, we had a different political situation in which the leaders of smaller parties also had to have an opportunity from time to time to ask questions. We are pleased to note that experience to date shows that the current 30-minute format seems to work well, enables more time to be given to back benchers and seems to allow us to get through all six of the questions that have been selected. We also note the committee's suggestion that Executive question time should be extended to an hour and its recommendation of the introduction of a thematic element involving 40 minutes of in-depth questioning on a departmental rota basis. We welcome those proposals and the opportunity that they will give for back-bench scrutiny of Executive ministers and their policies. That is a good step forward and will improve ministerial accountability in a transparent and open way, which is one of the things that the Parliament is about. However, the Executive recognises and supports the need for the thematic system to be introduced—if we agree to that today—initially on a trial basis, as the committee proposes. That is the right way forward and it is right to subject the trial to a review after a period of time, as in the case of First Minister's question time. We also support the committee's recommendation to move the lodging deadline for questions to 4 pm on a Tuesday. That will have the benefit not only of giving Executive officials enough time to undertake the necessary research to prepare answers, but of allowing the chamber desk staff ample time to process the questions. We are happy to work constructively with the Parliament in taking forward any revised procedures that are agreed today. On the format of Executive question time and First Minister's question time, as discussed in the committee's reports, the Executive notes that,  following an initial trial period, the committee now recommends that FMQT should remain at 12 noon on Thursdays, at least for the time being. We also note that Executive question time, in its revised format, with the thematic element, should start earlier—at 2 o'clock on the same day. Although we recognise that the average viewing figures for "Holyrood Live" have declined since FMQT was moved to an earlier time slot, we are pleased to note that there have been compensations, as other members indicated, in that the current timing has enabled more school pupils and other visitors to attend.

I fail to see how the change can possibly have made matters worse. We still have a question time on a Thursday afternoon and we now have a question time in the morning as well, so there are two opportunities for people to come along. Moreover, it is fair to say that people are coming from around the country to be able to observe one or other of those question times.

Karen Gillon makes exactly the point that I wanted to make to Mr Gallie—I hope that he will acknowledge what she has said. The change has been important.

No, we have taken enough on that point. I also want to come back to the point that Alex Neil made. I do not want to compare constituency and list members, because he is a bit touchy on that subject, but Labour members were slightly surprised, because we do not get to see daytime television very often—perhaps that is because we are constituency representatives, but we will not go there—and absolutely delighted to hear that Des McNulty was such a draw on daytime television. Somebody has said to me that Alex Neil was not talking about that Des, but never mind. Alasdair Morgan made exactly the right point: First Minister's question time and Executive question time will never attract the kind of audience that some of the more tabloid-type programmes attract. That is because people do not engage with politics in the same way as they  engage with some of the other broadcasts that they see on their televisions. However, we all have a responsibility to make the process work and to participate in a way that will encourage interest.

It is important to remember that the last figures for FMQT before it was moved had built up over four years. The number of people who now watch question time in its revised slot probably represents a fraction of the number of people who will watch it four years from now. We must take all those points into consideration, but I am also keen to encourage people, particularly young people and those visiting our education centre, to come into our public gallery and have the opportunity to see question time. We also support the earlier start time of 2 pm for Scottish Executive question time. It is important that we avoid cutting into debating time in the afternoon, as we all know the difficulties that we will face in providing enough time for back-bench speakers if afternoon debates are curtailed any further. As we noted in our formal response to the committee, the Executive endorses the recommendation that the new format of question time should itself be the subject of a trial, which should run in tandem with an extended trial period for FMQT at noon. We also endorse the committee's conclusion that both trial periods should be reviewed before the summer recess, when a full assessment can be made of the best arrangements to adopt for the future. We look forward to working with the Procedures Committee in its deliberations in future and thank it for its constructive reports.

I realise that Mr Sheridan works on the basis that any publicity is good publicity, but I feel obliged to draw to your attention the comments that he made from a sedentary position today, because I realise that the official report and possibly you would not have been able to pick them up. He was repeating his allegations concerning the First Minister. The First Minister has already identified in writing to Mr Sheridan and again today the source of the comments that he made at a previous question time. That is perfectly clear, and Mr Sheridan does not have a case, but his behaviour has become a sustained period of conduct that, to be frank, does not befit a member of the Parliament and is certainly not prescribed within our standing orders. Presiding Officer, I know that you and most members of the Parliament hold the Parliament's reputation and integrity in very high regard and therefore I ask you to investigate that sustained period of misconduct. [ Applause. ]

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

That is fine, but I reserve the right to make a point of order at the end of First Minister's question time.

On the Sewel motion,   members have had longer to consider the issues relating to the Westminster bill than they have had with many other Westminster bills. At the Enterprise and Culture Committee's meeting yesterday, the convener correctly pointed out that the bill and its explanatory notes were published on 27 November, so they have been in the public domain for some two months. During that period, some MSPs have sensibly taken the opportunity to ask parliamentary questions about the bill. Those supplement the scrutiny that was given to the bill yesterday in the one-and-a-quarter-hour slot that the committee devoted to it and that will be given to it in the hour and a half that will be devoted to it in the chamber next week. The timetable is tight, but manageable. We must give Westminster a view in accordance with the  bill's timetable and MSPs have sufficient information to reach an informed conclusion next week about the Sewel motion. The proper course is to consider the motion and to let the Parliament determine whether it is content with it. If some committee members are concerned about a lack of time for considering the proposals for which consent is being sought, one wonders why they spent so much of their time yesterday discussing entirely reserved provisions that are not relevant to whether permission for a Sewel motion is granted or withheld.

Before moving the motion, I draw members' attention to something that has arisen this afternoon in connection with the motion. Members may recall that, at today's question time, Miss Goldie, who sits on the Conservative benches, asked my colleague Ms Jamieson when there was likely to be an Executive debate about the supreme court. Quite correctly, Ms Jamieson responded by referring to her letter to Miss Goldie dated 12 January, in which she had advised Miss Goldie that the Executive intended to put a proposal for a debate on the issue to the Parliamentary Bureau in the very near future. Unfortunately, Miss Goldie has now chosen to issue a press release, in which she accuses the Executive of dodging a debate on the issue. I point out that neither in their previous opportunity to choose a subject for debate nor at the Parliamentary Bureau have the Conservatives raised the issue. I also point out that the letter was issued only several days ago—perhaps Miss Goldie has not had an opportunity to consider it. We have a meeting of the bureau next Tuesday. By chance—or perhaps not—we have two slots for Executive debates on 29 January. Miss Goldie will not be surprised to know that, at this stage, I am not in a position to confirm whether one of those slots will be used for that subject. However, if she pays attention to the decisions that emanate from the bureau next week, she might find some elucidation of the matter. I move, That the Parliament agrees— (a) that the Justice 1 Committee reports to the Justice 2 Committee by 30 January 2004 on the Title Conditions (Scotland) Act 2003 (Conservation Bodies) Amendment Order 2003 (SSI 2003/621); and (b) that consideration of the Fire Sprinklers in Residential Premises (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 30 April 2004.

As members are probably aware, the Secretary of State for Health made a statement to the House of Commons today on a development concerning variant CJD. The Executive has been giving consideration to the effect that that statement has on Scotland and we have had indications that some parties would welcome a statement on the issue. In light of that development, and with your permission Presiding Officer, the Executive would like to make a statement on the matter at the commencement of tomorrow's business. [ Applause. ] Rather than try to amend the business motion currently before Parliament, I ask you to use your discretion to schedule the statement for 9.30 tomorrow morning. I move, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 7 January 2004 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 1 Debate on the Nature Conservation (Scotland) Bill followed by Financial Resolution in respect of the Nature Conservation (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 8 January 2004 9.30 am Executive Debate on Delivering a Quick, Effective Youth Justice System 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.30 pm Question Time 3.10 pm Executive Debate on Improving Scotland's Homes followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business

From the Labour Party's perspective—I feel free to speak on behalf of my colleagues in the Liberal Democrats, too—it is a bit rich for the SNP to try to lecture us about our commitment to health. The two Executive parties  are committed to improving health—not only the health of the health service itself, but the health of our people in Scotland. That is why I hope that we will soon pass the first of two NHS bills that have been introduced in this session of the Parliament. In their own way, those two bills will make a difference to the overall performance of the health service and to its capacity to deliver to the people that we represent. Mr Crawford referred to one debate on the NHS that the Executive had initiated since May. In fact, we have had four Executive debates on health since May. I took the opportunity to find out how many debates the SNP has had on health since May. Members will be surprised to learn that, of the four debates that the SNP has had since May, not one has been on the health service. [ Interruption. ]

It gets worse. Of those four debates, not one was even about things that the Executive has responsibility for. Every one of those debates was on issues that are reserved to Westminster. For the SNP to say that we are not representing the people of Scotland, and that we are not discussing the issues that matter to the people of Scotland, is really a bit of a cheek. Like many members in the chamber this afternoon, I was interested to see the emerging coalition of the Conservatives and the SNP. Perhaps the SNP can take a leaf out of the Tories' book. In their time tomorrow, the Tories have scheduled a debate on issues that matter in Scotland. They have scheduled a debate on issues concerning health and public services. That is what an Opposition should do. Perhaps the SNP needs to learn that. However, I urge the Conservatives not to think that my enthusiasm for their debates is prevalent. It is important to recognise—and I think that Parliament recognises—the right of each party in the chamber to determine its own business, even when we think that that choice of business is misguided. We would not attempt to interfere in the business programme of the SNP, the Conservatives or any other party. If a party wishes to discuss reserved matters in its own time, that is up to that party. I do not think that lodging an amendment without giving notice—as has been done this afternoon—is the way in which a serious Opposition should conduct itself. The SNP has never done that in the past, and I wonder what has changed.

It is ludicrous that the SNP has come to the chamber to ask for a debate on this issue. I remind the SNP that it has a slot tomorrow morning in which it can discuss whatever issue it wishes to bring to the chamber and that it has chosen not to discuss the IGC. In fact, this is the second time in a week that the SNP has suggested that the Executive should sponsor a debate that the SNP has not seen fit to put on the parliamentary agenda.

No, Bruce Crawford has had plenty of time. I had always assumed that the primary role of the Opposition was to scrutinise the Executive's  policies and legislation. Obviously, however, the SNP has decided to abrogate that responsibility in this instance. It is quite ironic that, when the SNP secures a debate, we end up talking about issues over which the Executive has absolutely no control. Mr Crawford seems to have missed that point. I would like to point out something else that Mr Crawford has missed. Today, the SNP issued a press release in the name of Mr Crawford, which says: "During yesterday's meeting of the Parliament's Business Bureau, Labour Minister for Parliament Patricia Ferguson"— that is me, in case Mr Crawford is unsure— "blocked any debate on the proposed new constitution being added to the schedule of Parliamentary business." As I am sure you will confirm, Presiding Officer, I was not in attendance at yesterday's meeting of the business bureau as I had a meeting elsewhere. [ Laughter. ]

I say at the outset that I welcomed the opportunity to listen to the views that colleagues expressed in the debate. I say that not least because I am one of the legions of former members of the Procedures Committee who sat through some of the meetings at which the committee began to compile the report. I watched the progress of the report with interest. I do not think that those of us who began the report envisaged that it would become as large as the tome that Robin Harper brandished in the chamber; nevertheless, a lot of the report makes good reading. I start by recording the appreciation of Scottish ministers and the Scottish Executive for the detailed and thorough work that members of the former Procedures Committee undertook. I thank also the committee clerks and other parliamentary staff who serviced the committee. The report is the result of a great effort of work by a number of people. The CSG principles embody Scotland's aspirations for a new political culture. Scottish ministers are keen to work in partnership with the Parliament and others to fulfil that vision of inclusive governance. We are committed to open, accessible and accountable government. I would argue that we have demonstrated that in the best possible way—by our deeds and by our actions. The Executive published its response to the committee's report in August. We expressed our whole-hearted support for the CSG principles and our commitment to reflect those principles in every aspect of our work. We are keen to find ways of improving parliamentary scrutiny of the Executive wherever possible. That is why, at the beginning of the new session, the First Minister proposed changes to the timing and duration of First Minister's question time. As many members said, the new arrangements are in place on a trial basis. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton asked me to comment. I think that he wants me to confirm that the new arrangements are not the way forward. I say to him that that is a matter for the Parliament and not the Executive to decide. I was interested to read one of the pieces of information that the Procedures Committee garnered from a survey that it undertook of people who watched First Minister's question time, which showed that 53 per cent thought that the way in which First Minister's question time is now being  done is the correct way to do it. We must give the trial time and then review it. As many colleagues have said, we must not be afraid to make changes, review them, take them forward if they work, or say so if they do not. Devolution brought the political process closer to the people. With that in mind, we are seeking the widest possible participation in the development of policy and proposals for legislation. We value the knowledge and experience of public service deliverers, interest groups, users of services, experts and the Scottish people. We want to hear what people have to say about what we are doing, not only because we believe that that is the right thing to do in principle, but because it makes for better policy. We are also committed to power sharing while ensuring that we retain proper accountability as the elected Government. I emphasise that—as John Home Robertson and many members pointed out—the Scottish Executive is also addressing its relationship with civic society through a programme of organisational improvement called "Changing to Deliver". That document recognises the challenges that devolution has created and will ensure that we continually evaluate our behaviours and systems; improve the service our civil servants provide for Scotland; and focus on the needs and views of ordinary people. A number of members mentioned consultation; certainly Brian Adam felt that there was too much of it. The Executive has initiated participation events to gather views on policy proposals such as school meals and antisocial behaviour. Indeed, I would argue that the Executive's consultation on antisocial behaviour over the summer broke new ground in reaching out to hear the views of people in communities. I very much hope that we have more such events in future and I know that the Executive is committed to that approach. As we were determined to ensure that that event should not be a traditional, paper-driven consultation exercise, over the summer ministers went to more than 30 constituencies to talk to people on the ground. We talked to people in the front line who dealt with antisocial behaviour in their communities and visited specific projects and initiatives aimed at dealing with the consequences. Above all, we went to listen to what ordinary residents had to say about what was happening in their areas. That approach very much accords with the points that Ken Macintosh made in his speech.

In our response, we were talking about individual consultations that have been conducted. Not every single consultation exercise leads to a piece of legislation, although it might well inform some of our other work. It is also important to stress that people should receive feedback from responses to consultations. In fact, we are always seeking to improve our practice. For example, in the next month, we will issue revised internal good-practice guidelines on consultation and will set standards across the Executive in relation to what people can expect in return for their contribution to a consultation.

Not at the moment. I want to develop my point. As a result, we recently committed £4.1 million to ensure that people from disadvantaged communities can participate in the decisions that affect their lives. I very much take on board the point that many members made that we should reach out to people other than the usual suspects and ensure that people who have something to say about the legislation or whose lives will be affected by it are able to make their point. The Executive's public internet access point initiative aims to create more than 1,000 internet access points in communities across Scotland, with 700 points up and running so far. Work is now starting to target access improvements on disadvantaged groups to ensure that everyone has the opportunity to respond to us if they so wish. We are also keen to be proactive about developing our civic participation strategy and want to share best practice with the Parliament as we do so. It is self-evident that the institutions of the Parliament and Scottish Executive alone cannot set the governance agenda; civic society must be brought fully into the dialogue. In that respect, we are pleased that Canon Kenyon Wright was able to organise the recent people in Parliament event and are glad to note that the event took place. A number of things were said in the course of the debate that I will not have time to respond to today, but I would like to pick up one or two points. The Parliamentary Bureau very much takes on board the views that it hears from all the business managers who participate in it, as well as from the clerks to committees, in formulating the amount of time that is made available for a stage 3 debate. We do that with the best of intentions, to try to focus on the areas that we are told will have the greatest amount of interest. As a result, the debate on the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001 was allocated  two days, although we used only one of those days, and that has been the case in a number of situations. We can learn to do things better, but we rely very much on the information that we have about what will be of interest and concern to members, and we genuinely try to reflect that in the amount of time that is available. I feel obliged to comment on Alex Neil's points. We have discussed the economy and we have also discussed transport in just the past week or so. Tomorrow, we will have what is, in my view, an important debate on domestic abuse. However, it is not just in this chamber that we discuss important issues; we do so also in our committees. It is their role to consider the issues in great detail and to come forward when they have something they want to say about the work that they have undertaken. We should not underestimate the work that they do, which I think Alex Neil was pretty close to doing in his contribution. I also want to respond to Fergus Ewing's points. He suggested that the answers to questions are often too long. Very often, the question itself is long and complex, and it is important that ministers are able to respond to the points that are made. He also said that reference was made to a website. I point out to him that that would have been done to indicate to him that the material is already available in the public domain and that he would not really have needed to ask his question if he had thought to look in another place. I close by giving two brief examples of my own experiences of written questions. On one occasion, I phoned up the member and said, "I am not quite sure what you want to elicit from this. Can you give me information?" I was told, "I am sorry. I don't actually know. I'll go and check with my researcher and come back to you." The member never did. On a second occasion, I phoned up and said, "I'm really sorry, but is this what you're looking for? The question you've asked me is very bland and the answer you're going to get back is equally bland." I was told by the member in question, "That's fine. If you give me back a bland answer, it just means I can ask another question." Needless to say, Presiding Officer, neither of those members is here with us in the chamber today. This has been a good debate. The Executive is always willing to work with the Parliament and with the committees to improve our procedures, and I shall always make myself available to attend meetings of the Procedures Committee to give evidence in that regard.

indicated agreement.

I am delighted to move a motion to bring forward decision time. I move, That the Parliament agrees under rule 11.2.4 of Standing Orders that Decision Time on Wednesday 1 October 2003 be taken at 4.58 pm.  Motion agreed to.

I speak in support of a Parliamentary Bureau motion that was discussed at a meeting of the bureau on Tuesday that Mr Aitken attended. Mr Aitken has obviously decided to set a great deal of store by what was a leaked, draft report to a committee. Instead of venting his ire in the way that he has, he might more sensibly vent his ire on the people who might have leaked the report. To see conspiracy theories of such a nature is perhaps to stretch a point a little too much, even for a Conservative. Mr Aitken also said that the move is somehow anti-democratic. The only thing that is anti-democratic about the situation is that the Conservatives are speaking against the democratic will of the Parliament, as discussed yesterday. It gives me further cause for thought that if the Tories are going to come back to votes a second time every time they get beaten, we could be in for a very long session.

If it helps you, Presiding Officer, I will move the motions individually.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the Communities Committee be designated as lead committee in consideration of the Environmental Impact Assessment (Water Management) (Scotland) Regulations 2003 (SSI 2003/341). That the Parliament agrees that the Justice 1 Committee be designated as lead committee in consideration of the draft Advice and Assistance (Assistance by Way of Representation) (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2003. That the Parliament agrees that the Justice 1 Committee be designated as lead committee in consideration of the draft Scotland Act 1998 (Transfer of Functions to the Scottish Ministers etc.) (No 2) Order 2003. That the Parliament agrees the following nominated committee substitutes, as permitted under Rule 6.3A— Scottish National Party  Audit Committee Mr Andrew Welsh Communities Committee Shona Robison Education Committee Brian Adam Enterprise and Culture Committee Fiona Hyslop Environment and Rural Development Committee Jim Mather Equal Opportunities Committee Tricia Marwick European and External Relations Committee Nicola Sturgeon Finance Committee Mr Adam Ingram Health Committee Ms Sandra White Justice 2 Committee Michael Matheson Local Government and Transport Committee Mr Kenny MacAskill Procedures Committee Linda Fabiani Public Petitions Committee Mr Rob Gibson Standards Committee Alasdair Morgan Subordinate Legislation Committee Bruce Crawford Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party  Audit Committee Mr Ted Brocklebank Communities Committee John Scott Education Committee David Mundell Enterprise and Culture Committee Mr Brian Monteith Environment and Rural Development Committee Alex Fergusson Equal Opportunities Committee Mr Jamie McGrigor European and External Relations Committee Murdo Fraser Finance Committee Mary Scanlon Health Committee Mrs Nanette Milne Justice 1 Committee Miss Annabel Goldie Justice 2 Committee Margaret Mitchell Local Government and Transport Committee Mr David Davidson Procedures Committee Murray Tosh Public Petitions Committee Phil Gallie Standards Committee Lord James Douglas-Hamilton Subordinate Legislation Committee Alex Johnstone Scottish Green Party  Audit Committee Chris Ballance Communities Committee Shiona Baird Enterprise Committee Mark Ballard Environment and Rural Development Committee Mr Mark Ruskell Equal Opportunities Committee Patrick Harvie Procedures Committee Robin Harper Scottish Socialist Party  Equal Opportunities Committee Carolyn Leckie Public Petitions Committee Frances Curran—[ Patricia Ferguson .]

I will be brief. I say once again that I am grateful to the Procedures Committee for the work that it has put into the exercise. I look forward to co-operating with the committee in its further review of question time. It is ironic that Jamie McGrigor argues against a temporary change that will be reviewed at the end of a wider review of question time. Members will not be fooled into tying ourselves down at this point to a change that would not achieve much for the Parliament.

The Executive welcomes and endorses the Procedures Committee's report on First Minister's question time. As other colleagues have said, the ability to question the First Minister plays a vital part in the accountability and accessibility of our Parliament.

I will come to that later in my speech, although I can confirm to Mr Crawford now that that is the position. First Minister's question time has worked well in the past, but it can be improved and we must not be complacent about it. We must always be alert to ways in which the Parliament's business processes can be improved, which is why we are discussing the matter today. If agreed to by the Parliament today, the recommended changes to the duration and timing of First Minister's question time, which were suggested by the First Minister in a letter to the Presiding Officer in May, will allow greater scrutiny of Scottish Executive policy. Both the First Minister and the Presiding Officer are keen to ensure that, in the light of past experience, new arrangements  should be in place as soon as possible at the start of this second session. The Executive is pleased that the First Minister's suggestion to extend First Minister's question time from 20 minutes to 30 minutes has been recommended by the Procedures Committee. The First Minister is keen for more time to be made available to back benchers, which addresses Mr Canavan's point. The suggested changes would increase the opportunities for back benchers to ask questions and would enable a fairer balance in the allocation of questions and supplementaries.

I am aware of that issue and I thank Mr Canavan for pointing it out to the chamber. I will refer to his point again before I close. I also welcome the Procedures Committee's preferred option to move First Minister's question time to 12 noon on a Thursday. However, I confirm what Mr Crawford was trying to elicit from me earlier—we acknowledge that the Procedures Committee has recommended that the change should occur for a trial period, until perhaps the end of the year. The Scottish Executive welcomes that recommendation because the position might need to be reviewed to ensure that we get the fine tuning right. As the First Minister makes his way around Scotland, he regularly receives representations from schools and teachers about the timetabling of First Minister's questions. The present 3.30 pm finish time is often too late for some school groups to remain in Edinburgh—they have to leave before the end of the session. The suggested timing will therefore make First Minister's question time more accessible to members of the public and to schoolchildren. The proposed timing should also give better lunchtime news coverage, which is an important factor in engaging the public in our proceedings. The committee's report proposes a number of miscellaneous minor and technical changes to standing orders. The Executive is content with those recommendations, which have been proposed mainly to add further clarity to standing orders. We welcome the changes, which we believe will improve the overall democratic processes of the Parliament, and we acknowledge the Procedures Committee's consideration of all  the individual issues under discussion today. The Scottish Executive looks forward to working closely with the Procedures Committee as it develops the work that we have discussed today and conducts a wider and more general review of question time. At that stage, the committee may want to examine in more detail the points that Mr Canavan has raised today.

Before I move the business motion in my name, I point out to the chamber that there are two changes to the motion as printed. The debate on motion S2M-110, in the name of Irene Oldfather, on valuing carers, will now take place on Thursday of next week. The motion that will be taken on Wednesday evening is a Conservative motion, but it is S2M-140, on Red Brae School, and not S2M-174, in the name of John Scott, as shown at present. I move, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 25 June 2003 2:30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Executive Debate on Modernising Justice followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5:00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S2M-140 Murdo Fraser: Red Brae School Thursday 26 June 2003 9:30 am Landfill (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2003 followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Final Stage of Robin Rigg Offshore Wind Farm (Navigation and Fishing) (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion 2:30 pm Question Time 3:10 pm First Minister's Question Time followed by Motion on Fireworks Bill - UK Legislation followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5:00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S2M-110 Irene Oldfather: Valuing Carers Motion agreed to.

I wonder whether Ms Leckie's happiness—as she put it—to give the deputy convenership of the Subordinate Legislation Committee to a member of the Labour party has anything to do with Ms Kane's comment in court yesterday that she hoped that her community service would be on a Thursday afternoon so that she would not have to come to the chamber?

Parliament will perhaps recall that last week I moved a motion, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, to allow committees to be formed and to indicate to Parliament the political affiliation of the convener and deputy convener of each of the committees. It is worth putting on record that, in order to accommodate the involvement in the committees of the Scottish Green Party, the Scottish Socialist Party and the independent members of our Parliament, every party in the chamber made sacrifices towards a package that was aimed at maximising the inclusiveness of our committee structure. My own party relinquished the deputy convenership of the Environment and Rural Development Committee to the Greens and the deputy convenership of the Subordinate Legislation Committee to the SSP. As I am sure that members will recognise, those are both important committees. I am sorry that I have to come back to Parliament today to move a further Parliamentary Bureau motion to allow the deputy convenership of the Subordinate Legislation Committee to revert back to the Labour party, mainly because of the unwillingness of the SSP to fill the post. Given the protestations that we heard last week from the SSP about its involvement in committees, it should be a matter of great regret that a committee that in its short life has had some illustrious members—Margo MacDonald, Bristow Muldoon and Kenny MacAskill, to name but three—should not be regarded as important enough to merit the time, commitment and participation of members of the SSP. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Deputy Convener of the Subordinate Legislation Committee be appointed from the Labour Party.

In the first instance, it is worth pointing out that neither the Scottish National Party nor the Conservative Party share a monopoly of concern about the news that we all received last week on the Holyrood project. Given that the Conservatives have until now refused to be involved in the Holyrood progress group, it is a little rich of them to say what they did. Since day 1 however, along with the other major parties in the  chamber, the Conservatives have been part of the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body. It is worth drawing to the attention of Conservative members that it is the corporate body that is responsible for the building project. I must also point out that it is a matter for the Presiding Officer whether he wishes to make a statement on behalf of the corporate body to the chamber. The Executive would be happy to facilitate such a statement, should a request be made. Tomorrow's business includes Scottish Executive and First Minister's question time. The Presiding Officer has selected a question from my colleague Janis Hughes on the inquiry that is proposed by the First Minister. I am sure that my colleague Mr McConnell will take the opportunity to outline in as much detail as he can what is proposed. I suggest that First Minister's question time is the correct vehicle for that. Transport is an issue of great public concern and we do not wish to delete it from the business programme, particularly as the item of business that the Opposition wishes to delete from the business programme comes after the First Minister's answer to Ms Hughes's question. For those reasons, it seems entirely inappropriate to change the business motion.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Before I move the motion that is before Parliament today, I would like to take the opportunity to outline some of the guiding principles behind it. We are following on from the first session of the Parliament. During the past four years, the Parliament's committee structure—and the work of its committees—became one of the jewels of devolution and one of the things for which this Parliament was most noted and which was treasured most by the wider public and civic Scotland. It is important that, in the new session, the new committees begin their work and build on the achievements of the first session. Therefore, we are pleased to have been able to lodge this motion at this particular time. It is suggested that the Parliament's structure should be streamlined and that the number of committees should be reduced from 17 to 16. We have aligned the committees' remits a little more with ministerial portfolios for the ease of committees that do scrutiny work and to ensure that ministers can attend meetings and be fully held to account. The revised structure and make-up of committees will give them more balanced and meaningful remits, which should in turn help with the job of scrutiny and should enhance the opportunity for scrutiny. Following the election, the new Parliament is more diverse than it was before and the Parliamentary Bureau's challenge has been to try to reflect that diversity. That there has been a high level of co-operation across the parties to try to achieve that objective is pleasing. At this stage, we have been able to identify 15 places for those members who are not in the four major parliamentary parties—those committee places were identified as available for allocation at a meeting of the bureau last Tuesday. I understand that all but one of those places has now been taken up, and the motion reflects that. I move, That the Parliament shall establish committees of the Parliament as follows— Name of Committee: Audit Remit: Set out in Rule 6.7 Number of members: 7 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party. Membership: Rhona Brankin, Susan Deacon, Robin Harper, Margaret Jamieson, George Lyon, Mr Kenny MacAskill, Mr Brian Monteith Name of Committee: Equal Opportunities Remit: Set out in Rule 6.9 Number of members: 9 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Labour Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish Liberal Democrat Party. Membership: Shiona Baird, Frances Curran, Marlyn Glen, Marilyn Livingstone, Campbell Martin, Mrs Nanette Milne, Cathy Peattie, Mr Keith Raffan, Elaine Smith Name of Committee: European and External Relations Remit: Set out in Rule 6.8 Number of members: 9 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Labour Party. Membership: Dennis Canavan, Mrs Margaret Ewing, Phil Gallie, Mr John Home Robertson, Gordon Jackson, Richard Lochhead, Mr Alasdair Morrison, Irene Oldfather, Mr Keith Raffan Name of Committee: Finance Remit: Set out in Rule 6.6 Number of members: 9 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Labour Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party. Membership: Ms Wendy Alexander, Mr Ted Brocklebank, Fergus Ewing, Kate Maclean, Des McNulty, Jim Mather, Dr Elaine Murray, Jeremy Purvis, John Swinburne Name of Committee: Public Petitions Remit: Set out in Rule 6.10 Number of members: 9 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Labour Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party. Membership: Jackie Baillie, Helen Eadie, Linda Fabiani, Carolyn Leckie, Michael McMahon, John Farquhar Munro, John Scott, Mike Watson, Ms Sandra White Name of Committee: Procedures Remit: Set out in Rule 6.4 Number of members: 7 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish Liberal Democrat Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Labour Party. Membership: Mr Richard Baker, Mark Ballard, Bruce Crawford, Cathie Craigie, Karen Gillon, Mr Jamie McGrigor, Iain Smith Name of Committee: Standards Remit: Set out in Rule 6.5 Number of members: 7 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Labour Party. Membership: Bill Butler, Alex Fergusson, Donald Gorrie, Mr Kenneth Macintosh, Tricia Marwick, Alex Neil, Karen Whitefield Name of Committee: Subordinate Legislation Remit: Set out in Rule 6.11 Number of members: 7 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Labour Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish Socialist Party. Membership: Gordon Jackson, Dr Sylvia Jackson, Mr Stewart Maxwell, Christine May, Mike Pringle, Murray Tosh Name of Committee: Communities Remit: To consider and report on matters relating to anti-social behaviour, housing and area regeneration, poverty, voluntary sector issues, charity law and religious and faith organisations and matters relating to the land use planning system and building standards and such other matters as fall within the responsibility of the Minister for Communities. Number of members: 9 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Labour Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish Liberal Democrat Party. Membership: Cathie Craigie, Donald Gorrie, Patrick Harvie, Johann Lamont, Maureen Macmillan, Campbell Martin, Mary Scanlon, Elaine Smith, Stewart Stevenson Name of Committee: Education Remit: To consider and report on matters relating to school and pre-school education and social work and such other matters relating to young people as fall within the responsibility of the Minister for Education and Young People. Number of members: 9 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish Liberal Democrat Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party. Membership: Ms Wendy Alexander, Rhona Brankin, Robert Brown, Ms Rosemary Byrne, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, Fiona Hyslop, Mr Adam Ingram, Mr Kenneth Macintosh, Dr Elaine Murray Name of Committee: Enterprise and Culture Remit: To consider and report on matters relating to the Scottish economy, business and industry, energy, training, further and higher education, lifelong learning and such other matters as fall within the responsibility of the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning; and matters relating to tourism, culture and sport and such other matters as  fall within the responsibility of the Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport. Number of members: 9 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party and the Deputy Convener will be a  member of the Labour Party. Membership: Brian Adam, Mr Richard Baker, Chris Ballance, Susan Deacon, Murdo Fraser, Christine May, Alasdair Morgan, Mr Jamie Stone, Mike Watson Name of Committee: Environment and Rural Development Remit: To consider and report on matters relating to rural development, environment and natural heritage, agriculture and fisheries and such other matters as fall within the responsibility of the Minister for Environment and Rural Development. Number of members: 9 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Labour Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish Green Party. Membership: Sarah Boyack, Roseanna Cunningham, Mr Rob Gibson, Karen Gillon, Alex Johnstone, Maureen Macmillan, Mr Alasdair Morrison, Nora Radcliffe, Eleanor Scott Name of Committee: Health Remit: To consider and report on matters relating to health policy and the National Health Service in Scotland and such other matters as fall within the responsibility of the Minister for Health and Community Care. Number of members: 9 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Labour Party. Membership: Mr David Davidson, Helen Eadie, Christine Grahame, Janis Hughes, Kate Maclean, Mr Duncan McNeil, Shona Robison, Mike Rumbles, Dr Jean Turner Name of Committee: Justice 1 Remit: To consider and report on matters relating to the administration of civil and criminal justice, the reform of the civil and criminal law and such other matters as fall within the responsibility of the Minister for Justice, and the functions of the Lord Advocate other than as head of the systems of criminal prosecution and investigations of deaths in Scotland. Number of members: 7 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Labour Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party. Membership: Bill Butler, Marlyn Glen, Pauline McNeill, Michael Matheson, Margaret Mitchell, Mr Stewart Maxwell, Mrs Margaret Smith Name of Committee: Justice 2 Remit: To consider and report on matters relating to the administration of civil and criminal justice, the reform of the civil and criminal law and such other matters as fall within the responsibility of the Minister for Justice, and the functions of the Lord Advocate other than as head of the systems of criminal prosecution and investigations of deaths in Scotland. Number of members: 7 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Labour Party. Membership: Jackie Baillie, Scott Barrie, Colin Fox, Miss  Annabel Goldie, Mike Pringle, Nicola Sturgeon, Karen Whitefield Name of Committee: Local Government and Transport Remit: To consider and report on matters relating to local government (including local government finance), cities and community planning and such other matters (excluding finance other than local government finance) which fall within the responsibility of the Minister for Finance and Public Services; and matters relating to transport which fall within the responsibility of the Minister for Transport. Number of members: 9 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Labour Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party. Membership: Dr Sylvia Jackson, Rosie Kane, Michael McMahon, Mr Bruce McFee, Paul Martin, Bristow Muldoon, David Mundell, Iain Smith, Mr Andrew Welsh The Communities, Education, Enterprise and Culture, Environment and Rural Development, Justice 1, Justice 2, Health and Local Government and Transport Committees shall be established for the whole session of the Parliament.

I move those motions in my name, and I assure Miss Hyslop that I will pass on her concern for the Executive staff and for my colleagues on the ministerial benches as soon as I have the opportunity.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that between 1 June 2003 and 27 August 2004 the office of the Clerk shall be open all days except: Saturdays and Sundays, 28 November 2003, 24 December (pm), 25 December and 26 December 2003, 1 and 2 January 2004, 9 and 12 April 2004, 3 May, 28 May and 31 May 2004. That the Parliament agrees the following dates under Rule 2.3.1: 28 June - 31 August 2003 (inclusive), 11 - 26 October 2003 (inclusive), 20 December 2003 - 4 January 2004 (inclusive), 14 February - 22 February 2004 (inclusive), 3 April - 18 April 2004 (inclusive) and 26 June - 29 August 2004 (inclusive). That the Parliament directs that under Rule 11.8.3 of the Standing Orders any division at Stage 2 of the Education (School Meals) (Scotland) Bill shall be conducted using the electronic voting system. That the Parliament agrees that Rules 9.5.3A, 9.5.3B, 9.6.1, 9.6.2, 9.6.3, 9.6.4, 9.6.5, 9.6.6, 9.7.9 and 9.8.3 of the Standing Orders be suspended for the purposes of the Education (School Meals) (Scotland) Bill.—[ Patricia Ferguson .]

The question is, that motion S1M-4063, in the name of the First Minister, on the Presiding Officer, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament expresses its gratitude to Sir David Steel for his service to the Parliament and recognises the important and historic role he has carried out as its first Presiding Officer.

The motion is agreed to unanimously. For the last time, I hand back the chair to Sir David Steel.

On behalf of the members of the Parliamentary Bureau, both past and present, I have great pleasure in taking the opportunity to say a few words before you go into your semi-retirement—like other members, I am sure that it will be no more than that. As colleagues know, Sir David, for the first couple of years of this Parliament I had the honour of being one of those who assisted you in chairing meetings of the Parliament and in your other duties. I therefore have a unique vantage point from which to view your work and your contribution. I should probably say that a number of members have asked me if I am going to reveal at this point whether a certain conversation on the subject of whether the Presiding Officer should wear robes ever actually took place. I can assure you that my lips are sealed—on that question at least. We are politicians going into an election period, after all. My office was keen to press-release my contribution in advance of the debate. I have to admit that I was a little unsure about that, and I decided to take some advice from my colleague, Angus MacKay. [ Laughter. ] Angus advised me in no uncertain terms that it was probably not very wise to issue such a press release today. But seriously, I know that my fellow business managers, past and present, have very much appreciated your fairness and even-handedness in chairing the Parliamentary Bureau, a body that is often regarded by colleagues who have not had the privilege of serving on it as being some kind of secretive club—which we know is not the case. You have helped to make the bureau what it is today. This might come as a surprise to some colleagues, but it is usually a consensual body; more often than not we find ourselves in agreement. The whole Parliament admires the way in which you have persisted, often in the face of criticism, steadfastly to maintain the integrity of the Enric Miralles design for the new Parliament building. The Parliament also admires the personal interest that you have taken in that project, as chair of the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body, over the past four years. As an ambassador for the  Parliament, you have worked tirelessly, visiting other Parliaments and organisations abroad and welcoming visitors from abroad to this new Parliament. I believe that the Parliament has developed well in its short life, and that all its members have played a role in that development. The role of its Presiding Officer has been particularly important in shaping it. It seems absolutely no time at all since the day, almost four years ago, that you were elected to the office of Presiding Officer of the Scottish Parliament. Most of us had very little idea at that time about what the job of the Presiding Officer would actually entail, or about how it would fit into the overall life of the Parliament. It is the mark of the way in which you have developed that post that anyone aspiring to the role in future will have absolutely no doubt as to what is required of them. The post requires a leader. It requires someone who is approachable, someone with dignity, someone who can act with fairness at all times, and whose commitment to the Parliament is unstinting. We thank you, Sir David, as well as George Reid, Murray Tosh and all the staff who have assisted you in your role, for the dedication that you have shown to the role of Presiding Officer and to this new Parliament. I have great pleasure in supporting the motion before us.

It is with real pleasure, Sir David, that I ask you to reply to the debate.

I feel obliged to respond to the point that Mr Russell has just made. Having tried to imply that the bureau was somehow stymying the bill, he now implies that it is the fault of the Executive—[ Interruption. ] Mr Russell might want to say that a bit more loudly for the Official Report .

Thank you.

We are now in absolutely no doubt about Mr Russell's intention. The bureau considered the matter in its entirety yesterday. We came to the conclusion that it would not be appropriate to truncate by suspending the standing orders the correct provisions of the standing orders as they relate to timetabling of bills. Mr Russell is on record on many occasions talking about the sanctity of that process, on which I agree with him whole-heartedly. In order for the bill to go through stage 3, we would be required to have the Education, Culture and Sport Committee meet on Tuesday to consider amendments. Thereafter, a bill would have to be printed to be available on Wednesday, amendments to that bill would have to be lodged by close of play on the same day and the bill would have to be considered on Thursday. Parliament has standing orders to protect it and its processes. Therefore—as someone who holds the Parliament very dear, having argued for it for many years—I believe that the standing orders exist to protect the smaller parties in the Parliament and individual members. In its discussion, the bureau—by majority, with one member voting otherwise—voted that the bill should not proceed further because the timetable did not allow it to do so because of when the bill was introduced. That is a fact of which Mr Russell was aware at the time of the bill's introduction.

As members know, the Parliament has debated the Iraq situation on three occasions in recent times. The United Kingdom Parliament, which has responsibility for international matters, debated that important and grave issue as recently as last night. Our Scottish representatives at Westminster played their part in that debate and in exercising their votes. That is the right thing for them to have done.

No. There has been ample time for the democratically elected representatives in the Scottish Parliament to make known their views. As  we saw last night, time has also been given in the Westminster Parliament—

No, Mr Sheridan.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. The Executive recognises the importance of the matter and the gravity with which the matter is taken by the whole country and by the political parties and their members. Let me be clear that no one in this Parliament or elsewhere wants or supports war. We all want a peaceful solution. That peaceful solution is still possible, but it is up to Saddam Hussein to embrace that solution. Because of the gravity of the situation, the First Minister has approached the Presiding Officer with a view to making a statement this afternoon on the contingency planning that the Executive is putting in place to cover those matters that lie within our responsibility. That step, which the First Minister will take on behalf of the Scottish Executive, is the correct way to proceed at this time.

I had got to about 20 minutes and counted one thing that David McLetchie got right. Then he got into his 20 th minute and got his second thing right. Voters will indeed have an opportunity to vote Conservative on 1 May, yet once again they will not do it, because they know that David McLetchie's other correct point was that voters, like the rest of us in the Parliament, have a very long memory. Even if Mr McLetchie chooses to gloss over what went before, we will not allow him to do so. Why should the attitude of the Conservatives surprise us? As everyone in the chamber knows, the Tories did not want a Scottish Parliament and they campaigned against it. After four years, what do we have? We have a motion that attacks the Labour-Liberal Democrat coalition. The motion contains nothing new. It is the same old whingeing motion that we have come to expect from the Tories. In fact, it was probably drafted around 12 September 1997, the day after the Tories failed to stop the referendum victory. They immediately set out to rubbish the Parliament and I am afraid that they just cannot kick that habit. The Conservative motion attacks the Labour-Liberal Democrat Executive and its record of achievement. The Executive is proud of its record and I believe that it has good reason to be proud. Let us look at that record. By the end of this parliamentary session, the Executive will have introduced 50 bills, every one of which will make a difference to the lives of the people of Scotland. Every one of those bills reflects our concern for our people and none of them would have been introduced if the Tories had had their way and prevented the Parliament from being established. Indirectly, the Tories have played a part in deciding the Executive's priorities because, if it were not for the Tories' 18 years of flawed policies, we would not have had to introduce those bills. We would not have to invest so heavily to help the unemployed back to work and we not have to invest so massively in education, health and housing.

Absolutely not. Our public investment is not just in capital. A whole lot of other things have to go into making those services work. Unlike the Conservatives, we are not cutting staff for those facilities; we are ensuring that the facilities are adequately staffed. I do not accept what Phil Gallie says at all. What  I will say is that—

No. I am talking about the 18 years of Conservative rule and I seem to remember that the SNP had something to do with that.

Order, Mr Wilson.

Members on the Executive benches are proud of their history. I am not sure that other members can say the same thing. It took the Tories 18 years to wreak havoc across our public services. In the six short years that Labour has been in power at Westminster, and in the four years that the coalition has operated here, we have made massive inroads into redressing the damage that the Tories did. Let us look at our record in more detail. On the economy and jobs, we have created 20,000 modern apprenticeships, one year ahead of schedule. We have frozen the business rate for a year and we have encouraged business through our "A Smart, Successful Scotland" strategy. What did the Tories do? They presided over unemployment rates that twice hit 3 million. How did they react to that shaming fact? They said that it was a price worth paying. What are they suggesting they will do now—if they ever get a chance, that is? They will take £250 million out of the enterprise network, as Mr McLetchie confirmed this morning, and spend it on transport. That is more than half Scottish Enterprise's budget and more than Scottish Enterprise can spend annually on skills. On health, we have introduced free nursing and personal care for our older people, helping 75,000 of our most vulnerable Scots. We are investing £100 million over four years in the health improvement fund and we have recruited 1,400 more doctors and nurses. What did the Tories do? By 1997, residents in my city of Glasgow were 66 per cent more likely to die prematurely than people living in rural Dorset were. At the same time, the number of nurses in Scotland reduced by 8,490 between 1989 and 1997. I should tell Mr McLetchie that I worked in the health service for many years during the Conservatives' period in office and I do not recognise the picture of the NHS that he paints. The picture that most of us who worked in the health service at that time saw was one where patients did not get the treatment that they wanted, where the bureaucracy was overwhelming and where, from day to day, we did not know  where the next reform was coming from. Well, we did know that—it came from the Conservatives—but we did not know how it would make a difference to our working lives.

I will give way in a moment. If the past of the NHS under the Tories was bad, what would its future be like? We know that they want to break up the health service and that, given the opportunity, that would be their priority. Conservative members are not contradicting that.

Mr McLetchie may intervene if he wishes.

The figure that I quoted answers Mr McLetchie's first question. In Scotland, the number of nurses reduced by more than 8,000 between 1989 and 1997.

If David McLetchie wants to quote figures from a particular year, he can do that when he is speaking. I will quote from the Conservative's health spokesperson, Liam Fox, who operates for the Conservatives at Westminster. He said: "We've got a problem in this country where the NHS and health care have been synonymous. We're here to break that." I have news for him; we will not let the Conservatives do that.

In education—

Order. There is a difference between making witty interjections and sledging. This is becoming a bit of a sustained barracking.

In education, we have provided a nursery place for every three and four-year old whose parents want that place. We have guaranteed class sizes of 30 or less for all five, six and seven-year-olds. For the first time, more than  half of Scotland's school leavers now go into further or higher education. The Tories invested money in a bureaucratic nursery voucher scheme instead of increasing nursery places. The other thing that they did in education was to introduce the assisted places scheme.

A colleague behind me has just remarked that it is interesting that, as soon as we mention the assisted places scheme, we have an intervention from Mr Monteith—I would not want to comment on that. The information that we have from East Lothian Council is that it says no such thing about its ability to provide nursery places. Perhaps Mr Monteith should go back and check his source. On transport, we have introduced free local off-peak bus travel for our older people. We are investing £690 million in a package of improvements to Scotland's motorway and trunk road network over three years. Also important is the fact that we are investing money in road safety schemes to cut the number of children killed in traffic accidents. What did the Tories do? Not a lot, surprisingly enough. In fact, in their last year in government, they reduced to zero the number of grants that they gave to local authorities for public transport. On crime, we have introduced new measures against anti-social neighbours, we have taken powers to allow the confiscation of the profits of criminals who deal in drugs and we are implementing a range of new measures to tackle youth crime, which is a blight in so many of our communities. What did the Tories do? They tried to block attempts to remove handguns from society. Moreover, recorded crime rose by 42 per cent under the Conservatives.

No thank you. By any comparison, I think that the Executive's record is good, but by comparison with the Tories' record over 18 years it is excellent. I believe that what we have done is only a start, which an incoming Administration will be able to build on, because there is still a lot to do. There is still a lot to do in social justice, health and education, but the Executive knows what it wants to do and what its priorities are. The SNP's idea of divorce from the rest of the UK, with all the instability and  danger that that would bring, is not for us and certainly not for us is the 20 per cent cut in spending on public services that the Conservatives would impose. We want to continue to make real investment in our public services, which is possible only because of the economic stability of the United Kingdom and would not be possible if the nationalist dream of divorce were ever realised. We want more nurses, teachers and police officers. That would not be possible if the Tories' plan to cut investment in those services were ever realised. I am sure no one in the chamber has forgotten what it was like to live under a Tory Government. There was—to name but a few things—the poll tax, massive unemployment and high mortgage rates. As I said, the Tories have, in spite of themselves, helped to shape the agenda of the Parliament because of the pressing need to reverse the effect that they had on our country. The Tories are also responsible for a whole lot more. They are responsible for creating a whole generation of new political activists, many of whom are sitting in the Parliament—people such as me who would never have dreamed of joining a political party if they had not experienced Conservative government at first hand. Collectively, we have a vision of the Scotland that we want. We want a Scotland where all our children can achieve to the best of their potential, where our old people and our sick receive the best possible care, where people have meaningful work and where our old people are not afraid to leave their homes at night. We want a Scotland where pensioners can put on their central heating timer to coincide with their return home after having used their free bus pass to pick up their grandchildren from their free nursery places. We have worked hard to make progress towards our goals and we will continue to do that. We have done a lot, but there is a lot more to do. I move amendment S1M-3986.2, to leave out from "not achieved" to end and insert: "delivered a clear record of achievement which includes, amongst many other accomplishments, a full legislative programme and Executive action in urban and rural areas that has led to record investment in the health service, the abolition of tuition fees, the introduction of free personal care for older people, nursery places for all three- and four-year-olds whose parents want them, record numbers of police, an increase in the seizure of class 'A' drugs by 173%, freezing business rates, rates relief for small businesses and a substantial programme for long-term investment in transport; notes that Scotland has achieved the lowest level of unemployment for 25 years, and further believes that the next Parliament will have every opportunity to build upon the foundations laid in this first session for a prosperous, confident Scotland."

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

I had not intended to raise a point of order because I hoped that, if we had to have a debate at all, we would have a civilised debate. My experience of interviewing people outwith the Parliament leads me to regret what has been said  in the debate and to worry about what else is going to be said. The chamber must uphold the confidentiality of the appointment process. The prospect of people ever wanting to apply for such posts is being called into question. I also make the point, which seems to have escaped some members in the chamber, that the very reason for having an interview panel of seven people and not six people is to allow for a situation in which there might be a difference of opinion.

I moved the motion, which is sufficient.

I do not think that it is a matter for the Executive. It is a matter for the parliamentary authorities.

Does the minister wish to respond?

I suspect that I will have more than ample opportunity to do so next week when I bring the amendment to the chamber.  Motion agreed to.

I was just trying to think of where I had heard that last slogan before. I think that it was at the last election, but never mind. Before I formally move the business motion, I indicate to members that the business for next week requires to be adjusted. It is proposed that the United Kingdom Government will publish an extradition bill today, some aspects of which will relate to devolved matters. It is the Executive's intention to lodge a motion seeking the Parliament's agreement for the UK Government to legislate on the devolved aspects of the bill. Next week, I will propose to the Parliamentary Bureau that the motion be debated on Thursday 21 November, immediately after the stage 1 debate on the Title Conditions (Scotland) Bill. I understand that the Justice 1 Committee considers that the three hours that has been allocated to the bill is more than generous. It should not a problem therefore to reduce the length of the debate to accommodate the addition of a debate on the extradition bill. I move, That the Parliament agrees— (a) the following programme of business— Wednesday 20 November 2002 2:30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 1 Debate on Protection of Children (Scotland) Bill followed by Financial Resolution in respect of the Protection of Children (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5:00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-3486 Duncan McNeil: Mis-selling of Utilities Thursday 21 November 2002 9:30 am Stage 1 Debate on Title Conditions (Scotland) Bill followed by Financial Resolution in respect of Title Conditions (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion 2:30 pm Question Time 3:10 pm First Minister's Question Time 3:30 pm Executive Debate on Scottish Executive Response to Foot and Mouth Disease Inquiries followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5:00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-3538 John Farquhar Munro: Affordable Rural Housing Wednesday 27 November 2002 2:30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee Debate on its 9 th Report 2002 on Lifelong Learning followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5:00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-3565 John Swinney: A9 - Perth to Inverness Thursday 28 November 2002 9:30 am Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party Business followed by Business Motion 2:30 pm Question Time 3:10 pm First Minister's Question Time 3:30 pm Executive Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5:00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business and (b) that Stage 1 of the Prostitution Tolerance Zones (Scotland) Bill be completed by 21 February 2003 and that Stage 2 of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill be completed by 17 January 2003.

Presiding Officer, I would like to move a motion without notice. I move, That, under Rule 2.2.6(d), the meeting of the Parliament continue until 7.30 pm.

There is some inconsistency in the line that the SNP is taking on Sewel motions. Last week we considered a business motion that proposed that the chamber debate a Sewel motion, and that business motion was taken without demur. The Sewel motion was agreed to yesterday, with abstentions from SNP members. Those abstentions were on a bill that will allow the carriage in private hire vehicles of guide dogs for the blind and assistance dogs for people hard of hearing.  Fiona Hyslop posed an interesting question. She said that the issue was how we make the amendments that are proposed in the Police Reform Bill. The Executive knows how it wants to make those amendments. It wants to make them quickly—which is why we have attached them to this piece of Westminster legislation—and it wants to make them consistently, so that Scotland is not out of step with the rest of the UK. If legislation is made separately, in separate places, at different times, with recesses intervening, it is likely that we will end up with legislation that is inconsistent across the UK. If the Parliament agrees to the proposed Sewel motion, we will have the opportunity to close a very important loophole.

Let us get matters straight—if we agree to the Sewel motion, we will give Westminster the opportunity to introduce a provision that will allow us to close this loophole across the UK. We will not be abdicating responsibility, but ensuring that everyone in the UK has the same protection under the law. That may not be important to the SNP, but it is important to the rest of the chamber.

The member should consider the point that I made earlier. We are not going to sit through three hours of extra whingeing from the SNP when ministers could be doing the job that they are meant to do, which is to deliver for the people of Scotland. I am pleased that Ms Cunningham can treat the debate that she and her party have engineered with the flippancy that her body language has just shown.

Order.

Order on the back benches.

The member who is holding the floor is entitled to speak without members having a separate debate across the back benches.

No. The member is in her last minute.

It would not have been the debate that it has been if we had not had that wee burst at the end. My apologies to other members who hoped that they might squeeze in at the tail-end. It is not possible to call any more members. We move to the closing speeches. I invite Pauline McNeill to close for the Labour party. She has six minutes.

I will give Alex Neil two minutes, if he can use them.

The member is closing and will not give way. She has spoken for four and a half minutes.

In the interests of getting in as many members as possible, I would be grateful if the remaining speakers could confine their remarks to four minutes.

Order.

Order.

Of course, this is a matter for members, but I think that when speeches are longer than five minutes, it is  reasonable to take at least one intervention.

Will the member give way?

We move to open debate, during which I encourage members to take interventions and engage in dialogue. Speeches can be up to five minutes long.

The SNP motion that John Swinney has just moved claims that devolution is not delivering "improvements in public services" and that the only solution is independence. It is the same tired old nationalist story that we have heard so often, but it does not reflect reality. The reality is that devolution is a success story. The Executive has set out a clear statement of its priorities and it is pursuing an ambitious and distinctive programme of legislation that allows us to implement those priorities. We are delivering real change and real achievements on the issues that matter to the people of Scotland. For example, the Parliament has delivered for pensioners. On 1 July this year—exactly 3 years to the day after the Parliament assumed its powers—free personal care for the elderly will become a reality and will be followed a few months later by free off-peak local bus travel.

No thank you. I like to get the introduction in first. The Parliament has delivered an historic pay deal that will restore the professional status of teachers. We have delivered investment for young people's futures by abolishing tuition fees for students. The Parliament is delivering for people in rural areas who have spent all their lives—as did their parents and grandparents—working on the land for someone else's benefit. Land reform and feudal reform mean that their long held dreams can become reality.

Not at the moment. Let us not forget that devolution was not some strange idea that was foisted upon us by Westminster. On the contrary, the devolution settlement reflects what John Smith famously described as "the settled will of the Scottish people". The SNP might not like to hear that repeated, but I think that it bears repeating at this time. Devolution is also built on the hard work that was done over a number of years by the Scottish constitutional convention to develop a detailed blueprint for devolution that would command the widest possible support across the public and political spectrum in Scotland. Of course, the SNP did not contribute to that debate.

Mr Neil is welcome; I am happy to take his intervention. The powers that we have are the powers that we work with. The SNP seems to want to concentrate on powers that we do not have. We want to work with the powers that we have and deliver with them. As for the comments of Mr Dewar, I think that Mr Neil is referring to a quote that he and some of his colleagues often use. They quote Mr Dewar as having said that devolution was not an end in itself. He said that, but he went on to say that devolution was only a means of improving the lives of the people of Scotland. That is the position of this Executive. Before Mr Neil intervened, I talked about the important work that was done by the Scottish constitutional convention. I was about to say that the SNP did not contribute to that process.

No thank you. I will make progress. I will say for the third time that the SNP did not contribute to that process. I have to say that it is news to some of us that the SNP campaigned hard for devolution, as Mr Swinney claimed. I campaigned for devolution in many parts of the country over a number of years and, in particular, during the referendum campaign. The SNP was conspicuous by its absence from the streets during that campaign and, of course, our Conservative colleagues campaigned vigorously against devolution.

I do not accept that.

The premise that Mr Swinney is putting forward is not the case. Those of us who work daily in constituencies throughout the country know that that is not the case. We see the difference that the policies of this Government  and our colleagues at Westminster are making, and will continue to make, to people's lives throughout the country. However, I do not claim that everything has been done; a lot has still to be done. Let me remind the Conservatives and the SNP that the devolution settlement received the overwhelming support of the Scottish people in the 1997 referendum.

No. I want to make progress. There was no evidence during the referendum in 1997, and there is no evidence now, that any more than a small percentage of Scots want independence. They want the Parliament to make a success of the wide powers that it has been given. That is exactly what the Executive will do. Mr Swinney paints a picture of gloom and doom.

No. I want to tell the chamber about Mr Swinney's picture of doom and gloom. He claims that we are not delivering improvements in public services. That is not a picture that I recognise. The Executive has no higher priority than delivering first-class public services and, during the Holyrood elections in May next year, we will be more than happy to be judged on that record. I will turn to what we have done.

Mr Lochhead need only consider predictors of economic growth such as the number of unemployed people. I do not know about Mr Lochhead's constituency, but that certainly matters to people in my constituency.

Mr Gibson is continuing his habit of lobbying from behind, Presiding Officer. He referred to my constituency; I am the first to argue that unemployment in my constituency, as in many others, has not come down by as much as I want it to, but it has come down significantly since 1997. That is what the people of Scotland recognise.  The First Minister has made it clear that we have five overriding priorities. They are health, education, crime, transport and jobs. Those services bind us together as communities and impact directly on each of our lives. Those are the Executive's priorities for attention and action. Improving the lives of people in Scotland means improving the quality, accessibility and relevance of our public services. Since 1999, we have set about that task by focusing on the key areas of public service that have the greatest impact and in which improvement and effective delivery will make the greatest difference. Those are major public services, which we use and benefit from every day. They are key areas, which affect the lives of the people of Scotland. We have made steady progress in our councils, our health boards and our police service. Work goes on every day to ensure that there is a nursery place for every 3 and 4 year old and that our young people increase their success rates in literacy and numeracy. Work is done to ensure that more crime is solved, that more victims are protected, that more of us can get the health care that we need in our local communities and that we are safer when we travel on our roads. Work goes on to ensure that our bus, rail and ferry links work to make our journeys connect. However, there is more to do.

I will not give way just now. The Executive's response is to sit down with those who deliver services—whatever they are—and ask how we can do better. However, our partnership approach is not a neat trick to absolve us of responsibility. Government has a job to do.

I have taken a number of interventions and I need to press on. Our job is to lay out the direction in which we want to go, identify the priorities, underpin them with legislation, make the best use of resources where necessary to improve delivery and lead the drive to improve standards. Working together, we are investing in and rebuilding our public services around five key principles. The first is a clear focus on the needs of those who use and those who work in the services. The second is the introduction of national standards on which local excellence can be built, backed by inspection and accountability to ensure quality and continuous improvement across services and throughout the country.

I do not thank the Tories. I do not thank them for ignoring the work forces and the public services for 18 years and I do not thank for them for the legacy that they left us, which we must try to improve. The third of our five key principles is devolution of decision making to those who are best placed to make decisions.

I will not take an intervention from Mr Swinney; I am trying to press on. Devolution of decision making enables doctors, nurses, teachers and head teachers to feel the measure of our confidence in them because we let them make the decisions that they need to make. The last two principles are improvement of conditions and working practices so that skilled staff can spend their time doing what they do best—delivering a quality public service—and the searching out of best value and making decisions that will get the best return for every public pound that we spend. We are not talking about more targets or new initiatives; we are talking about delivering a service for patients or passengers—not for the system. We are not talking about glossy brochures or review groups; we mean to focus on tackling issues and to act when that will make a difference—

It is a consistent approach and one that the SNP has obviously missed. We are talking about using technology to free skilled staff from endless paperwork so that they can get on and do the job that they signed up to do. We are talking about nurses being trained to increase their clinical skills so that they can treat patients directly and thus free up doctors to concentrate on those who need their specialist skills. We are talking about speeding up our court system so that police officers do not waste time in court waiting rooms and so that the victims see justice delivered efficiently and fairly.

No. We are talking about providing resources and modernising conditions so that our teachers can get on with teaching. The Government's job is to help those who deliver to do their job. That is not our only responsibility and it is not only our responsibility. We have a responsibility to use all the resources that we have—the public's resources—to the greatest effect. People are not really interested in how many billions we spend; they are interested in whether we are making things better in their daily lives. They are interested in whether those billions of pounds are making a difference. They are interested in repairs being made to their children's schools, in improved and modern facilities in their local hospitals or health centres, and in public transport that helps them get to where they want to be. We will lead the process of best value and quality improvement that we expect from our councils, our health boards, our police service and the independent public bodies. We will focus on the priorities, find the best value for money and deliver real improvement.

No. I am running out of time. This summer, we will prepare our national spending plans for the next three years. We will apply the test of the five principles in our preparations and ensure that our resources are used to target improvements in health and education, to reduce crime and to strengthen our transport system and our economy. Those are the areas for which we are responsible to the people of Scotland. We want our resources and our efforts to make a difference for those who need it most. Improving public services is a big job, and we know that we cannot do it on our own. Politicians make the decisions. We in Government know that some decisions are tough, but our decisions are informed by people who have first-hand experience of public services—the front-line staff and the managers. They have the skills, the expertise and the everyday experience of trying to get the job done and they have something else. They have a special quality: they have made a positive choice to work in public services. They have signed up to work as part of a service that makes a direct impact on the lives of others. They will go the extra mile, put in the extra effort and work the additional hours to ensure not only that the job is done, but that it is done well. Public service staff bring more than skills, talent and expertise to their work every day—they bring commitment. They bring commitment to saving,  improving and building lives. That is a powerful force for good. Our job is to let them deliver, not to talk them down and not to denigrate what has been achieved. In the short period since the Scottish Executive and Parliament came into being, devolution has made an enormous difference to the governance of Scotland. By the end of the first session, we will have passed more than 50 bills that reflect Scottish policies and Scottish priorities. The legislative programme covers the whole sweep of devolved powers. It has included major legislation on our key priority areas including health, education and criminal justice, not to mention the care of the elderly and the most radical restructuring of the social housing sector in Scotland for a generation. That achievement is all the greater because the vast majority of Scottish bills are tailored to meet Scottish needs and to tackle Scottish problems. One of the first fruits of devolution is an ambitious and wide-ranging programme of homegrown legislation that is tailored to our policies and priorities. The legislative programme is only the most visible manifestation of the way in which devolution has changed the political landscape in Scotland. The establishment of the Parliament has brought about a massive increase in the process of scrutinising government and holding it to account. The Parliament provides a forum for real democratic accountability in Scotland. Our devolved institutions are genuinely open and accountable and they are working well. Yesterday, Mr Swinney said that the politics of grievance would not deliver the kind of Scotland that we all want. What have we heard so far today from Mr Swinney but grievance after grievance after grievance? Mr Swinney and his party have asked the Parliament to spend three hours this morning discussing his party's priority—independence. It is a priority to a minority of people outside the Parliament, but it is the SNP's one priority. The SNP wants us to spend three hours discussing it. Instead, the coalition Executive wants to talk about the issues that matter to the people of Scotland. They sent us here to do that. When we debate, we use their time. Our responsibility is to reflect their concerns. Now is not the time to embark on further constitutional change.

Devolution works—that is why not—and is here to stay. The overwhelming majority of Scots have no desire for independence. They want us to make a success of devolution. If they had wanted independence, they would have voted for it in a referendum called a general election. The SNP has had an opportunity  to increase its share of the vote in general election after general election after Scottish Parliament election and has stunningly failed to do so every time. I invite the Parliament to reject John Swinney's negative and sterile arguments and I confidently predict— [Interruption.]

Order.

That might have been the SNP members whingeing, but I will give them the benefit of the doubt. I predict confidently that, in May 2003, the Scottish people will reaffirm their strong and consistent support for devolution as opposed to the false panacea of independence. I move amendment S1M-3052.1, to leave out from "Scottish Executive" to end and insert: "devolution settlement is right for Scotland, that wide powers have been devolved to the Scottish Executive and the Parliament and endorsed by Scottish voters in a referendum, that full use is being made of these powers to deliver the policies set out in the Programme for Government, and that these powers can deliver real improvements in the public services and help secure a strong and competitive economy."

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I have been absent for most of the debate but I have a feeling of déjà vu, because the debate is at exactly the same place as it was when I left the chamber.

Presiding Officer, I am not  going to react to the jibes that are coming from some Opposition members. The minister made clear the position about the document that was distributed to the other parties. The fact that Mr Russell lost a vote on a spurious motion cannot continue to be the subject of argument in the chamber.

I have already indicated that the debate has become singularly ill tempered. I am anxious to draw it to a reasonably peaceable conclusion. Mr Russell, you have about 30 seconds.

rose—

To respond for the Executive we have Euan Robson. Minister, finish as near to 5 o'clock as possible, please.

I apologise to the considerable number of members who wished  to speak in the debate but were beaten by the clock. We now move to the winding-up speeches. I urge members to stick to their allocated times.

We have time for three speeches of four minutes or possibly four speeches of three minutes.

rose  —

The arrangements for elections to the Scottish Parliament, including the size of the Parliament, are a reserved matter. The effect of those arrangements as they stand is that the number of members of the Scottish Parliament would be reduced from 129 to around 106, probably in 2007. The United Kingdom Government has always made it clear that it is prepared to revisit the matter in the light of experience. The Secretary of State for Scotland accordingly published a consultation paper last December that invited comments on whether the Scotland Act 1998 should be amended to allow the Parliament to remain at its current size. It is therefore right that we should debate the matters and make our views known to the UK Government before it reaches its decision. I will first say a word about the relevant provisions in the Scotland Act 1998 and the thinking behind them. One aspect of the overall devolution settlement was Scottish representation at Westminster. Scotland has for some time been guaranteed not less than 71 seats at Westminster. The boundary review will reduce Scottish representation at Westminster from 72 seats to about 59 seats. The UK Government also took the view during the passage of the Scotland Bill that it was important to retain the same constituency boundaries at Westminster as at Holyrood. Schedule 1 to the act provides for that. It also requires the Boundary Commission for Scotland to keep the ratio of constituency to regional seats as close as possible to the current ratio of 73:56. In practice, that means that any reduction in Scottish representation at Westminster will result in an automatic reduction in the number of seats in the Scottish Parliament. The arithmetic suggests that having 59 or so Scottish constituencies for the purposes of the Westminster elections, which is what the Boundary Commission is minded to recommend, would mean a reduction in the total number of Holyrood seats from 129 to about 106.  It is likely that that reduction would take place before the elections to the Scottish Parliament in 2007. I will make it clear where the Executive stands. In our view there is a strong case for the Parliament to remain at its current size. We do not believe that the Parliament and its committees could function as well as they do with 106 members instead of 129. We believe that the force of that argument outweighs the desirability, which we acknowledge, of retaining common constituency boundaries. As I said, the UK Government has made it clear that it is prepared to listen to representations from the Scottish Parliament. It is up to us to make the case as strongly and as convincingly as we can. In the remainder of my speech, I will set out the arguments as I see them for retaining the present size of the Parliament. First and foremost is the need for stability. The present arrangements are working well. Reducing the size of the Parliament would change its dynamics considerably for the worse. It would amount to a considerable upheaval for no good purpose. With the exception of the Conservatives, who never supported devolution in the first place, I am aware of no one who argues for such a change on its own merits. A reduction in the number of MSPs would have a particular bearing on the work of our committees, which already, as I know well, have a heavy work load. Our committee system has been widely praised; it is rightly regarded as one of the successes of devolution. We have 17 committees, which are all busy and hard pressed. We have already reduced the number of members serving on each committee from between 11 and 13 to between seven and nine and most back benchers serve on at least two committees. Reducing the pool of members available would make it almost impossible to retain the present committee structure.

I thank the member for that. If the committee structure were to be jeopardised in such a way, there would be serious implications for the Executive's legislative programme and for the capacity of committees and back-bench members to introduce their own bills, as they have begun to do. The ability of committees to scrutinise proposals for legislation,  to hold the Executive to account and to conduct independent inquiries would be severely curtailed. So too would the ability of individual MSPs to serve the needs of their constituents. In short, the ability of the Parliament to function effectively would be compromised, in my view quite significantly. The consultative steering group established the principles on which the Parliament is founded: accessibility, transparency, the sharing of power and equal opportunities. Those principles would be seriously jeopardised if we were to reduce the size of the legislature. We have only one chamber, so the work of our committees takes on a particular importance. Their role in scrutinising Executive legislation is vital. So too is their taking of evidence from civil Scotland and the dialogue that they have around Scotland. All that would be jeopardised by a reduction in the number of MSPs. Our commitment to equal opportunities could also be threatened by a reduction in the number of members. We are rightly proud of the number of women in this Parliament: at 32.7 per cent, we have the third highest proportion of women representatives of any Parliament in the world. If the number of MSPs were reduced, our ability to observe family-friendly hours would be threatened. That would impact not just on members, but on our accessibility to our constituents. The work that we do is not just about being in the chamber; it is also about our ability to visit community groups, to speak to individual constituents, to hear their views and to work with them in our communities. That, in a nutshell, is the argument for retaining the Parliament at its present size. The present arrangements represent a consensus that emerged after much debate over a period of years, starting with the work of the Scottish Constitutional Convention. The Parliament can, and does, hold the Executive to account, not only by scrutinising its proposals for legislation, but through parliamentary debates, questions and ad hoc inquiries. There is a proper democratic balance between the Executive and the Parliament. What, then, are the countervailing arguments that led the UK Government and Parliament to reach the contrary view during the passage of the Scotland Bill? The key consideration was the risk of public confusion if there were two sets of parliamentary constituencies, one for Westminster and the other for Holyrood. There could also be practical difficulties for local authorities, returning officers and the political parties. Those are legitimate concerns, but electors already have to contend with different boundaries for local, parliamentary and European elections,  not to mention different voting systems. There is no evidence to suggest that that has caused any serious problems. The electorate are increasingly sophisticated and I see no reason why differences in parliamentary constituencies would cause any great difficulty in practice.

I am sure that Mr Canavan will make those points in his submission to the consultation. It would, of course, be possible for any problems that may arise—the kind of problems that Mr Canavan has mentioned and other problems that I have mentioned—to be dealt with by a UK-Scottish advisory commission after 2007. During the passage of the Scotland Bill, the UK Government gave an undertaking that "if the parliament took the view that its workings would be seriously undermined by a reduction in numbers—then it is open to the parliament to make representations to the Government of the day ... It would be open to the parliament, in the light of experience ... to say to the Government of the day, 'Look, we think we have got a system which works well and effectively. It is in danger of being disturbed in a very deleterious way if this reduction takes place.' ... The opportunity would not be lost, at some time in the future ... to reopen this question on the initiative of the parliament."—[ Official Report , House of Lords , 17 November 1998; Vol 594, c 1195.] That is what we are doing. It would be wrong to suggest that the Parliament has got everything right, but I believe that it will take more than the nearly three short years that have passed to judge it properly. In the meantime, we need stability to allow us to continue to move forward. The Executive believes that there are compelling arguments for retaining the Parliament at its current size. The UK Government has made it clear that it is prepared to listen. I hope that during this debate the Parliament will set out the case as strongly and as clearly as it can. I hope and believe that the UK Government can be persuaded to accept those arguments and to table appropriate amendments to the Scotland Act 1998 in due course. I move,  That the Parliament notes Her Majesty's Government's consultation paper on the size of the Scottish Parliament; acknowledges the positive progress made by the Parliament and its committees, and considers that the number of elected representatives should remain at 129.

I am surprised that the SNP has decided to raise this issue at this time. Just over a month ago, Ms Hyslop wrote to me about the issue. Unfortunately, she managed to get some of the facts wrong in her letter. I rebutted that letter around 5 March, I believe. As no correspondence had winged its way to me from that source, I had to presume that Ms Hyslop was content with the reiteration of the facts as they were. I hear SNP members saying that I was wrong, but I was absolutely correct. I find it hypocritical for Ms Hyslop to raise this matter with us today, not least because the SNP's health spokesperson and deputy health spokesperson are, apparently with no conflict of interest, members of the Health and Community Care Committee. In fact, Mr Russell, who is the SNP's education spokesperson, is on the Education, Culture and Sport Committee, a situation that we would be happy to go along with, if not for the fact of Ms Hyslop's hypocrisy today.

No, thank you. I also point out that Ms Hyslop is a member of the Procedures Committee, which closely shadows the work of the Parliamentary Bureau, of which Ms Hyslop is a member. It is strange that the matter is raised today. It shows that the SNP has not thought through properly the role of ministerial parliamentary aides in the Parliament. I also think that it shows a distinct lack of knowledge of the individuals involved. To suggest anything else does those individuals a grave disservice.

I am sure that, for Ms MacDonald, the public of Scotland would make an exception on the beheading. I do not intend to make a long speech, but a couple of points must be put on the record. That obligation falls to me as one of the business managers to whom Shona Robison referred. None of us wants to take part in the debate. Colleagues from all parties would agree that the topics that we should discuss are jobs, health, education, transport and crime. However, the motion was lodged by the SPCB and has been the subject of discussion among the four main political parties. The motion is based on an independent review by the SSRB and, if passed, will mean that today will be the last time that individual MSPs are required to vote on their pay. That is the crucial point.

If Dorothy-Grace Elder's premise were correct, I would probably agree with her, but it is not correct. The motion will mean that in future the SPCB will have an independent review of our salaries, the result of which will guide our salary levels. If the review recommends a decrease in our salaries, we will have to accept that. That is why I support that element of the motion. If either of the amendments are agreed to, the effect will be different. Shona Robison's amendment would give the corporate body the opportunity to decide which index our salaries should be pegged at. I do not think that that is what members want. The motion takes annual increases out of our hands altogether and links us—rightly, I think—with the closest group of politicians that it could: our colleagues at Westminster. If, in future, the corporate body thinks that we have got the level wrong, it is open to it to commission an independent review and to determine how the annual increase should be made, based on the outcome of that review. We need a period in which the Parliament and its members can concentrate on the work in hand without the diversion of what we should be paid. The motion facilitates that and it is for individual members to decide how they want to proceed. For the record, I confirm that all members of the Executive parties are free to vote as they see fit.

Presiding Officer, I apologise for not being in my proper seat. Mr Robson's absence caught me slightly unawares. I move, That the Parliament agrees that, at Stage 3 of the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman Bill, debate on each part of the proceedings shall be brought to a conclusion by the time limits indicated (each time limit being calculated from when Stage 3 begins and excluding any periods when the meeting is suspended)— Groups 1 to 3 - no later than 1 hour Motion to pass the Bill - no later than 1 hour 30 minutes.  Motion agreed to.

I would hate Alex Neil to draw the wrong conclusion. In fact, he has spoken for six minutes and 39 seconds. There is an error on the clock, which has added the previous speaker's time to his.

We now move to closing speeches, and I make the observation in passing that we are 35 minutes ahead of schedule.

On behalf of the Executive, I congratulate the Standards Committee on the thoughtful and careful work that has gone into the preparation of the bill. I say that having been party to some of that work. I was not present for the latter deliberations, but I have watched keenly as they have moved on. We welcome the committee's proposals and will give the bill our full support. The present arrangements for the investigation of complaints against members of the Parliament are set out in the code of conduct, which is non-statutory. Following a detailed inquiry and an extensive consultation process, the Standards Committee concluded that those arrangements should be replaced by legislation. That is the purpose of the bill. The key ingredients of the bill can be summarised briefly. The bill provides for the appointment of an independent standards commissioner who will have statutory security of tenure. The appointment process will be open and transparent and the commissioner may be re-appointed for another term of up to five years. The commissioner will investigate complaints independently and will have the same statutory powers to summon witnesses and compel production of evidence as the Parliament enjoys under section 23 of the Scotland Act 1998. The commissioner will, having carried out an investigation, report his or her findings to the Standards Committee in the first instance. It will then be for the committee and the Parliament to decide whether there has been a breach of the code and, if so, what action to take. Both the committee's report and the commissioner's findings will be published in full. The proposals have been carefully formulated to establish an independent and credible commissioner who will have wide powers of investigation, while properly leaving the final decision on what action to take in the hands of the Parliament. Although there is scope for debate about the precise detail of the proposals—I look forward to engaging in that debate at stage 2—it seems to me that the committee's approach strikes the right balance. I hope and believe that the bill will command support across the political spectrum. The establishment of an independent commissioner who will have clear and transparent powers of investigation will enhance the Parliament's  reputation and public standing. The Standards Committee has in my view—although some might say that I am a little biased—carried out an exemplary inquiry that has resulted in a well thought through and workable bill. Once again, I offer the Executive's warm support for the proposals in the bill and I wish it safe and speedy passage.

I am minded to accept a motion to bring forward decision time.

I am always happy to oblige, especially someone in the Deputy Presiding Officer's august office. I ask the chamber's permission to move a motion without notice. To allow for the fact that business has concluded early, I move, That, under Rule 11.2.4, Decision Time be taken at 7.12 pm.  Motion agreed to.

Speak into your microphone please, Mr Mundell.

I never needed a microphone, but you do.

Order. Mr McLetchie, let the member finish his speech.

I must close the open part of the debate. I apologise to those members who have not been called. I am grateful that ministers have chosen to use only one slot in the debate.

As a consequence of the decision that we have just taken, I wish to move a motion without notice to move decision time.

I am minded to accept the motion without notice.  Motion moved,  That, under Rule 11.2.4, Decision Time be taken at 7.15 pm.— [Patricia Ferguson.]  Motion agreed to.

The question is, that amendment S1M-2742.1, in the name of Alex Johnstone, which seeks to amend business motion S1M-2742, in the name of Patricia Ferguson, on the timetabling of stage 3 of the Protection of Wild Mammals (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 20, Against 97, Abstentions 2.  Amendment disagreed to.

The second question is, that motion S1M-2742, in the name of Patricia Ferguson, on the timetabling of stage 3 of the Protection of Wild Mammals (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 100, Against 19, Abstentions 1.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that, at Stage 3 of the Protection of Wild Mammals (Scotland) Bill, debate on each part of the proceedings shall be brought to a conclusion by the time-limits indicated (each time-limit being calculated from when Stage 3 begins and excluding any periods when the meeting is suspended)— Group 1 to Group 3—no later than 45 minutes Group 4 to Group 6—no later than 1 hour 45 minutes Group 7 to Group 10—no later than 2 hours 15 minutes Group 11—no later than 2 hours 45 minutes Group 12 to Group 18—no later than 3 hours 30 minutes Group 19—no later than 4 hours 15 minutes Group 20 to Group 22—no later than 4 hours 45 minutes Group 23—no later than 5 hours Motion to pass the Bill—no later than 6 hours.

I must say that I cannot help but think that Mr Johnstone is simply employing a delaying tactic. As my colleague Mr Robson has indicated, the motion was discussed and agreed by all the business managers. Despite the fact that he was given ample opportunity to do so, Mr Johnstone did not find it necessary to raise this issue at yesterday's meeting of the Parliamentary Bureau. As he has made no attempt to discuss the amendment with the business managers before today, I find it difficult to understand why he has now decided to move the amendment. As far back as 31 January, Mr Johnstone has had opportunities to debate his suggestion in the chamber. Tomorrow's debate on the Water Industry (Scotland) Bill—for which more amendments have been lodged for than for today's debate—will be dealt with expeditiously, yet I have not had any complaints about the timetabling of that debate. If Mr Johnstone and his members have any difficulty in keeping track of what happens this afternoon, there are plenty of other members in the chamber who will be happy to assist them.

I thank Lyndsay McIntosh for her support for the motion. I thank Irene McGugan for her comments, although I am not sure that I can say the same for her colleague's comments. The Sewel convention has led to this important debate. My colleague Cathy Jamieson has outlined some of the reasons for that. Frank McAveety added to the debate his personal experience and his knowledge of what has happened to parents and children in the past. The point about the Adoption and Children Bill is that it will allow us to be part of a UK-wide register. It will allow children to be placed into adoptive situations more quickly. By reducing the time that  people have to wait to adopt children, the register will help to prevent the kind of heartache to which Frank McAveety so eloquently referred. It is worth saying that, although Sewel motions have not been the subject of this debate, they were largely the subject of the debate on fur farming. Sewel motions are used in the Scottish Parliament for three reasons. First, they are used in situations in which it is more effective to legislate on a UK basis, to bring us into a UK-wide regime. Secondly, they are used where we believe that the provisions in a Westminster bill should be brought into effect in Scotland, but where there is limited time in the Scottish Parliament. Thirdly—

There is no inconsistency as yet, Mr Russell. You spent two minutes and 48 seconds of your five minutes dealing with the issue; in the same way, I am watching how the Minister for Parliamentary Business divides her time.

I am sure that you are, Presiding Officer—I had taken that on board. It is worth trying to respond to some of the serious points that Mr Russell made. In making them, he was calling into question the Executive's judgment in bringing forward an important item in this manner. That has to be put on the record, because this is an important issue. It must not be overshadowed by any discussion on the constitutional arrangements or on the individual mechanisms that are being used in this case.

Minister, you said that you would set the record straight and I think that you have done so. I wonder whether we could get back to the subject fairly quickly.

I will certainly do so, but, to answer Mr Lochhead's point, I think that it is worth mentioning that, in the press today, Mr Russell commented on our education system. I took the opportunity to find out how many debates the SNP has called for on education. In the past eight  months, there has been only one such debate. That is the significance that the SNP attaches to issues of importance to children. The difference is that the Labour party and the coalition are introducing legislation and discussing issues that matter to the people of Scotland, particularly to a vulnerable group of young people.

Yes. In fact, the Executive—

I always understood that the parliamentary process allows the member who is on his or her feet—and not members who are sitting down—to speak. Then again, we are not surprised at Mr Russell's attitude. The Executive has not only introduced legislation on the issues that are of importance to Scotland and its people, particularly its young people, in education and in other areas; it has also addressed those issues through measures other than legislation. Legislation from this chamber is not always required to make a difference, which is what the Executive is intent on doing. We will use whatever processes work, including Sewel motions, to deliver for the people of Scotland. Mr Russell got his arithmetic slightly wrong. Even if we include the two that are to be passed today, there will have been only 30 Sewel motions to date. Perhaps education is something that the SNP should not major on. Scott Barrie made some interesting comments based on his time as chair of the adoption panel in Fife and I know that he takes the issue very much to heart. I think that his contribution assisted us greatly in developing the ideas that the Sewel motion sets out. Much has been said about Sewel motions and about the way in which we do business. We make no apologies for what we are doing. Through an important bill, we are helping a vulnerable group of young people. We will help them by using a Sewel motion if that is the best method to effect change.

It is heartwarming to see Mr Russell's concern for a Labour member and I am sure that Cathy Peattie will treat his words with due regard. Obviously, this is an internal matter for the Labour party and is something that we will discuss with Cathy Peattie. It is not a matter for this chamber.

I am minded to accept a motion to add up to 15 minutes.  Motion moved,  That the meeting be extended by up to 15 minutes.— [Alex Neil.]  Motion agreed to.

I stress that the extension does not mean that I will fit in everyone who wants to speak. I ask members to keep their speeches tight, as many members wish to speak.

I would be grateful if members would keep to about three minutes, because we are running short of time.

Many members have indicated their wish to take part in the debate and it will be impossible to call them all if members speak for a full four minutes. I ask members to keep their speeches as short as possible.

I ask Peter Peacock to move motion S1M-2440, on the financial resolution in respect of the Scottish Local Government (Elections) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Scottish Local Government (Elections) Bill, agrees to any increase in expenditure payable out of the Scottish Consolidated Fund in consequence of the Act.— [Peter Peacock.]

The next item of business is a debate on motion S1M-2458, in the name of Susan Deacon, on the NHS Reform and Health Care Professions Bill, which is UK legislation.

I do not think that I have any latitude on that. However, I have not so far been inundated with speakers for this debate, so I suspect that I shall not have too much of a problem. I will bear your comment in mind, Mr Wallace.

The member is winding up.

The member should wind up.

The member must now come to a close.

We now move to open debate. Several members want to speak, so I ask those who do to keep their contributions to four minutes.

We move to consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motion S1M-2443, on approval of Scottish statutory instruments.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the following instruments be approved— the Food Protection (Emergency Prohibitions) (Amnesic Shellfish Poisoning) (West Coast) (No 8) (Scotland) Order 2001 (SSI 2001/374); the Food Protection (Emergency Prohibitions) (Paralytic Shellfish Poisoning) (East Coast) (No 2) (Scotland) Order 2001 (SSI 2001/387); the Food Protection (Emergency Prohibitions) (Amnesic Shellfish Poisoning) (West Coast) (No 9) (Scotland) Order 2001 (SSI 2001/388); and the Food Protection (Emergency Prohibitions) (Diarrhetic Shellfish Poisoning) (Orkney) (Scotland) Order 2001 (SSI 2001/391).— [Euan Robson.]

Unless members disagree, I am minded to accept a motion without notice from Euan Robson to bring forward decision time. Do members agree to that?

There are seven questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S1M-2445.1, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, which seeks to amend motion S1M-2445, in the name of Jim Wallace, on the Anti-terrorism, Crime and Security Bill—UK legislation—be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 26, Against 75, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The second question is, that motion S1M-2445, in the name of Jim Wallace on the Anti-terrorism, Crime and Security Bill—UK legislation—be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 75, Against 30, Abstentions 1.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament recognises the urgency of enhancing anti-terrorist capability and security in the current international situation and agrees that the provisions of the Anti-Terrorism, Crime and Security Bill specified in the Scottish Executive's memorandum that relate to devolved matters should be considered by the UK Parliament.

The third question is, that motion S1M-2444.2, in the name of Bruce Crawford, which seeks to amend motion S1M-2444, in the name of Ross Finnie, on the Executive's vision for the protection and promotion of Scotland's natural heritage, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 31, Against 75, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The fourth question is, that amendment S1M-2444.3, in the name of John Scott, which seeks to amend motion S1M-2444, in the name of Ross Finnie, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 15, Against 62, Abstentions 29.  Amendment disagreed to.

The fifth question is, that motion S1M-2444, in the name of Ross Finnie, on the Executive's vision for the protection and promotion of Scotland's natural heritage, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 60, Against 15, Abstentions 31.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament supports the Scottish Ministers' intention to come forward with legislative proposals to protect and promote Scotland's natural heritage; notes the widespread support for this proposed reform, and agrees that improved protection of nature requires a combination of new legislation and integrated land use policies and incentives currently being developed by the Executive.

The sixth question is, that motion S1M-2275, in the name of Jack McConnell, on the general principles of the School Education (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the School Education (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill.

The seventh question is, that motion S1M-2443, in the name of Tom McCabe, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the following instruments be approved— the Food Protection (Emergency Prohibitions) (Amnesic Shellfish Poisoning) (West Coast) (No 8) (Scotland) Order 2001 (SSI 2001/374); the Food Protection (Emergency Prohibitions) (Paralytic Shellfish Poisoning) (East Coast) (No 2) (Scotland) Order 2001 (SSI 2001/387); the Food Protection (Emergency Prohibitions) (Amnesic Shellfish Poisoning) (West Coast) (No 9) (Scotland) Order 2001 (SSI 2001/388); and the Food Protection (Emergency Prohibitions) (Diarrhetic Shellfish Poisoning) (Orkney) (Scotland) Order 2001 (SSI 2001/391).

I call Nicol Stephen to close for the Executive.

Before calling the next speaker, I indicate that it looks very likely that we will finish the debate early.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S1M-2275, in the name of Jack McConnell, on the general principles of the School Education (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill. I ask members who wish to participate in the debate to press their request-to-speak buttons.

The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motions. The first motion to be considered is motion S1M-2453, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, on a change to decision time.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees under Rule 11.2.4 of the Standing Orders that Decision Time on Thursday 22 November 2001 shall begin at 12.30 pm.— [Euan Robson.]  Motion agreed to.

The second motion to be considered is motion S1M-2452, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, on a suspension of standing orders.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that Rule 5.6.1(c) of the Standing Orders be suspended for the duration of the Meeting of the Parliament on Thursday 22 November 2001.— [Euan Robson.]  Motion agreed to.

The next motion for consideration is business motion S1M-2451, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 21 November 2001 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 1 Debate on the Sexual Offences (Procedure and Evidence) (Scotland) Bill followed by Financial Resolution in respect of the Sexual Offences (Procedure and Evidence) (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-2081 Mr John Home Robertson: Regulation of Opencast Mining in the Lothians Thursday 22 November 2001 9.30 am Stage 1 Debate on the Scottish Local Government (Elections) Bill followed by Financial Resolution in respect of the Scottish Local Government (Elections) Bill followed by Executive Debate on the NHS Reform Health Care Professions Bill - UK Legislation followed by Question Time followed by First Minister's Question Time followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 12.30 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-2184 Alex Neil: Contract Research Staff 2.30 pm Selection of the Parliament's Nominee for First Minister Wednesday 28 November 2001 12.00 noon Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by First Minister's Motion to appoint Scottish Ministers followed by First Minister's Motion to appoint junior Scottish Ministers 2.30 pm Stage 1 Debate on the Community  Care and Health (Scotland) Bill followed by Financial Resolution in respect of the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 29 November 2001 9.30 am Scottish National Party Business followed by Business Motion 2.30 pm Question Time 3.10 pm First Minister's Question Time 3.30 pm Executive Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business— [Euan Robson.]

Order.

Before I call the minister, I ask members to respect the opportunity that is being given for members to speak by keeping down the background noise. I call Ross Finnie to wind up for the Executive.

Wind up, please.

Come to a close, please.

Come to a close, please.

That ends the open debate. I thank members for their co-operation, Mr Harper in particular. He delivered a six-minute speech in about three minutes.

I am trying to accommodate all the members who want to speak in the debate, so it would be helpful if the last three speakers could stick strictly to the three-minute time limit.

I ask the member to wind up.

I ask the member to wind up.

The member must come to a close.

I ask the member to wind up.

A large number of members wish to take part in the debate, but very little time remains. So that I can try to accommodate all those who wish to speak, I ask members to keep their contributions to three minutes if at all possible.

Please wind up.

I am sorry, Mr Canavan, but Mr Scott is winding up and will have to continue.

The minister is winding up.

We move to the next item of business, which is a debate on motion S1M-2444, in the name of Ross Finnie, on the Executive's vision for the protection and promotion of Scotland's natural heritage. There are two amendments to the motion.

We move to the open debate. I call the convener of the Local Government Committee.

There are no amendments for stage 3, so this stage consists only of a debate on motion S1M-2379, in the name of Jim Wallace, that the Police and Fire Services (Finance) (Scotland) Bill be passed.

I advise members that, for the stage 2 debate, they should have with them the bill, the marshalled list and the list of groupings, which have been agreed. The electronic voting system will be used for all divisions. Two minutes will be allowed for the first division that occurs after each debate on a group of amendments. Members who have a question about the procedures should ask it now. Otherwise, I will begin.

Amendment 1 is grouped with amendments 2, 3 and 4.

Amendment 5 is grouped with amendments 6, 7, 8 and 9.

Amendment 10 is grouped with amendments 11, 12 and 13.

We now move to closing speeches.

Mr Stone, the member has finished his speech.

Although we started this debate with extra time, we have managed to catch up with our schedule. I must therefore ask members from here on in to stick to a five-minute time limit.

Two more members have indicated that they wish to speak. I would appreciate it if both members would keep their remarks as brief as possible.

A large number of members want to speak. I ask members to limit their speeches to three minutes in order to accommodate all those who want to speak.

The final item of business today is a members' business debate on motion S1M-2187, in the name of Cathie Craigie, on world Alzheimer's day.  Motion debated,  That the Parliament expresses its support for World Alzheimer's Day, held on 21 September every year; recognises its aim of raising global awareness of dementia and its impact on families; notes that around 58,000 people suffer from dementia in Scotland, and further recognises the importance of the work of organisations such as Alzheimer Scotland - Action on Dementia in supporting sufferers and their families.

We now move to the wind-up speeches.

Yes, you are in your last minute.

In view of your constituency, you can have another minute.

We have some time in hand, so you could have another two or three minutes.

It was an extraordinarily generous extension. Phil Gallie was given an additional three and a half minutes.

That is not a point of order. It is for the member to decide whether to withdraw a remark.

Order. The member is not giving way.

We move now to open debate. If speeches are about four minutes long, all members who want to speak should be able to do so.

Will the minister assure the organisations and asylum seekers in my constituency, where many asylum seekers are housed in areas that could be described as areas of deprivation, but which do not make up part of a SIP, that they will not be neglected when funding and other support is given to asylum seekers in Glasgow?

Several members whom I would expect to speak in the debate are not showing on my screen. If members wish to participate, they should press their request-to-speak buttons now.

Before the minister responds, I ask for order in the chamber. The background noise is becoming fairly loud.

Two members have indicated that they want to speak. I will be able to accommodate them if they limit their speeches to three minutes.

We are a little short of time and I encourage members to keep their speeches to between three and four minutes from now on.

I am letting members' speeches run to about four minutes.

Yes.  Motion moved,  That the meeting be extended by up to 10 minutes.—[ Michael Russell .]  Motion agreed to.

Before I call Mr Russell, I must say a gentle word to our visitors from the Borders. I do not want to be discourteous, but I must point out that applause from the public galleries is not allowed in this chamber.

I do not think that you will be surprised when I say that that was not a point of order. Please continue, Mr Wilson.

One intervention only was the Presiding Officer's injunction, Miss Gillon. We are not taking any more interventions.

Three members wish to speak, and I intend to call them all, but they really must stick to three minutes.

Does the minister agree that the Parliament has an opportunity to continue to raise not only its own profile, but the profile of Scotland as a whole? In that connection, will the minister join me in welcoming the legislators from Nebraska, Minnesota and Kansas who are in the VIP gallery? [ Applause. ]

Do not conduct conversations in between the speaker and the chair, please, Mr Gibson.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to address the increase in the number of school exclusions following the transition from primary to secondary school. (S1O-3854)

Does the minister agree that some of the problems with discipline can be exacerbated when young people must travel long distances outside their own areas and communities and where, as a result, they and their parents are unable to engage with the wider activities of their school? If he agrees, will he encourage local authorities to take that into account when they plan provision?

The next item of business is an SNP debate on motion S1M-2249, in the name of Alasdair Morgan, on Government stewardship of the public's resources. Members who wish to speak in the debate should press their request-to-speak buttons.

No. You should be winding up, Mr Rumbles.

Surprisingly, many members wish to speak in this evening's debate. If all members are to be called, I ask members to restrict their speeches to three minutes.

We move to the open part of the debate. As a large number of members wish to speak, I ask those who are called to limit their speeches to fewer than four minutes.

Wind up, please.

Carry on please, Mrs McIntosh. You are winding up.

Yes.  Motion moved,  That the meeting be extended by 10 minutes.—[ Paul Martin .]  Motion agreed to.

Paul Martin is correct. A large number of members wish to speak. I ask members, therefore, to keep their speeches within the recognised time limits.

The final item of business today is a members' business debate on motion S1M-2119, in the name of Paul Martin, on community issues in Sighthill, Glasgow.  Motion debated,  That the Parliament deplores the recent racist attacks in Sighthill that have been carried out by a minority; recognises that the community in Sighthill welcomes asylum seekers and that they require support and resources to ensure successful community relations; welcomes Glasgow City Council's introduction of an emergency action plan which will take a corporate approach to tackling many of the estate management issues that face residents in Sighthill, and considers that the Executive should ensure that Scottish local authorities share examples of best practice and expertise in implementing the dispersal programme, take steps to ensure that local police levels are kept to the maximum level possible, consider what additional resources can be allocated to assist communities with integration and the delivery of local services and develop an action plan that would work towards ensuring that councils and communities are assisted and informed during the dispersal programme.

That shall be noted.

Will the member please wind up.

The member must now close.

Will the member please come to a close.

The member must now come to a close.

The member must do so very quickly.

The member must close.

No interventions. Margaret Smith is winding up.

We now move to the open part of the debate. Several members wish to speak. In the time that is available, I will be unable to call all those members. I ask the members who participate to keep their speeches brief, to allow me to try to accommodate as many members as possible.

The minister is winding up.

The next item of business is a debate on Conservative motion S1M-2207, in the name of David McLetchie, on improving patient care, and on two amendments to the motion.

That is not a point of order. Mr Rumbles was winding up for the amendment. I call Fergus Ewing to wind up for amendment S1M-2078.2.

We now move to closing speeches. I reiterate the regrets expressed by the Presiding Officer at the beginning of the debate about its not being possible to call all those members who wished to take part. I call Mike Rumbles to speak to amendment S1M-2078.1.

Before I call the next member to speak, I remind members that there should be no interventions in the last minute of a member's speech. Members are beginning to drift over their four-minute time limit.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made in encouraging local authorities to adopt the guidelines under the Scottish diet action plan on nutritional standards in school meals. (S1O-3768)

In view of the fact that implementation has not been the same across the board, will the minister consider making the guidelines mandatory?

Ms MacDonald, do you wish to speak? Your light is on.

The member has finished, I am afraid.

I call Iain Gray to speak to and move amendment 43, in the name of Jim Wallace, which is grouped with amendment 47.

I call the minister to wind up.

We come to amendment 3, in the name of Lord James Douglas-Hamilton.

The question is, that amendment 3 be agreed to. Are members agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 41, Against 60, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 3 disagreed to.

Amendment 44, in the name of the Minister for Justice, is grouped on its own.

Amendment 45, in the name of the Minister for Justice, is grouped on its own.

We now move to the debate on motion S1M-2044, in the name of Jim Wallace, which seeks agreement that the International Criminal Court (Scotland) Bill be passed.

The question is, that amendment 1 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a two-minute division.

The result of the division is: For 43, Against 58, Abstentions 2.  Amendment 1 disagreed to.

The question is, that amendment 40 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 26, Against 76, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 40 disagreed to.

Amendment 41, in the name of Christine Grahame, has already been debated with amendment 40.  Amendment 41 moved—[Christine Grahame].

The question is, that amendment 41 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 26, Against 75, Abstentions 1.  Amendment 41 disagreed to.

Amendment 1 is grouped with amendments 2, 29, 6, 7, 30, 10, 11, 31, 32, 17, 18, 33, 21, 34, 24, 36, 37, 38 and 39.

We move on to the stage 3 proceedings of the International Criminal Court (Scotland) Bill. I will make the usual announcements about the procedure that will be followed. First, we will deal with amendments to the bill. We will then debate the motion to pass the bill. For the first part of the proceedings, members should have a copy of the marshalled list and of the groupings that have been agreed. Amendments will be debated in groups where appropriate and each amendment will be disposed of in turn. An amendment that has been moved may be withdrawn with the agreement of the members present. It is possible for members not to move amendments should they so wish. The electronic voting system will be used for all divisions. I shall allow an extended voting period of two minutes for the first division that occurs after each debate on a group of amendments.

Amendment 40 is grouped with amendment 41.

I ask Euan Robson to move motion S1M-2201, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, which is a timetabling motion for stage 3 of the International Criminal Court (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that, at Stage 3 of the International Criminal Court (Scotland) Bill, debate on each part of the proceedings shall be brought to a conclusion by the time-limits indicated (each time-limit being calculated from when Stage 3 begins and excluding any periods when the meeting is suspended)— Group 1 and Group 2—no later than 55 minutes Group 3—no later than 1 hour 25 minutes Groups 4, 5, 6 and 7—no later than 1 hour 55 minutes Motion to pass the Bill—no later than 2 hours 25 minutes.—[ Euan Robson ].  Motion agreed to.

The first item of business is consideration of business motion S1M-2213, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a business programme. I call on Euan Robson to move the motion.

A number of members wish to speak in the debate, so I remind members that the time limit for their speeches is four minutes.

Your microphone is not on.

Will the member wind up?

Mr Tosh is winding up.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S1M-2164, in the name of Sarah Boyack, which seeks agreement that the Erskine Bridge Tolls Bill be passed.

Amendment 2 is in a group on its own.

That is correct.

Mr Ingram has an opportunity to respond.

The question is, that amendment 2 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 26, Against 74, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 2 disagreed to.

The next question is, that section 2 be agreed to. Are we all agreed?

I think I heard some noes there. As I tried to explain earlier, it is not possible to divide on the question on a section. However, an amendment to leave out section 2 would be admissible. Does any member wish to lodge such an amendment? If they do, we will have to adjourn. No such amendment is forthcoming.  Section 2 agreed to.  Long title agreed to.  Meeting closed at 15:56.

We now move to stage 2 of the Erskine Bridge Tolls Bill. I ask members who are leaving the chamber to do so quickly and quietly. I invite members who have any questions on procedure to raise them now as points of order before we begin. I also invite members who wish to speak on either section of the bill to press their request-to-speak button when we move to the relevant section. Since the stage 1 debate this morning, two admissible amendments for stage 2 have been lodged. They have been printed on the marshalled list, copies of which I hope have been made available. I have decided that the two amendments should be debated separately, rather than grouped. Because they are the only two amendments, a printed groupings list has not been prepared.

Amendment 1 is in a group of its own.

The question is, that amendment 1 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 23, Against 71, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 1 disagreed to.

I asked members to vote on  amendment 1 before agreeing to section 1, which is the wrong procedure. I must now ask members to correct that by agreeing to the section. The question is, that section 1 be agreed to. Are we all agreed?

We cannot have a division on a section at this stage in the debate, because we are meeting as a committee of the whole Parliament at stage 2. The only appropriate way to oppose a provision in the bill is to move an amendment to leave out that section of the bill. Such an amendment would be subject to the normal rule on admissibility that states that an amendment is not admissible if "it is inconsistent with the general principles of the Bill as agreed by the Parliament." The effect of that rule in relation to this bill is that an amendment to leave out section 1 is inadmissible. Members who want to oppose section 1 of the bill should vote against the whole bill at stage 3. I am sorry if that is confusing for members. I can quite understand why.  Section 1 agreed to.

I would be grateful if the next two speakers could keep under four minutes.

We are rapidly running out of time and a number of speakers still wish to be called. I therefore ask those whom I am about to call to keep their speeches as brief as possible.

Please wind up.

I welcome Murdo Fraser to the chamber for his first speech.

No, Mr Hamilton is coming to the end of his speech—I hope.

The question is, that amendment S1M-2163.1, in the name of Adam Ingram, which seeks to amend motion S1M-2163, in the name of Sarah Boyack, on the general principles of the Erskine Bridge Tolls Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 25, Against 78, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S1M-2163, in the name of Sarah Boyack, on the general principles of the Erskine Bridge Tolls Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 79, Against 25, Abstentions 0.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Erskine Bridge Tolls Bill.

Now that Parliament has agreed to the general principles at stage 1, it is possible for members formally to lodge amendments for the stage 2 proceedings that take place this afternoon. If any member wishes to lodge an amendment, I urge them to do so as quickly as possible, to give the clerks time to check admissibility and to arrange for admissible amendments to be put into print for the benefit of members. Amendments should be lodged with the clerks and the legislation team in room 3.5 in the committee chambers.

The next item is a debate on motion S1M-2133, in the name of Alex Neil, on behalf of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, on the report on the inquiry into the impact of the new economy. I ask members who are leaving the chamber to do so quickly and quietly.

We now move to closing speeches.

We now move to the open part of the debate. If members stick to the allotted four minutes, I should be able to call all those who have indicated that they want to speak.

I call John Farquhar Munro. [ Interruption. ]

I call Murray Tosh.

No—the member is winding up and must continue.

I have been advised that we can proceed, although when I switched my microphone on, nothing happened. However, it seems to be working so, optimistically, I call Peter Peacock to close for the Executive.

Please wind up.

Peter Peacock will wind up for the Executive, but his microphone does not appear to be working. In fact, I have just been advised that the entire sound system has gone down.

You should be winding up.

No, you should be winding up now, Mr Neil.

Wind up, please.

Come to a close, please.

No.

For Mr Jackson's information, he will know when I am winding him up.

The member is about to wind up.

Order. Speak through the chair.

We move now to closing speeches. As a ministerial statement will follow, I ask members to exercise the same discipline as did those who spoke during the debate.

The member is not giving way.

Please wind up.

Come to a close, please.

I advise members that they must stick to three minutes if I say that they have three minutes. That will assist the debate, although I realise that members will have to cut the speeches that they have prepared.

We move now to the open part of the debate. If I were to stick rigidly to the business programme, we would have fewer than four minutes for that part of the debate. However, I propose to run this morning's business into lunchtime, in order to accommodate as many members as possible. In the circumstances, I ask members to keep their speeches to three minutes.

Before I call the next speaker, I remind all members that they should address the chair when they are speaking.

Order.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S1M-2023, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on central heating for the elderly, and two amendments to that motion. I point out to members that we are extremely short of time and the debate will be short. We ran over time for the previous debate. I ask members to keep to the time scales that have been allocated and I apologise in advance to members whom it will inevitably be impossible to call this morning.

Several members wish to speak. It would be helpful if members would keep their speeches to four minutes.

Carry on, Mr Morrison.

The minister is not taking an intervention.

Order.

The minister is winding up.

The minister is about to close.

That is not a point of order. It is up to the speaker to decide whether they want to take interventions. The minister took interventions in the first part of her speech, but not towards the end. That is her decision.

I call Ben Wallace to close for the Conservative party.

We now move to the winding-up speeches. I apologise to the three members whom I have not been able to call.

I ask Elaine Thomson to come to an end.

I call Nora Radcliffe and ask her please to keep her comments to under four minutes.

I think that you should be a little careful when talking about this case, Mr Quinan.

I agree with that view. The word "alleged" would be helpful, Mr Quinan.

I think that you should now move on, Mr Quinan.

Before Pauline McNeill responds, I want to clarify that the debate is a Parliament and not a committee debate. Pauline McNeill is opening for the Labour party. I remind her that she is in her last minute.

I make it clear that members should not speak to one another across the chamber, except through interventions that a member has accepted.

Our first item of business is a debate on motion S1M-1838, in the name of Mr Jim Wallace, on the general principles of the International Criminal Court (Scotland) Bill.

Order. Mr Adam, from whom are you taking an intervention?

Amendment 98 is grouped with amendments 99 to 101 and 103 to 123.

Before calling Bill Aitken, I ask members to keep down the noise in the chamber. It is becoming quite loud again.

Amendment 127 is grouped with amendments 128, 196, 197, 137 and 146. They are all in Ms Hyslop's name.

The result of the division is: For 35, Against 85, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 89 disagreed to.  [Amendment 90 moved—[Ms Sandra White].]

The question is, that amendment 90 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 33, Against 83, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 90 disagreed to.   Amendment 91 moved—[Ms Sandra White].

The question is, that amendment 91 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 34, Against 83, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 91 disagreed to.

The minister will speak to and move amendment 95.

Amendment 96 is grouped with amendments 97, 102, 124 to 126, 129, 130 and 147.

Amendment 170 is in a group on its own.

I have an indication that an additional member wishes to speak. However, as it is not usual for me to take someone after the minister has spoken, I will not do so. The question is, that amendment 170 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 35, Against 84, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 170 disagreed to.

Before we come to amendment 165, I remind members that the guillotine has fallen and that the next group of  amendments will have to be taken formally.  Amendment 165 not moved.  [Amendment 166 moved—[Brian Adam].]

The question is, that amendment 166 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 34, Against 86, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 166 disagreed to.  Amendment 167 not moved.  Amendment 168 moved—[Brian Adam].

The question is, that amendment 168 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 34, Against 86, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 168 disagreed to.  [Amendment 169 not moved.]

Amendment 89 is grouped with amendments 90 and 91.

The question is, that amendment 89 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The question is, that amendment 81 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 50, Against 68, Abstentions 1.  Amendment 81 disagreed to.

The question is, that amendment 157 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of  the division is: For 35, Against 82, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 157 disagreed to.  [Amendment 158 moved—[Brian Adam].]

The question is, that amendment 158 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 34, Against 85, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 158 disagreed to.   Amendment 159 moved—[Brian Adam].

The question is, that amendment 159 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 33, Against 86, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 159 disagreed to.  [Amendment 160 moved—[Brian Adam].]

The question is, that amendment 160 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 35, Against 84, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 160 disagreed to.  Amendment 161 not moved.  Amendment 162 moved—[Brian Adam].

The question is,  that amendment 162 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 35, Against 86, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 162 disagreed to.  Amendment 163 not moved.  Amendment 164 moved—[Brian Adam].

The question is, that amendment 164 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 34, Against 83, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 164 disagreed to.

Amendment 81 is grouped with amendments 157, 158, 159, 160, 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168 and 169. I invite Bill Aitken to move amendment 81 and to speak to all the amendments in the group.

The question is, that amendment 9 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 35, Against 84, Abstentions 1.  Amendment 9 disagreed to.

Several members have indicated that they want to speak in this part of the debate. I ask them all to be as brief as possible.

Will you wind up, please?

A number of members want to speak on a subject that I know is of great concern to them. I would prefer not to have to ask members to wind up, so I ask them to be brief.

The question is, that amendment 75 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 17, Against 98, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 75 disagreed to.

Amendment 77 is grouped with amendments 9 and 13.

Amendment 70 is grouped with amendments 71, 195, 72 and 74.

The question is, that amendment 73 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 31, Against 80, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 73 disagreed to.  [Amendment 156 not moved.]

Amendment 75 is in a group on its own.

We continue our proceedings on stage 3 of the Housing (Scotland) Bill. Amendment 56 is hanging over from this morning.  Amendment 56 not moved.

Amendment 59 is grouped with amendments 155 and 62.

I indicate to members that we are very short of time on this group of amendments.

The question is, that amendment 59 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 68, Against 27, Abstentions 2.  Amendment 59 agreed to.  [Amendment 155 moved—[Robin Harper].]

The question is, that amendment 155 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 2, Against 93, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 155 disagreed to.  [Amendment 62 moved—[Ms Margaret Curran]—and agreed to.]

Amendment 66 is grouped with amendments 67 and 69. Because of the short amount of time that we have remaining to us in this section of the debate, I ask the minister to move the amendment formally.  Amendment 66 moved—[Ms Margaret Curran]—and agreed to.

Amendment 67 would have been debated with amendment 66.  Amendment 67 moved—[Tommy Sheridan].

The question is, that amendment 67 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 2, Against 102, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 67 disagreed to.  [Amendment 69 moved—[Ms Margaret Curran]—and agreed to.]

The next item of business is a debate on motion S1M-1981, in the name of Angus MacKay, which seeks agreement that the Scottish Local Authorities (Tendering) Bill be passed.

No amendments to the bill have been lodged so far. Unless any manuscript amendments are lodged, the committee's only task is to agree to each section of the bill and to the long title. I do not anticipate that there will be any divisions, but if a division is required, the electronic voting system will be used. If members have no questions, we will consider section 1 of the bill.  Section 1 agreed to.  Section 2 agreed to.  Long title agreed to.  Meeting closed at 14:38.

There is only one question to be put as a result of today's business. The question is, that motion S1M-1965, in the name of Susan Deacon, which seeks agreement that the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Bill be passed, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Bill be passed.

The final item of business is a members' business debate on motion S1M-1932, in the name of David McLetchie, on proposed cuts to the Scottish regiments. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. I ask members who are leaving the chamber to do so quickly and quietly.  Motion debated,  That the Parliament believes that the proposed substantial cuts to the size of both the regular army and the Territorial Army will undermine the efficiency and morale of the British armed forces, damage our military capability and threaten the future of Scotland's historic frontline regiments.

I am minded to accept the motion to bring forward decision time. Are we agreed?

Wind up, please.

There are five questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S1M-1958.1, in the name of Iain Gray, which seeks to amend motion S1M-1958, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, on justice, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 55, Against 35, Abstentions 1.  Amendment agreed to.

The second question is that motion S1M-1958, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, on justice, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 55, Against 10, Abstentions 26.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  [Resolved,]  That the Parliament notes the increased resources going into the justice system as a whole; further notes the decision of the Justice 2 Committee to hold an inquiry into the operation of the Crown Office and the Procurator Fiscal Service, and looks forward to their report.

The third question is, that amendment S1M-1957.1, in the name of Mr Jack McConnell, which seeks to amend motion S1M-1957, in the name of Michael Russell, on education, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 55, Against 36, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

Because amendment S1M-1957.1 is agreed to, amendment S1M-1957.2, in the name of Mr Brian Monteith, falls.

The fifth question is that motion S1M-1957, in the name of Michael Russell, on education, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 79, Against 16, Abstentions 1.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  [Resolved,]  That the Parliament continues to support the framework for school improvement which it put in place in the Standards in Schools etc. Act 2000 and recognises that to achieve the highest possible standard for each and every pupil investment must be made across the whole of a child's education, providing a quality experience in pre-school for every 3 and 4-year-old child, effective early intervention to ensure a good foundation in literacy and numeracy, support for all children with special educational needs, a modern, well-resourced school environment and a highly motivated, professional teaching staff.

I am minded to accept the motion to bring forward decision time. Is that agreed?

Mr Finnie?

The minister will now take questions on the issues raised in his statement. It would be helpful if members who wish to ask a question would press their request-to-speak buttons now.

I asked members to be brief. Please conclude quickly.

Before I call Mr Finnie, I ask members to keep the background noise in the chamber down.

I appeal again to members to keep down the background noise.

I remind members that questions are meant to be directed to issues that were raised in the minister's statement. I suspect that the member was not in the chamber at the time.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress it has made in developing relationships with other devolved administrations in Europe. (S1O-3477)

I hope that the minister will agree to work with the Parliament in its attempts to establish relationships with other devolved assemblies and Parliaments throughout Europe, so that we can exchange good practice, learn from one another and work together to the benefit of our individual countries and nations. Does he agree that this week's contribution to the general election campaign by a certain retired politician has highlighted the clear difference between the Labour party and the Conservative party on European issues?

The question is, that motion S1M-1956, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.

I call Euan Robson to move business motion S1M-1962, on the suspension of standing orders.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that Rules 9.5.3B and 9.7.9 of the Standing Orders be suspended on Wednesday 6 June 2001 for the purposes of the Scottish Local Authorities (Tendering) Bill.—[ Euan Robson. ]  Motion agreed to.

The second Parliamentary Bureau motion for consideration is business motion S1M-1961, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, to agree that stage 2 of the Scottish Local Authorities (Tendering) Bill be taken in whole by a committee of the whole Parliament.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that in accordance with Rule 9.7.1(b) of the Standing Orders, Stage 2 of the Scottish Local Authorities (Tendering) Bill be taken in whole by a Committee of the Whole Parliament and directs that any vote to be taken shall be conducted using the electronic voting system.—[ Euan Robson. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S1M-1956, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.

The next item of business is a members' business debate on motion S1M-1926, in the name of Mr Duncan McNeil, on local newspaper week, 14 to 20 May 2001.  Motion debated,  That the Parliament welcomes Local Newspaper Week; recognises that local newspapers play a crucial role in their communities and can act as a focal point of community life; acknowledges that they provide valuable services such as scrutiny of local elected representatives and the championing of local causes; further acknowledges that they are a window on our communities and give us a unique opportunity to present all that is positive within our areas to a wider audience, and notes that the Greenock Telegraph is a fine example of these roles.

Will you wind up please?

I remind members that the usual four-minute speaking rule applies.

This is always a difficult time in a short debate, particularly when one is the closing speaker in the opening section of the debate. However, members should not sympathise with me too much—they should think of my colleague Tricia Marwick, who is to close the debate for the committee. To be frank, our colleagues have outlined eloquently and clearly all the proposals in the committee's report. It is worth emphasising the fact that, as the committee went through its work, we were concerned about ensuring that the Parliament's founding principles were adhered to and that public confidence in the independence of the process that we are proposing was to be sacrosanct. We were also concerned to ensure that members could have confidence in not only the rigor, but the clarity of the process to which they might be subjected. We also wanted members to feel confident that the process was open and would allow them to submit appeals at the appropriate stages. We took a lot of evidence before we reached our conclusions. I will highlight two of the issues that, for me, were crucial in reaching those conclusions. First, the commissioner will not be responsible for giving advice to members. The committee felt that that was crucial to the process, as we did not want the commissioner to find himself or herself investigating a member who had acted on advice given by the commissioner. That difficulty has been encountered in other Parliaments and we did not want to go down that road. Secondly, we were clear that evidence-taking sessions held during an investigation by the commissioner should be held in private. At that stage, members are still innocent until a problem has been proven, and we believe that if those sessions are taken in private, members will have the confidence to speak freely to and to co-operate fully with the commissioner and to give him or her all the information that might be required from them. I believe that the conclusions that we reached  after that lengthy process are the right ones. Time will tell, but our experience so far of the temporary adviser, who has worked in a similar way to that proposed for the commissioner, leads me to believe that that will be the case. In conclusion, I thank Sam Jones and Jim Johnston, the committee clerks, for steering us along that path. I look forward to the introduction in the Parliament of the committee report's conclusions.

As long as you are both brief.

Wind up, please.

Come to a close please, Mr McGrigor.

That is not a point of order. Please continue, Mr Macdonald.

Mr Russell, the content of speeches is not a matter for me or for this chamber.  Please continue, Mr Macdonald.

Do you still want to intervene, Mr Crawford?

Order.

No, I am afraid—

I have yet to answer your first point of order. Ms Curran, you can intervene only on the member who is speaking; you cannot intervene on an intervention. Have you finished, Ms Hyslop?

Order.

The first item of business is a Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party debate on motion S1M-1914, in the name of Mr David Davidson, on tourism. There are two amendments to the motion.

I call Margaret Smith.

I call Donald Gorrie.

We move to the open part of the debate.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S1M-1892, in the name of Alex Johnstone, on behalf of the Rural Development Committee, on that committee's "Report on the Impact of Changing Employment Patterns in Rural Scotland".

I call John Farqhuar Munro to wind up the debate on behalf of the Transport and the Environment Committee.

Please wind up, Mr Tosh.

Order.

Order. Mr Macdonald, I have to stop you for a second. Please wait until the member has finished his intervention before you continue—I presume that Mr MacAskill has now finished.

You are in your last minute.

Before I call Mr Macdonald, I ask all members to listen to other members' speeches. The level of noise in the chamber is becoming excessive.

Mr MacAskill, the member is not taking an intervention.

Please wind up.

Please come to a close, Mr Rumbles.

It is 10 minutes.

I already have, Mr Sheridan. Could you please come to a conclusion?

Close please, minister.

We move now to the open debate. A large number of members wish to speak in what is a relatively short debate, so I ask them to conclude their remarks on or before the four-minute mark.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S1M-1804, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Any member who wishes to speak against the motion should press their request-to-speak button now.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees: (a) the following programme of business— Wednesday 4 April 2001 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Executive Debate on Looked After Children and Adoption Services followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-1683 Richard Lochhead: Removal of Reliefs for Water and Sewerage Charges for Charitable Organisations Thursday 5 April 2001 9.30 am Executive Debate on Structural Funds followed by Ministerial Statement followed by Business Motion 2.30 pm Question Time 3.10 pm First Minister's Question Time 3.30 pm Ministerial Statement followed by Ministerial Statement followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-1511 Karen Whitefield: Airdrie to Bathgate Rail Link Wednesday 25 April 2001 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Executive Business 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 26 April 2001 9.30 am Scottish National Party Business followed by Business Motion  2.30 pm Question Time 3.10 pm First Minister's Question Time 3.30 pm Executive Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business and (b) that the Rural Development Committee reports to the Health and Community Care Committee by 24 April 2001 on The Feeding Stuffs (Sampling and Analysis) Amendment (Scotland) Regulations 2001 (SSI 2001/104).— [Mr Tom McCabe.]

No members have asked to speak against the motion. The question is, that motion S1M-1804, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.

Mr Canavan.

Mr Canavan, I must ask you to face your microphone when you are speaking, otherwise the chamber will not hear you and neither will the official reporters.

The question is, that amendment 2 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division. [Interruption.] There is a problem with the electronic voting system. Members who are just entering the chamber can relax, as we are having to delay the vote. The clerks are now resetting the system.

The result of the division is: For 32, Against 74, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 2 disagreed to.

That concludes consideration of amendments to the Education (Graduate Endowment and Student Support) (Scotland) (No 2) Bill.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S1M-1780, in the name of Wendy Alexander, which seeks agreement that the Education (Graduate Endowment and Student Support) (Scotland) (No 2) Bill be passed.

The question is, that amendment 11 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 31, Against 77, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 11 disagreed to.  Amendment 12 moved—[Dennis Canavan].

The question is, that amendment 12 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 46, Against 63, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 12 disagreed to.

Amendment 1, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, has been debated with amendment 4.

The question is, that amendment 1 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division: For 46, Against 62, Abstentions 1.  Amendment 1 disagreed to.

Amendment 2 is in the name of Kenny MacAskill.

I ask members to keep the background noise down when other members are speaking.

Before calling the next speaker, I appeal again to members to keep the level of background noise down in the chamber, as it is very distracting.

Several members want to speak on this group of amendments. I ask members to restrict their contributions to three minutes so that we can make some progress. I call Brian Monteith.

The question is, that amendment 8 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 46, Against 60, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 8 disagreed to.  Amendment 9 moved—[Dennis Canavan].

The question is, that amendment 9 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 46, Against 61, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 9 disagreed to.  Amendment 10 not moved.

Amendment 11, in the name of Dennis Canavan, is grouped with amendment 12.

Order. Just a second please, Mr Canavan. I remind members that interventions, by their nature, should be brief.

The question is, that amendment 4 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 43, Against 61, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 4 disagreed to.

I ask Brian Monteith to move amendment 5, which was debated with amendment 4.

Mr Monteith, I must interrupt you. I have a point of order.

Amendment 5 has been debated, but Mr Monteith can make a brief statement, which I hope is what he is doing.

The question is, that amendment 5 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 45, Against 59, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 5 disagreed to.

I ask Dennis Canavan to move amendment 6, which was debated with amendment 4.

Amendment 8, in the name of Dennis Canavan, is grouped with amendments 9 and 10. I ask Mr Canavan to move amendment 8 and to speak to the amendments in the group.

We move to stage 3 of the Education (Graduate Endowment and Student Support) (Scotland) (No 2) Bill. I shall begin by making the usual announcements about the procedures that will be followed. First of all we will deal with amendments to the bill. We will then move to a debate on the question that the bill be passed. For the first part of the proceedings, members should have a copy of the bill—SP Bill 22—the marshalled list containing all amendments selected for debate by the Presiding Officer, and the groupings that have been agreed. Amendments will be debated in groups where appropriate. Each amendment will be disposed of in turn and an amendment that has been moved may be withdrawn with the agreement of members present. It is, of course, possible for members not to move amendments should they so wish. The electronic voting system will be used for all divisions. I shall allow an extended voting time of two minutes for the first division that occurs after each debate on a group of amendments. Amendment 4 is grouped with amendments 5, 6, 7 and 1. I invite Dennis Canavan to move amendment 4 and to speak to the other amendments in the group.

I call Brian Monteith to speak to amendment 5 and the other amendments in the group.

Good morning. The first item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Euan Robson to move business motion S1M-1810, which is a timetabling motion for stage 3 of the Education (Graduate Endowment and Student Support) (Scotland) (No 2) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the time for consideration of Stage 3 of the Education (Graduate Endowment and Student Support) (Scotland) (No 2) Bill be allocated as follows, so that debate on each part of the proceedings, if not previously brought to a conclusion, shall be brought to a conclusion on the expiry of the specified period (calculated from the time when Stage 3 begins)— Group 1 to Group 3 - no later than 1 hour 30 minutes Group 4 - no later than 2 hours 30 minutes Motion to pass the Bill - no later than 3 hours.— [Euan Robson.]  Motion agreed to.

Order.

We now move to the closing speeches. I have noted that three members who wished to speak in the debate were not called.

I ask the member to wind up, please.

Wind up, please.

Mr Sheridan, please close.

I remind members that, when they exceed their time, other members are deprived of time at the end of the debate. That is not helpful.

Last minute.

Please wind up.

I see that Brian Adam is now handing out raspberries to the civil servants. Before his enthusiasm leads him to the public gallery, I indicate that neither the clerk, Mr Thomson, nor I was being rude when we refused the raspberries we were offered. We were merely trying to lead by example. The standing orders are very clear on the matter of food in the chamber.

Ms McGugan, I will halt you for a moment. I ask members who are leaving the chamber to do so quickly and quietly.

Having previously been in receipt of a cake from Dorothy-Grace Elder at another members' business debate, I am very glad that this evening I am not being singled out for blandishments from the SNP.

Yes please. You have five minutes.

Order.

It is entirely up to you.

No.

Wind up, please.

I now call Lyndsay McIntosh to close for the Scottish Conservative party.

Please wind up.

Please be quick.

You are close to the five-minute limit, Ms MacDonald. This must be the last intervention that you accept.

I remind Ms MacDonald that she must come to a close.

Please wind up.

Come to a close, please.

Before I call the next speaker, I remind members that the time limit for speeches is five minutes. It would be helpful if members would stick to that limit, as that would allow me to call all members who wish to contribute to the debate.

Together with Mr Reid and other members of the Scottish Parliament, I was privileged to be able to  attend tartan day in Washington last year. Looking around the chamber, I see that a number of the members who were there last year are with us this afternoon. I was struck by the hospitality that we were shown and by the interest in America in maintaining the Scottish heritage that many Americans recognise as their own. I would like to highlight a number of points that show that the connection continues to this day, and to echo the history that Mr Reid has so eloquently outlined to us. In doing so, I want to mention my home city of Glasgow. The links between Glasgow and America go back to the very beginning of that great nation. By 1730, trade from Glasgow to America was fully established. Glasgow's tobacco lords had cornered the market, in the process becoming Glasgow's—and Scotland's—first millionaires. Unfortunately, trade was curtailed by the civil war, but Glasgow's shipyards were prized for their ability to construct packet-ships, which I am told were used by both sides in the civil war. They were built in Glasgow and dispatched across the Atlantic. After the civil war, shipbuilding on the Clyde, which was recognised as being top quality, quickly became Scotland's major export to north America. The Glasgow of today has many remnants of that past, both in the fine buildings that adorn our city centre—especially the Merchant City—and in the place names. Virginia Street, for example, is obviously connected with that particular trade. When I looked for similar connections in America, I was intrigued to find that the idea of naming places or streets after one's homeland is very much part of American culture. In fact, I was surprised to find no fewer than eight Aberdeens, eight Edinburghs and seven Glasgows in the United States. I am sure that, wherever we were to land in America, we would, as George Reid said, feel very much at home. It is interesting to note that it was a Scot—Logie Baird—who, in 1928, first transmitted television pictures across the Atlantic. It is fitting that today's debate is being recorded and webcast for an American audience. The Americans would be proud of the way in which, since the first days of the Parliament, we have embraced new technology. I will come back to that in a moment. America is also proud of Scotland because there are so many women members of our Parliament. When we were in Washington last year, that was one of the main areas that people expressed an interest in and wanted more information about. Given that the idea of international women's day originated in America, at the socialist women's international, it is understandable why that is. In recent years, Glasgow has had other links  with America. We in Glasgow were very much involved in the repatriation of a ghost dance shirt that had been taken from one of those killed at Wounded Knee. Glasgow City Council negotiated with the Wounded Knee Survivors Association and was able to come to an agreement that allowed the important artefact to be returned to its homeland. Today, I was told of an interesting piece of history. Alexander Hamilton may have drafted the US constitution, which declares that all men are created equal, but it was black Scots Americans—the descendants of African slaves and Scottish settlers—who helped to give substance to those aspirations two centuries later. One of them was Professor Joseph Douglas. I do not have time to go into Professor Douglas's entire curriculum vitae, which is long and distinguished, but I will say that he is a lifelong campaigner in America for higher education for all and was the first black professor of engineering at Penn State University. I wanted to mention Professor Douglas not only because of his Scots ancestry, but because he ties us in with the idea of using new technology. Professor Douglas's daughter, Marion, works for the United Nations in Macedonia. Having watched a meeting of our Equal Opportunities Committee in February this year, she brought Professor Douglas's heritage to our attention. She decided that, since she had, as it were, found the Scottish Parliament, she would tell us about her own heritage. It is interesting to note that new technology is beginning to reap dividends in promoting the culture of Scotland and the Parliament of Scotland as far afield as Macedonia.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it plans to improve the delivery of health services to homeless people. (S1O-3132)

I am grateful for the minister's answer and I welcome the new initiative. However, will the minister assure me that the complex health needs of homeless people will be addressed on the ground—or on the street—where help is badly needed? I draw his attention to the great need that many homeless people have for services to which he or I might give much less priority, such as chiropody and podiatry.

Will you wind up, please.

The member needs to wind up.

Mr Mundell, please make your point of order. I cannot allow you to make a speech.

You will have to take that matter up with Mr Finnie, as it is not appropriate for me to prejudge what tomorrow's business is likely to be. We are drawing today's business to a close, but you have made your point.  Meeting closed at 18:13.

Very quickly.

Order.

The member must come to a close.

Please wind up.

Very quickly.

Close now please.

We move to the open part of the debate. As was indicated previously, we have a large number of speakers. I will rigorously enforce the four-minute rule.

The next item of business is the stage 3 debate on the Leasehold Casualties (Scotland) Bill. As there are no amendments to the bill, we move straight to the general debate on motion S1M-1721, in the name of Mr Adam Ingram, which seeks agreement that the bill be passed.

We now move to a brief open debate. I ask members not to exceed the time limits for speeches.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S1M-1719, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 14 March 2001 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Stage 1 Debate on the Housing (Scotland) Bill followed by Financial Resolution in respect of the Housing (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.30 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-1464 Des McNulty: Clydebank and the Blitz Thursday 15 March 2001 9.30 am Executive Debate on Freedom of Information followed by Business Motion 2.30 pm Question Time 3.10 pm First Minister's Question Time 3.30 pm Executive Debate on Credit Unions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-1670 Mr George Reid: National Tartan Day Wednesday 21 March 2001 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Stage 1 Debate on the Convention Rights (Compliance) (Scotland) Bill followed by Financial Resolution in respect of the Convention Rights (Compliance) (Scotland) Bill followed  by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-1650 Kay Ullrich: School Swimming Lessons Thursday 22 March 2001 9.30 am Social Justice Committee Debate on Drug Misuse and Deprived Communities  followed by Business Motion 2.30 pm Question Time 3.10 pm First Minister's Question Time 3.30 pm Executive Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business— [Tavish Scott.]

No members have asked to speak against the motion. The question is, that motion S1M-1719, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Tavish Scott to move motion S1M-1728, which is a timetabling motion for stage 3 of the Leasehold Casualties (Scotland) Bill. Any member who wishes to speak against this motion should press their request-to-speak button now.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the time for consideration of Stage 3 of the Leasehold Casualties (Scotland) Bill be allocated as follows, so that debate on the proceedings, if not previously brought to a conclusion, shall be brought to a conclusion on the expiry of the specified period (calculated from the time when Stage 3 begins)— Motion to pass the Bill—no later than 30 minutes.— [Tavish Scott.]

As no member has asked to speak against the motion, I will put the question to the chamber. The question is, that motion S1M-1728, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.

I ask Tavish Scott to move the second Parliamentary Bureau motion, S1M-1727, which seeks agreement to change decision time to 5.30 pm on Wednesday 14 March 2001. If any member wishes to speak against this motion, they should press their request-to-speak button now.

No member has asked to speak against the motion, so I will put the question to the chamber. The question is, that motion S1M-1727, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.

We move to the next item of business, which is a Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party debate on motion S1M-1726, in the name of Alex Johnstone, on the crisis in rural Scotland, and two amendments to that motion. Mr Johnstone has his breath back and so I call him to speak to and move the motion. He has 10 minutes.

Order.

Order. Please continue, minister. I ask for order from other members.

Order. The minister said that she is not giving way, Mr Lochhead. [Interruption.] Order.

May I continue please, Mr Ewing?

Please sit down, minister. I am about to take a point of order  from Mr Ewing. It is difficult for me to hear his point of order, as members are continuing to talk while I try to acknowledge him. Please proceed, Mr Ewing.

Mr Ewing's point is not a point of order. We are not hearing a ministerial statement. This is a Conservative party debate. [Interruption.] I ask members to observe some order as we reach the close of the debate. Continue, minister.

I advise members that I am taking note of their comments. Some of the comments verge on being unparliamentary.

Mr Salmond, I  am not conducting a conversation with you across the chamber. I am making the point that some members' behaviour and language verge on being unparliamentary.

I said some members, Mr Salmond.

You are in your last minute, Mr Robson.

The member is in her last minute. I ask Maureen Macmillan to continue.

I will call Brian Adam if he can confine his remarks to one minute.

You are.

I can take a point of order, but I cannot take a point of clarification.

A large number of members want to take part in this evening's debate, so I ask members to restrict their speeches to the four-minute limit. If they do, I will be able to call everyone who wants to speak.

I must interrupt you, Ms Curran. The level of noise in the chamber is excessive. I ask members to do Ms Curran the courtesy of listening to what she has to say.

Ms Curran, we  have a point of order.

I repeat my injunction to members in the chamber to keep the background noise down and allow members who wish to listen to do so.

Before I call the minister, I remind all members that their comments should be directed through the Presiding Officer rather than at one another. We would progress much better if we were to adhere to that rule.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S1M-1709, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out the business programme.

No member has asked to speak against the motion.

The question is, that motion S1M-1709 be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.

You have 12 minutes.

I am sorry to interrupt you. The clock did not start when you did, so I am afraid that you are further ahead than you appear to be.

Please wind up.

Please wind up now.

Quickly, please.

A number of members want to speak in this debate so I ask members called from here on in to restrict their comments to about three minutes.

The next item of business is motion S1M-1664, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out the business programme. Any member who wishes to speak against the motion should press their request-to-speak button now.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees: (a) the following programme of business— Wednesday 28 February 2001 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Executive Debate on Sustainable Development 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-1251 Mr Kenneth Gibson : Discrimination Against Teaching Centres of Artistic Excellence Thursday 1 March 2001 9.30 am Executive Debate on Primary Care followed by Business Motion 2.30 pm Question Time 3.10 pm First Minister's Question Time 3.30 pm Executive Business followed by Executive Motion on the Culture and Recreation Bill - UK Legislation followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-1263 George Lyon: Caledonian MacBrayne Wednesday 7 March 2001 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Stage 1 Debate on the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Bill followed by Financial Resolution in respect of the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 8 March 2001 9.30 am Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party Business followed by Business Motion 2.30 pm Question Time 3.10 pm First Minister's Question Time 3.30 pm Executive Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business and (b) that the Justice 1 Committee reports to the Justice 2 Committee by 9 March 2001 on the draft Civil Defence (Scotland) Regulations 2001 and the European Communities (Matrimonial Jurisdiction and Judgments) (Scotland) Regulations 2001 (SSI 2001/36)— [Tavish Scott.]

One member wishes to speak against the motion.

The question is, that motion S1M-1664, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 27, Against 1, Abstentions 1.  Motion agreed to.

You are in your final minute, Mr Mundell.

Mr Mundell has finished his speech and so cannot take an intervention.

Mr Mundell has finished partly because I indicated too early that he had only one minute left. I apologise for that, Mr Mundell, and I will ensure that the time is made up to you on a future occasion.

You might find that that phrase comes back to haunt you in future debates, Mr Mundell.

Order. Members must please sit down.

Order.

Will the member wind up?

Thank you for your consideration.

There are three members who wish to speak. If all three restrict their speeches to about three minutes, I will be able to accommodate them all.

I remind members that speeches should be addressed through the chair.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S1M-1624, in the name of Tommy Sheridan, on the national health service. There is one amendment to the motion.

I hope to call as many as I can. Obviously, that will be dictated largely by the amount of time that each member takes and more names are appearing on my screen as I speak. To be honest, it is almost impossible to predict how many members I will be able to call. I will monitor the situation and try to call as many as I can.

Will you wind up, please?

Another day.

Very quickly.

Will the member wind up, please?

A number of members still wish to be called. I have already mentioned Michael McMahon, who will speak next. I will call Gil Paterson if both he and Mr McMahon keep to the time limits.

I call Tommy Sheridan, to be followed by Michael McMahon.

Please wind up, Mr Davidson.

The member is closing, Mr Rumbles.

Please come to a close, Mr Davidson.

Yes, I can hear it.

To ask the Scottish Executive what measures are being taken to encourage local authorities to provide free fruit to pre-school and primary school pupils, in line with the initiative recently introduced to a number of schools by Glasgow City Council. (S1O-2865)

Will the minister join me in congratulating Glasgow City Council on the initiative, which follows a previous initiative to provide children with breakfast at 9 am, before the primary school day starts. If successful, the pilot scheme will be rolled out to approximately 60,500 primary and pre-school children in Glasgow. Will the minister say what proposals the Executive has to develop that kind of initiative in the rest of Scotland?

Before I call the next speaker, I ask members to observe a little more courtesy when other members are speaking. The noise in the chamber is quite loud.

Next time.

Before I call the minister to wind up the debate, I thank those members who spoke in the debate for the inspiration that they have given me. If I tell you that I am replying to a toast to the lassies that is to be proposed by our colleague Frank McAveety, you will understand why I need the inspiration. I call Allan Wilson.

In election times, I think that that is called treating.

Thank you very much.

I am not sure how many rules in the standing orders we have broken. I call Jamie Stone.

I must admit that that is the second time at a members' business debate that I have been obliged to turn a blind ear to what is going on in the chamber.

I was about to say that I may have been able to make an obvious exception in this case, but Mr Ewing beat me to it.

Presiding Officers, as of habit, review most of their decisions, so I am sure that we can comply with your request, Mr Russell. We move to decision time. I am sorry—I am the one who is confused now. We move to members' business.

I have taken your point, Mr Raffan.

The final item of business today is a members' business debate on motion S1M-1506, in the name of David Mundell, on Robert Burns.  Motion debated,  That the Parliament recognises the immeasurable contribution which the life and works of Robert Burns have made to the history and culture of Scotland; commends the activities of the Robert Burns World Federation, individual Burns' Clubs and the many other organisations and individuals who are dedicated to preserving and promoting Burns' memory and work in Scotland and abroad, and believes that the Scottish Executive should do all it can to ensure that the maximum educational, cultural and economic, particularly from tourism, benefits are gained by the people of Scotland from Robert Burns' global legacy.

The first question is, that amendment S1M-1584.1.1, in the name of Mr Murray Tosh, which seeks to amend amendment S1M-1584.1, in the name of Sarah Boyack, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

I hear dissent, therefore there will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 53, Against 69, Abstentions 0.  Amendment to the amendment disagreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S1M-1584.1, in the name of Sarah Boyack, which seeks to amend motion S1M-1584, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on roads of Scotland, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 86, Against 35, Abstentions 1.  Amendment agreed to.

The third question is, that motion S1M-1584, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on roads of Scotland, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 88, Against 34, Abstentions 1.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved, That the Parliament recognises the strong concerns expressed by the local government consortia and trade unions about the award of the contracts for the management and maintenance of the trunk road network; in particular notes their concerns about the contract assessment process, the future operation of the trunk road services and the potential knock-on implications for local authorities, and calls upon the Executive to continue further exploration of all outstanding issues.

The fourth question is, that amendment S1M-1589.2, in the name of Dr Richard Simpson, which seeks to amend motion S1M-1589, in the name of Mr John Swinney, on personal care for the elderly, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 65, Against 55, Abstentions 1.  Amendment agreed to.

As amendment S1M-1589.2 has been agreed to, amendment S1M-1589.1 has been pre-empted and falls. The next question is, that motion S1M-1589, in the name of Mr John Swinney, on personal care for the elderly, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 65, Against 20, Abstentions 36.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved, That the Parliament recognises that there are benefits in providing free personal care for the elderly; welcomes as a major step in this direction the further package of proposals announced by the Executive on 24 January 2001 which set out a process that will lead to a substantial extension of free personal care; notes that there are significant issues of cost and practicality in moving further and calls upon the Executive to broaden the terms of reference of the Development Group to require it to consider the practicalities, costs and implications of providing free personal care for all and to report by August 2001 with proposals that will inform the Executive's expenditure decisions for 2002-03 and beyond.

The final question is, that motion S1M-1574, in the name of Angus MacKay, on the general principles of the Budget (Scotland) (No 2) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

We have dissent, so there will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 67, Against 0, Abstentions 52.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Budget (Scotland) (No 2) Bill.

I call Nicola Sturgeon to speak on behalf of the Scottish National Party.

Order.

The chamber will come to order and members will refrain from trying to give me instructions. Ms Sturgeon, you may continue. I expect silence from the other members.

Before we proceed, I must insist that members hear out members quietly and with courtesy.

We will now move to decision time.

Mr Swinney, I was about to take Mr Raffan's point of order.

We have to move to decision time.

Can we have a point of order?

That is not a point of order, Mrs Smith.

Order.

Order.

Order. [Interruption.] Mr Cleland, I will have to suspend the meeting if you do not leave the gallery.

I am in a position to answer that point of order, Mr Neil.

I have received a request for an urgent ministerial statement to be made. I intend to allow that statement to be made before decision time. As is required by standing orders, I will then allow a few brief questions to be asked of the minister. We will then proceed to decision time.

I will hear Ms Marwick's point of order.

Order. I cannot hear the member.

As I have already said, I intend to take the ministerial statement before decision time. I am now going to call Mr Tom McCabe—

I hope that it is not the same point of order.

I cannot, and nor can my colleagues, predict what issues may arise in the future. However, I will say to Ms MacDonald that there is provision in the standing orders for ministerial statements of an urgent or emergency nature to be made.

We have deemed that the statement this afternoon is of such a nature. Members cannot make a point of order while I am still speaking. That is a matter of common courtesy and, apart from that, what I am saying may pertain to the point that the members are trying to make. I was saying to Ms MacDonald that there is provision in the standing orders for this statement to be taken this afternoon. It is our intention to take it.

All I can tell you, Mr Neil, is that the decision to hear the statement was agreed by the Presiding Officers after your point of order earlier this afternoon. We do not know that the press knew of it earlier than that. We have no way of knowing whether the press knew of it earlier. If we find that the press did know earlier, that would obviously be dealt with accordingly. However, that is not our information at this stage.

Given that we are now past the scheduled time for decision time and that we need to conclude decision time shortly, I intend to take one member from each of the major parties. I now call Mr McCabe—

I am not setting a precedent, Mr Sheridan, because we review each case on its merits. This afternoon, I will take one member from each of the major parties.

I hope that this is a different point.

We could hardly judge it to be of an urgent nature if we did not know the topic to be covered. We do know the topic to be covered; we do not know the content. We are, however, advised that it is germane to today's proceedings. We have therefore decided to take it. I intend to call Mr McCabe now—

I remind you of the rules governing questions to the chair about rulings. However, as a matter of courtesy I will say that the subject under discussion has been of great interest to members of the Parliament and to the public. In such circumstances it is appropriate to take the statement at this time. I intend to move to take the statement.

I have the power to change that and I propose to do so.

If we move to the statement we will find that out— [Interruption.] Let me finish. Suffice it to say that the information we have leads us to that conclusion. [Interruption.]

I said that the information we have leads us to that conclusion.

I call Mr Tom McCabe to make a brief statement.

Before the deputy minister resumes his speech, I ask members to keep down the level of background conversation.

I call Dr Elaine Murray.

Question 6 has been withdrawn.

Questions 8 and 9 have been withdrawn.

I ask members to keep the background noise down and to show some respect for the people who are speaking.

I do not think that that is particularly relevant.

I must again ask members to keep the background noise down. Members at the back are having difficulty hearing what is being said.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S1M-1581, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out the business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees: (a) the following programme of business— Wednesday 31 January 2001 2.30 pm Time for Reflection - The Reverend Ernest Levy, Member of the Jewish Clergy followed by Stage 1 Debate on the Education (Graduate Endowment and Student Support) (Scotland) (No 2) Bill followed by Executive Debate on the Outworking Bill - UK Legislation followed by Financial Resolution on the Education (Graduate Endowment and Student Support) (Scotland) (No 2) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-1579 Ian Jenkins: Borders Textile Industry Thursday 1 February 2001 9.30 am Executive Debate on Working Together for Scotland - a Programme for Government followed by Business Motion 2.30 pm Question Time 3.10 pm First Minister's Question Time 3.30 pm Executive Debate on the Strategy for Enterprise followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-1575 Roseanna Cunningham: Tayside Acute Services Review Consultation Wednesday 7 February 2001 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Executive Debate on Local Government Finance (Scotland) Order 2001 followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time  followed by Members' Business Thursday 8 February 2001 9.30 am Scottish Socialist Party and Green Party Business followed by Business Motion 2.30 pm Question Time 3.10 pm First Minister's Question Time 3.30 pm Stage 3 Debate on the Budget (Scotland) (No 2) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business (b) that the Justice 2 Committee reports to the Justice 1 Committee by 2 February 2001 on the draft Legal Aid (Scotland) Act 1986 Amendment Regulations 2001 and on the draft Advice and Assistance (Assistance by Way of Representation) (Scotland) Amendment (No 2) Regulations 2001 and that the Justice 1 Committee reports to the Justice 2 Committee by 2 February 2001 on the draft Number of Inner House Judges (Variation) Order 2001; and (c) that Stage 1 of the Convention Rights (Compliance) (Scotland) Bill be completed by 21 March 2001.— [Tavish Scott.]

That is a matter for the Parliamentary Bureau, but Tavish Scott may want to reply.

The question is, that motion S1M-1581 be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.

Malcolm Chisholm replied on behalf of the Executive; no one replied on behalf of Richard Simpson and his amendment.

You are indeed. You must close now.

I call Margo MacDonald.

Please close, Ms MacDonald.

There are still two members who wish to speak. I can accommodate them both, if they will be brief.

Order.

I should explain to the chamber that I will now call Mr Sheridan, who will formally move his amendment. He will speak during the wind-up speeches at the end of the debate.

You are misquoting me, Mr Rumbles. I did not mention the word "Executive".

I have accepted two amendments: one in your name, Mr Sheridan, and one in the name of Dr Richard Simpson.

It is always open to members to draft motions including such information. That opportunity was open to you, Mr Crawford.

Let me continue please, if you do not mind, Mr Sheridan. There are opportunities for members to produce amendments to motions at fairly late notice, but it is always our intention to be able to give members as much notice as we possibly can of amendments. That is why, this morning, we, unfortunately, had to rule out Mr Sheridan's amendment.

Is this another point of order, or is it on the same point?

What I said earlier to Mr Crawford stands, but I would add that it is open to a member who so wishes to check with the chamber office to find out whether amendments have been lodged. The chamber office will co-operate with members to ensure that that process flows as smoothly as possible.

The next item of business is a Scottish National Party debate on motion S1M-1589, in the name of Mr John Swinney, on personal care for the elderly. There are two amendments to the motion. One of the amendments appears in the business bulletin. Copies of the second amendment are available at the back of the chamber, in the usual place.

Several members still wish to speak. I can accommodate all of them if they limit their comments to just under four minutes.

I call Phil Gallie to open for the Conservatives.

I am sorry. There has been a change. I call Lyndsay McIntosh to open for the Conservatives.

Does the minister agree that an initiative that should be copied throughout the country is fruit plus, which was launched on Monday at St Cuthbert's Primary School, in my constituency? Agencies such as the Greater Glasgow Health Board, Glasgow City Council and Sainsbury's are working to provide children in primary schools and other centres throughout the Glasgow area with several pieces of fruit each week. Does she further agree that the inclusion in the curriculum of packages that introduce the healthy consumption of fruit and vegetables to children's diet should be considered as a step forward?

Please wind up.

The member is winding up, Mr Crawford.

Come to a close, please.

Mr Munro, come to a close.

Mr Munro, please close now.

Mr Munro.

I must ask members to observe the time much more strictly. This is a short debate and I will be able to give members a maximum of three minutes for speeches in the open part of the debate.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S1M-1547, in the name of Murray Tosh, on route action plans and priority trans-European network road links, and one amendment to that motion. I invite members who wish to speak to press their request-to-speak buttons now. This is likely to be a short debate, and I advise members in advance that they may be restricted to three minutes.

I am sorry, Mr Tosh—I have not called you to speak yet. Please give me a few seconds.

My apologies—I now call Mr Tosh to speak to and move the motion.

Before we go back to Iain Smith, I must make two points. Iain Smith should not invite interventions from other members and interventions should be brief.

You have spoken for five minutes.

Yes.

I would now be prepared to entertain a motion that we should extend the meeting by up to 10 minutes.  Motion moved,  That the debate be extended for up to 10 minutes.— [Mr Kenneth Macintosh.]  Motion agreed to.

If the number of members who have indicated that they wish to speak remains about the same, it is likely that the debate can be contained within the allocated time of 45 minutes. If, however, it looks as though that will not be possible, I will indicate that I might be able to accept a motion to extend the debate.

Wind up, please.

Quickly, please.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S1M-1529, in the name of Malcolm Chisholm, on the UK Health and Social Care Bill.

We are running ahead of time and the next debate is likely to start a little early.

We now move to closing speeches. I call Euan Robson to close for the Liberal Democrats.

We now move to the open debate. I can allocate up to five minutes for each speaker.

We can now resume today's meeting. I call Euan Robson.

We now move to the open part of the debate. I ask members who wish to speak to press their request-to-speak buttons again now. I am afraid that we lost the information on who had requested to speak when the system crashed. I call Alasdair Morgan, who will be followed by Pauline McNeill.

Although this is the new year, old habits unfortunately seem to be dying hard. I am afraid that there are some technical difficulties with the Parliament's sound system this afternoon. I will have to suspend this meeting of the Parliament for five minutes so that the problems can be addressed.

You have a minute and a half.

As a large number of members want to speak in the debate, I ask members to keep their speeches to four minutes.

The question is, that amendment 70 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division, for which I will allow two minutes.

The result of the division is: For 2, Against 87, Abstentions 1.  Amendment 70 disagreed to.

Members will be aware that we are approaching the time to suspend the meeting. I will do so now and we will reconvene at 2.30 pm to safeguard the later debate.

I remind members that their remarks should be addressed through the chair.

The question is, that amendment 69 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 15, Against 80, Abstentions 1.  Amendment 69 disagreed to.

I ask the minister to move amendment 45, which is grouped with amendment 46.

We now come to amendment 70, in the name of Robin Harper.

Mr Rumbles, you cannot encourage interventions. Please move on.

Before calling the next speaker, I ask members to observe the rule that they should not intervene from a sedentary position during other members' speeches.

I call David McLetchie to speak to amendment 69, which is grouped with amendments 40 to 44.

We now come to amendment 66.

We now come to amendment 36, which is grouped with amendments 37 and 38.

We now come to amendment 67.

We now come to amendment 68, which is grouped with amendments 39 and 74.

Amendment 18,  in the name of the minister, is grouped with amendment 19.

Amendment 21, in the name of the minister, is grouped with amendments 22, 30, 34 and 35.

Amendment 23, in the name of the minister, is grouped with amendments 61 and 62.

Amendment 63, in the name of the minister, is grouped with amendments 24, 25 and 28.

Amendment 26, in the name of the minister, is grouped with amendments 27 and 29.

We now come to amendment 64, which is grouped with amendments 65 and 31.

We now come to amendment 32, which is grouped with amendment 33.

Amendment 6, in the name of Bruce  Crawford, is grouped with amendments 7 and 8.

The question is, that amendment 6 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division. As this is the first division in this group, I will allow two minutes for the vote.

The result of the division is: For 19, Against 66, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 6 disagreed to.  Amendment 7 moved—[Fiona McLeod].

The question is, that amendment 7 be agreed to. Are members agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 18, Against 66, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 7 disagreed to.

Amendment 9 is in the name of the minister and is grouped with amendments 10 to 16 and 20.

Amendment 59, in the name of the minister, is grouped with amendments 17 and 60.

As no member has requested to speak against the motion, I will put the question. The question is, that business motion S1M-1466, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.

The business bulletin contains an error. It suggests that today's meeting will resume at 3.30 pm; that should read 2.30 pm.

We will now have questions on the minister's statement, for which I will allow approximately 25 minutes.

Understandably, many members wish to ask questions on this statement, so I ask members to keep their questions as succinct as possible.

With the proviso that he will ask a one-line question, I call Mr Sheridan.

That was more than one line.

I apologise to the six members whom I could not call, but we must now move on.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S1M-1466, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to the business programme that was agreed on 7 December and the programme of business for Wednesday 20 December 2000.

It is not for members to seek interventions.

The next item of business is a statement by Susan Deacon on the health plan. The minister will take questions at the end of her statement and there should therefore be no interventions. I invite members who wish to speak to press their request-to-speak buttons now.

That is not a point of order, Mr Neil. I draw members' attention to my earlier comment about the minister's statement being available. I am sorry—I inadvertently gave members the wrong information. The statement was not available to members at that point; the NHS plan was. That said, the minister's statement is now available to any member who wishes a copy at the Scottish Parliament information centre desk at the back of the chamber.

We now come to winding-up speeches. I apologise to the three members who had hoped to speak in the debate and whom it has not been possible to call.

Very briefly, please.

I have to ask you to wind up, Dr Simpson.

Before I call the next speakers, I advise members that copies of the ministerial statement are now available at the Scottish Parliament information centre desk at the back of the chamber.

Order.

Order. I have still to respond to Dr Simpson's point of order.

Dr Simpson is absolutely right. Ms Elder has already been advised that she should stick to the terms of the motion. I would be grateful if she did that now.

Please may I deal with one point of order before the next? Thank you. Dr Simpson's substantive point is correct. I would be grateful if Ms Elder stuck to the motion, as she has twice been asked to do. However, I ask Dr Simpson to withdraw his previous remark.

I thank Mr Neil for reading out the motion. I have it in front of me. I ask Ms Elder to stick strictly to the terms of the motion, which I am sure she has read.

Before I call the next speaker, I want to make it clear that, in a motion as wide ranging as this, members may of course raise points of more general interest, but they must be in the context of the motion.

Elaine Thomson will wind up for the committee.

That requires the agreement of the chair—the chair does not agree, because a motion on that very issue has already been voted on this morning. I call the final opening speaker, Mr George Lyon.

I will not accept a motion on that issue. I call Mr George Lyon, as the final speaker in the opening part of the debate.

I call Jack McConnell to open for the Executive.

We now come to the closing speeches in this debate. I apologise to those members whom I was not able to call. Mr Gorrie has four minutes in which to close for the Liberal Democrats.

We move now to the open part of the debate. A large number of members have indicated that they wish to speak, so I ask members to keep their contributions to four minutes.

Please wind up.

Very briefly, please.

I call Keith Raffan. As I said, Mr Raffan, you have five minutes.

You have one minute left, Mr Chisholm.

I am sorry, but you have only 10 minutes.

I should explain that the time limit for opening and closing speeches depends on the length of the debate. As a strict rule, in a debate of this length, the opening speaker has 10 minutes. I am sorry if the minister thought otherwise.

I would have told you before you spoke, but for your information you get five minutes.

The minister will address that at the close of the debate. I call Mr Keith Harding. You have seven minutes.

We now move to closing speeches. I call Dr Elaine Murray to wind up on behalf of the Labour party.

Please wind up.

Please come to a close.

indicated disagreement.

In order to accommodate all the members who want to speak, I ask the remaining members to limit their speeches to three minutes.

There is only one question to be put as a result of today's business. The question is, that motion S1M-1401, in the name of Tommy Sheridan, which seeks agreement that the Abolition of Poindings and Warrant Sales Bill be passed, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the Abolition of Poindings and Warrant Sales Bill be passed.

The final item of business is a members' business debate on motion S1M-1286, in the name of Tommy Sheridan, on a Glasgow light rail scheme. The debate will be concluded without any question being put after 30 minutes.  Motion debated,  That the Parliament believes that the construction of a light rail scheme in Glasgow would provide enormous benefits to the city in relation to jobs, improving the environment, tackling congestion and related pollution and regenerating the city as a tourist attraction; resolves therefore to reappraise urgently the Strathclyde Passenger Transport Executive's private legislation proposal for a light rail scheme promoted in 1994 but rejected by four Parliamentary Commissioners, appointed under the Private Legislation Procedure (Scotland) Act 1936, in 1996, and agrees that this matter deserves to be investigated by the Minister for Transport and the Environment immediately.

I call Tommy Sheridan to respond to the points raised in the debate.

We now move to the open part of the debate.

I call Phil Gallie. I apologise to him, as I should have called him earlier.

Mr Gray, you must wind up.

You must wind up now, Mr Gray.

Before proceeding, I must— [Interruption.]  I remind all members that they should not speak to each other across the rows of benches, whether to members of their own party or to those of other parties. Earlier, I said that I would give speaking times and I have indicated what the times will be for opening speakers. Members should keep to those times; otherwise I will not be able to call all the members who wish to speak in the debate. I now call Alex Neil, who has four minutes.

Mr Jenkins, Tommy Sheridan is not taking an intervention.

The question is, that amendment 2 be agreed to. Are members agreed?

There will be a division. As this is the first division in this grouping, I will allow two minutes for the vote.

The result of the division is: For 36, Against 71, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 2 disagreed to.  Amendment 3 moved—[Mr McAllion].

The question is, that amendment 3 be agreed to. Are members agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 38, Against 65, Abstentions 2.  Amendment 3 disagreed to.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S1M-1401, in the name of Tommy Sheridan, which seeks agreement that the Abolition of Poindings and Warrant Sales Bill be passed. I call Tommy Sheridan to speak to and move the motion.

Mr Neil, you must begin to wind up now.

I remind visitors in the public gallery that they should not applaud or make noise between speeches.

I shall begin with the usual announcements about the procedures that will be followed this afternoon. First, we shall deal with amendments to the bill, before moving on to a debate on the question that the bill be passed. For the first part, members should have copies of the bill—SP Bill 3A—as amended at stage 2, the marshalled list containing the three amendments selected by the Presiding Officer for this debate and the groupings that the Presiding Officer has agreed. Amendments will be debated in two groups. Each amendment will be disposed of in turn. An amendment that has been moved may be withdrawn with the agreement of the members present. It is, of course, possible for members not to move amendments should they so wish. The electronic voting system will be used for all divisions. I shall allow an extended voting period of two minutes for the first division that occurs after each debate on a group of amendments. I call the Minister for Finance and Local Government to speak to and move amendment 1, which is in a group on its own.

I call the minister to wind up on amendment 1.

The next amendment for debate is amendment 2, in the name of Tommy Sheridan, which is grouped with amendment 3. If amendment 2 is agreed to, amendment 3 cannot be called.

The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is the Reverend Alison Fuller, rector of St Columba's by the Castle Episcopal Church, Edinburgh.

The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motions. I call Tavish Scott to move business motion S1M-1429, which is a timetabling motion for today's stage 3 debate on the Abolition of Poindings and Warrant Sales Bill. Any member who wishes to speak against the motion should press their request-to-speak button now.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the time for consideration of Stage 3 of the Abolition of Poindings and Warrant Sales Bill be allotted as follows, so that debate on each part of the proceedings, if not previously brought to a conclusion, shall be brought to a conclusion on the expiry of the specified period (calculated from the time when Stage 3 begins)— Group 1 to Group 2 - no later than 1 hour 55 minutes Motion to pass the Bill - no later than 2 hours 25 minutes— [Tavish Scott.]

As no member has asked to speak against the motion, I will now put the question to the chamber. The question is, that motion S1M-1429, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, be agreed to. Are we agreed?  Motion agreed to.

I call Duncan Hamilton to wind up for the SNP. You have up to  five minutes.

We now move to closing speeches. I call Jamie Stone to wind up on behalf of the Liberal Democrats.

Given that for many Scots, British Sign Language is their first language, and that the inability of many of the people they meet in their daily lives to converse with them in their own language is a significant problem which leads to their social exclusion, will the minister consider proposals to include British Sign Language in the curriculum of  Scotland's schools next year?

The next item of business is motion S1M-1403, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out the business programme.

No member has asked to speak against the motion. I will therefore put the question to the chamber. The question is, that motion S1M-1403, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.

Some time ago, Mr Campbell.

Please begin to wind up, Mr Wallace.

Mr Wallace, please wind up.

Mr Wallace, you must come to a close.

If time allows, I am quite prepared to make allowances for members who take interventions, but I cannot allow speeches to go on for quite as long as that one did.

We are a little ahead of schedule, so I will be fairly lax about time, particularly if members take interventions. However, I hope that if I indicate that members should wind up, they will.

We now move to the open part of the debate. I call Maureen Macmillan. I am sorry—I meant to say John Home Robertson. [Laughter.] I apologise to both members.

Order. Members will refrain from shouting at one another across the chamber. Please proceed, Mr Lochhead.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S1M-1361, in the name of Ross Finnie, on the general principles of the Salmon Conservation (Scotland) Bill.

Janis Hughes will close the debate for the Procedures Committee.

We now move to the open part of the debate. I ask members who wish to speak to press their request-to-speak buttons now. Given the number of members who wish to speak in the debate, I suspect that I will have to ask members to restrict their speeches to three minutes. Shorter speeches would be even better.

Wind up, please?

We now move to the open part of the debate.

Mr Wilson is winding up.

A unique distinction, Mr Johnston.

We move now to the closing speeches. I apologise to members who wanted to speak but were not called.

I now call Iain Smith, but I must ask him to keep his remarks as brief as possible.

Please come to a close on the point.

Please come to  a close.

I will not be able to call all the members who wish to speak because of the length of time that members who do speak are taking.

I must indicate to members that speeches are slipping over the four-minute time limit. As we have more members than we have time for, I ask members to keep their speeches as short as possible.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S1M-1358, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out the business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees (a) the following programme of business— Wednesday 22 November 2000 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Executive Debate on Renewing Local Government Finance 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-1243 John Scott: SSSI, SPA and SAC Designations Thursday 23 November 2000 9.30 am Standards Committee Debate on its Report on Investigation of Complaints and the Appointment of a Standards Commissioner followed by Procedures Committee Debate on its Report on Parliamentary Questions followed by Procedures Committee Debate on its Report on Changes to Standing Orders followed by Stage 1 Debate on the Salmon Conservation (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion 2.30 pm Question Time 3.10 pm First Minister's Question Time 3.30 pm Continuation of Stage 1 Debate on the Salmon Conservation (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-1218 Margaret Jamieson: Tinnitus Wednesday 29 November 2000 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Ministerial Statement followed by Executive Debate on Domestic Abuse followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 30 November 2000 9.30 am Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party Business followed by Business Motion 2.30 pm Question Time 3.10 pm First Minister's Question Time 3.30 pm Executive Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business and, (b) that the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee reports to the Transport and the Environment Committee by 28 November 2000 on the draft Scotland Act 1998 (Modifications of Schedule 5) Order 2000— [Tavish Scott.]

As no member has asked to speak against the motion, I will put the question to the chamber. The question is, that motion S1M-1358, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.

Please begin to  wind up.

Please come to a close.

Perhaps you have not heard me do so. I believe that the minister is on her very last sentence.

That brings to an end the open part of the debate. I apologise to those members who wanted to speak but whom I was unable to call. I now call Euan Robson to wind up for the Liberal Democrats.

That is really not a point of order.

We move to the open part of the debate. Several members want to speak in what will be a short debate. I ask members to keep their speeches as short as possible. If members respect a time limit of three minutes to three-and-a-half minutes, I will be able to accommodate everyone. However, if speeches run to four minutes or more, my ability to accommodate members will be very constrained.

As I said earlier, it is not parliamentary practice for members to stay on their feet when it has been indicated that their intervention is not being taken. I do not know whether that is what is the minister referred to. I will read her comments later and get back to Mr Quinan.

I appreciate the brevity of your speech, Mr McGrigor, but I remind members that speeches should stick a little more closely to the subject under discussion.

I call Jamie McGrigor, but I ask him to keep his speech brief.

That is not a point of order. However, I must tell you, Mr McAveety, that Dorothy-Grace Elder has indicated that she does not want to take interventions. I would be grateful if you could respect her wishes. Please carry on, Ms Elder.

There are 11 questions to put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S1M-1303.2, in the name of Iain Gray, which seeks to amend motion S1M-1303, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, on drugs courts, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 60, Against 51, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

Amendment S1M-1303.1 is pre-empted. The next question is, that motion S1M-1303, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 61, Against 1, Abstentions 48.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved, That the Parliament recognises the complex nature of the drugs problem in Scotland; accepts that addressing the problem requires effective law enforcement working in partnership with well resourced rehabilitation and treatment strategies; and acknowledges the work that the Scottish Executive is doing in tackling this problem.

The next question is, that amendment S1M-1301.1, in the name of Angus MacKay, which seeks to amend motion S1M-1301, in the name of Mr Kenneth Gibson, on rates relief for small businesses, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 62, Against 50, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

Amendment S1M-1301.2 is pre-empted. The next question is, that motion S1M-1301, in the name of Mr Kenneth Gibson, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 62, Against 19, Abstentions 31.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved, That the Parliament commends the Executive for delivering a 1p reduction in the poundage applied to small businesses with a rateable value of less than £10,000; notes that the revaluation of business rates has been delivered with the minimum turbulence for Scottish business and was conducted on a clear partnership basis with full participation from business rate payers and local authorities at every stage in the process, and welcomes the Executive's current consideration of the case for small business rate relief.

The next question is, that amendment S1M-1305.1, in the name of Michael Russell, which seeks to amend  motion S1M-1305, in the name of Mr Sam Galbraith, on the national cultural strategy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 32, Against 80, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S1M-1305.2, in the name of Mr Brian Monteith, which seeks to amend motion S1M-1305, in the name of Mr Sam Galbraith, on the national cultural strategy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 19, Against 93, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S1M-1305, in the name of Mr Sam Galbraith, on the national cultural strategy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

The result of the division is: For 61, Against 0, Abstentions 49.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament recognises the strength and breadth of cultural activity in Scotland and the important contribution it makes to Scotland's economy and to the quality of life of people throughout Scotland; considers that public support and encouragement of cultural development should be guided by a framework which widens opportunities to participate, promotes education in and through culture and supports and celebrates excellence in all areas of cultural activity, and therefore welcomes the publication by the Scottish Executive of Creating Our Future, Minding Our Past, Scotland's first National Cultural Strategy.

The next question is, that motion S1M-1309, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on the membership of committees, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the following Members be appointed to committees Lloyd Quinan to the Audit Committee Irene McGugan to the Education, Culture and Sport Committee Linda Fabiani to the Equal Opportunities Committee Kay Ullrich to the Equal Opportunities Committee Richard Lochhead to the European Committee Lloyd Quinan to the European Committee Alex Neil to the Finance Committee Shona Robison to the Health and Community Care Committee Nicola Sturgeon to the Health and Community Care Committee Kay Ullrich to the Procedures Committee Winnie Ewing to the Public Petitions Committee Fergus Ewing to the Rural Affairs Committee Duncan Hamilton to the Rural Affairs Committee Brian Adam to the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee Sandra White to the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee Fiona McLeod to the Subordinate Legislation Committee Bruce Crawford to the Transport and the Environment Committee Fiona McLeod to the Transport and the Environment Committee John Home Robertson to the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee Frank McAveety to the Health and Community Care Committee Johann Lamont to the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee.

The next question is, that motion S1M-1302, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on the designation of lead committees, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee is designated as a Lead Committee in consideration of the Education (Graduate Endowment and Student Support) (Scotland) Bill and that the Bill should also be considered by the Local Government Committee.

We now come to members' business. I ask members who are not participating to leave the chamber as quickly and as quietly as possible. Today's debate is on motion S1M-1171, in the name of Alex Fergusson, on the waiver of the groundwater maintenance charge. The debate will be concluded without any question being put after approximately 30 minutes.  Motion debated,  That the Parliament notes that the annual groundwater maintenance charge has been waived for sheep farmers in England and Wales and believes that the Scottish Environment Protection Agency should waive its charge in order to eliminate the competitive disadvantage which is currently borne by Scotland's farmers.

The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Mr Tom McCabe to move motion S1M-1309, on the membership of committees, and motion S1M-1302, on the designation of lead committees.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the following Members be appointed to committees Lloyd Quinan to the Audit Committee Irene McGugan to the Education, Culture and Sport Committee Linda Fabiani to the Equal Opportunities Committee Kay Ullrich to the Equal Opportunities Committee Richard Lochhead to the European Committee Lloyd Quinan to the European Committee Alex Neil to the Finance Committee Shona Robison to the Health and Community Care Committee Nicola Sturgeon to the Health and Community Care Committee Kay Ullrich to the Procedures Committee Winnie Ewing to the Public Petitions Committee Fergus Ewing to the Rural Affairs Committee Duncan Hamilton to the Rural Affairs Committee Brian Adam to the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee Sandra White to the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee Fiona McLeod to the Subordinate Legislation Committee Bruce Crawford to the Transport and the Environment Committee Fiona McLeod to the Transport and the Environment Committee John Home Robertson to the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee Frank McAveety to the Health and Community Care Committee Johann Lamont to the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee. That the Parliament agrees that the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee is designated as a Lead Committee in consideration of the Education (Graduate Endowment and Student Support) (Scotland) Bill and that the Bill should also be considered by the Local Government Committee. —[Mr McCabe.]

May I interrupt you, minister? Would members please keep the background noise down? The minister is trying to close the debate.

You need to wind up now, Mr Monteith.

We have roughly a minute and a half left. I will call Kate MacLean if she can confine herself to that time.

Before I call Iain Gray to wind up for the Executive, I realise that a number of members have arrived for the second debate of the morning. I should inform them that we are running about 10 minutes late because of a technical problem, which I hope has been resolved.

We can now reconvene. We will move to the winding-up speeches.

I have to interrupt, as we seem to have lost sound from your microphone. Could you move to Donald Gorrie's microphone?

I am afraid that this morning's problems with the microphone system seem to be more serious than we had thought, and we will have to suspend the meeting for approximately five minutes. I propose that, on resuming, we continue this debate for the appropriate additional period. That will affect the next debate, so we will suspend the meeting for lunch five minutes—or thereabouts—later than usual. I apologise, but there is little else that can be done at this stage.

Could you wind up please?

That is an unusual end to the open part of the debate.

Because Mr Stone was so brief, there is about a minute left for Mr Gorrie to make a contribution.

We have time for one more—I hope brief—contribution.

As is often the case, more members have indicated that they wish to speak than we are likely to have time for. If members keep their speeches brief, I will accommodate as many of them as possible.

Mr Swinney, you must begin to wind up.

You have spoken for almost 12 minutes.

None the less, you must begin to wind up.

Please begin to wind up, Mr Wallace.

We now move to the winding-up speeches. I call Mike Rumbles to wind up on behalf of the Liberal Democrats.

The minister will now take questions on the issues raised in her statement. I intend to allow around 30 minutes for questions, after which we will move on to the next item of business. A large number of members have indicated that they wish to question the minister on her statement this afternoon, so I ask members to keep their questions—and the minister to keep her answers—as concise as possible.

Order.

Before I call the next speaker, I ask members to try to ask single rather than multiple questions. That would help us to get through the questions more quickly.

We are moving to the final five minutes for this item, so I ask members to keep their questions brief.

Eight members still wish to speak. However, the debate has overrun by five minutes and we must move to the next item of business.

As members are aware, the motion congratulates members and staff of local health councils who have served the public over the past 25 years. Some of them are in the gallery for the debate. On this anniversary it is pertinent not only to look back at the history of local health councils but to record our hopes and aspirations for their future. When I joined the NHS in 1976—it was that long ago—it was reeling from the major reorganisation that began in 1974. Little did we know that it would be the first of many reorganisations during the 1970s and 1980s. The main change brought about by the 1974 reorganisation was to shift some services from direct, democratic control by elected local authorities to health boards accountable to the secretary of state. That was rightly viewed by some as a reduction in democracy. To counter that, Bruce Millan, then a minister at the Scottish Office, said it would be "important to have an organisation which is a good deal closer to the community than a health board can be". Local health councils were established with the stated objective of representing in the NHS the interests of the public. Since 1975, local health councils have carried out that function; they have provided the patient with a voice in the NHS and ensured that patients are listened to rather than talked at. They have helped to guide patients through the NHS maze to find where they want to be—through the layers of government, politicians, civil servants, health authority members, managers, professional groups, trade unions, universities, the media, local authorities and patient groups. They have helped patients with difficulties they have encountered. In 1991, local health councils were restructured: their number was reduced but their remit was enhanced. That restructuring was largely successful, as a review of local health councils  carried out by Jim Eckford in 1995 found. Mr Eckford also recognised that the NHS has changed radically since the 1991 reforms. He pointed to an increased need for and emphasis on public participation in strategy and service delivery. The Government's 1997 white paper "Designed to Care" increased that emphasis, stating: "every aspect of the planning and delivery of services should be designed from the perspective of patients." I am aware that the Executive is considering its health plan and that what is being called the patients project is a great part of that. Susan Deacon has said that the patients project will change and improve the way in which the NHS communicates with and supports patients. I support that view. It is also hoped that regulation of public consultation in the health service will be improved. That hope will be echoed by those who are involved with the Stobhill secure unit campaign—especially my colleague Paul Martin. There is a role in such consultation for the health councils. Dr Simpson, the reporter for the Health and Community Care Committee, has highlighted the role that is played by the Greater Glasgow health council in that regard. That is the kind of role that I would like local health councils to take on. They have been reformed at least once since their inception, which marks them out from community health councils in England and Wales, which have remained largely unchanged since 1974. The proposals in the health plan for England and Wales have three fundamental flaws in regard to community health councils. They do not provide for independent bodies; they do not give a statutory obligation to those bodies; and they perpetuate a major flaw, as those health councils will still be funded through bodies that they will then monitor on behalf of the patient. In looking to the future, I ask the minister to ensure that local health councils in Scotland continue; that they have a strengthened role, especially in consultation; and that they remain independent financially and in the choice of their members. I hope that the minister will find a uniquely Scottish solution to this Scottish question.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S1M-1217, in the name of Mr Mike Rumbles, on behalf of the Standards Committee, on the register of interests for members' staff. I ask members who wish to speak in the debate to press their request-to-speak buttons now. I call Mike Rumbles to speak to and move the motion.

There are seven questions to put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S1M-1216.2, in the name of Alasdair Morrison, which seeks to amend motion S1M-1216, in the name of Mr David Davidson, on Scottish tourism, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

I thank the member and apologise for getting her involvement wrong. I call Tavish Scott to wind up the debate.

The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Mr Tom McCabe to move motion S1M-1225, on membership of committees.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the following members be appointed to committees— Alex Neil to the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee Alasdair Morgan to the Justice and Home Affairs Committee Donald Gorrie to the Transport and the Environment Committee.— [Mr McCabe.]

One member who was not directly involved in the passage of the bill has indicated that she wishes to speak. I will call Rhoda Grant, if she promises to keep her speech to one minute.

Before calling Richard Lochhead, I remind members that I asked earlier for background noise to be decreased, rather than increased.

Before I call John Home Robertson, I ask members to keep down the general background noise, as other members are still contributing to the debate.

Mr McGrigor is therefore putting his amendment to the chamber. The question is, that amendment 1 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 17, Against 66, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 1 disagreed to.

We now come to motion S1M-1222, in the name of Tavish Scott, which seeks agreement that the Sea Fisheries (Shellfish) Amendment (Scotland) Bill be passed. Members who wish to speak should press their request-to-speak buttons. Before I call Tavish Scott, I advise members that they are not required to speak up to the time limit imposed earlier.

The minister will now take questions on the issues that were raised in her statement. I intend to allow around 30 minutes for questions. In view of the number of members who want to ask questions, I ask for them to be brief and to the point whenever possible.

As many members wish to ask questions, I would be very grateful if questions could be succinct. I hope that that will also allow the answers to be slightly briefer.

We must now move to the next item of business, but before doing so, may I apologise—

Mr Sheridan, I do not know in advance what members will say, so I do not, and cannot, base my decisions on members' opinions. I called as many members as possible and I extended the time for questions by 10 minutes. When you interrupted me, I was about to apologise to those members—and there are many—whom I was unable to call. We must now move on.

The next item is stage 3 of the Sea Fisheries (Shellfish) Amendment (Scotland) Bill. The procedures that we will follow are more straightforward than previous stage 3 considerations as we have only one amendment before us. We will debate and come to a decision on that amendment, and then move to a debate on the question that the bill be passed. Members should have copies of the bill and the marshalled list. The electronic voting system will be used should there be a division when the question is put on the amendment, and I will allow an extended voting period of two minutes.

To ask the Scottish Executive what guidelines exist for the screening of the vision of children by an orthoptist. (S1O-2318)

I will be interested in the outcome of that revision. Given that many of the visual impairments that occur in children are best rectified before the children reach maturity and that such impairments can impact on their future life and job opportunities, does the minister agree that it is important that the training and recruitment of orthoptists in Scotland is maintained at a level that allows all Scotland's children to be screened?

No. The debate has ended.  Long-term Care The Deputy Presiding Officer (Patricia Ferguson): The next item of business is a Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party motion, S1M-1215, in the name of Mary Scanlon, on long-term care. There is an amendment to that motion. While members take their places for this debate, I would be grateful if those who wish to speak would press their request-to-speak buttons.

Before calling the minister to wind up the debate, I apologise to those members whom we have been unable to call this evening.

Understandably, a large number of members have indicated that they wish to speak in the debate. It will not be possible to call them all. I ask those who are called to keep their contributions brief, so that we can accommodate as many members as possible.

We now move to winding-up speeches.

I call Robin Harper for a brief contribution of just two minutes.

I welcome the minister's statement, particularly the announcement of an increase in funding for the police. I was struck by two points. One was that the increase in resources and the allocation of those resources are matters for the chief constables. I appreciate that that is the case, but I was also struck by the fact that the minister mentioned that the public want a highly visible police force. He is absolutely right in that assertion. Will the Executive consider giving guidelines to chief constables that would allow them to allocate police officers to beat patrols? My experience—and I am sure that it is shared by many members—is that the kind of crime that most often affects people and that raises the perception that there is crime in the streets is what might normally be referred to as petty crime—vandalism, loitering, breaking into cars and causing disruption in neighbourhoods.

I asked whether guidelines might be given to chief constables on high visibility.

Mr Brown does not want to accept an intervention. Please sit down, Mr Sheridan.

Order.

Excuse me, minister, but I must interrupt you. Members must not have exchanges across the floor of the chamber.

No member, regardless of rank or title, will have exchanges across the floor of the chamber. A member is on her feet, trying to address everyone in the chamber. Please continue, Ms Alexander.

I call Robert Brown to wind up the debate on behalf of the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee.

We now move to closing speeches. I apologise to members who wanted to take part in the debate but whom it was not possible to call.

Order.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is a debate on motion S1M-1185, in the name of Margaret Curran, on behalf of the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee, on housing stock transfer.

The next item is consideration of business motion S1M-1197, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out the business programme.

As I have no indication of any member wishing to speak against the motion, I will put the question to the chamber. The question is, that motion S1M-1197, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.

We must now move to the winding-up speeches in this debate. However, before doing so, I apologise to Brian Adam and Helen Eadie, who wished to contribute, but whom we have not had time to call. Mike Rumbles will now wind up for the Liberal Democrats.

We now move to the open part of the debate. Because of the additional time allowed for the statement, we have less time than we had hoped for each speaker. I therefore ask members to keep their contributions as brief as possible and certainly to no longer than four minutes.

All right, Mr Gibson. You have made your point.

Mr Rumbles, you have two minutes.

That is why you have two minutes.

Order. Mr Rumbles, are you taking an intervention from Mr Gibson?

Order. The debate has been tight for time and we have reached the end of the period for speeches from the floor. We move to wind-up speeches, and I apologise to members who were not called. I am afraid that I must go straight back to the Liberals, for whom I call Rob Brown to wind up. Mr Brown, you have four minutes.

Order.

No, I was calling the chamber to order, Mr Wilson. Please continue.

That is not a point of order. Please sit down.

That is not a point of order.

It is a ministerial statement. Please sit down.

That was not a point of information or a point of order. Please continue, Mr McConnell.

I see that Mr Wilson is getting support before he has even begun.

Yes. Whenever possible, I will add a little extra time to allow for interventions.

We move now to winding-up speeches. I call Margaret Curran, who has five minutes.

The member has about 20 seconds in which to close.

Order.

Order.

If you are not taking an intervention, Mr Sheridan, you should carry on.

Make them very quickly, please.

I will allow you one, Mr Sheridan.

We now move to the open part of the debate. I call Malcolm Chisholm.

Mr McLetchie, you must wind up now.

Please come to a close, Mr McLetchie.

Order.

To ask the First Minister whether monitoring measures will be introduced in order to ensure that local health boards direct the funding that is received under the Arbuthnott formula, particularly where there is additional funding, to those areas that have been identified as being of greatest need. (S1F-528)

Does the First Minister  agree that further discussion with partners on social inclusion partnership boards in areas of great deprivation should be considered to ensure that such areas benefit and that health improves as quickly as we all want it to?

I call Sandra White, following whom I shall call Robin Harper, if he keeps his speech to less than three minutes.

We are looking for brief interventions—that was becoming a speech, Mr Robson.

You are over your time limit, Mr MacAskill—I discourage you from taking interventions.

That is not a point of order, Mr Tosh. Mr Wallace can take interventions from whomever he pleases.

Order.

Order.

Order.

One moment, Mr MacAskill. Dr Simpson, you can take it that Mr MacAskill is not taking an intervention at the moment.

Order.

Less than a minute.

Malcolm Chisholm will wind up for the Labour party.

Wind up please.

Come to a close please.

I remind members that when they overrun they impinge on the time allowed for other members. I ask members to take the direction of the chair when it comes to finishing their speeches.

Before I call the minister to wind up, I would like to apologise to members whom I have not been able to call and thank the minister for agreeing to cut short his speech to allow other members to speak.

It is understandable that members get carried away when speaking on an important issue.

Will you wind up now, Mr Young?

You must come to a close, Mr Young.

I can assure you that there is a quorum: the quorum for a meeting of the Parliament is three.

I presume that Mr Scott was making up his own mind. Mr Scott, will you proceed?

I assure Mrs Ewing that the Presiding Officer takes such matters into consideration when calling members to speak.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S1M-1085, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out the business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business—

As no member has asked to speak against the motion, I will put the question to the chamber. The question is, that motion S1M-1085, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.

He was not giving way, Mr Sheridan.

That brings this morning's part of that debate to a close. It will continue after question time this afternoon.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S1M-1072, in the name of Mr Jack McConnell, on the Government Resources and Accounts Bill—UK legislation. This will be a short debate—it will last for just over 15 minutes. I intend to call opening speakers from the Executive and the main parties and a closing speaker from the Executive. Unfortunately, time constraints will not allow any other members to speak.

Please come to a close.

Wind up, please.?

Please wind up.

Please come to a close.

Please close now.

Please bring your speech to a close.

No, you have 12 minutes.

We move to the  open part of the debate. The time limit for speeches is four minutes.

I hope that it is a genuine point of order, Mrs Smith.

Order. If members will allow me to hear Mrs Smith's point of order, I will be able to make a judgment on it. Mrs Smith, do you wish to continue with your point of order?

That is an intervention, not a point of order, Mrs Smith. Carry on please, Mrs Scanlon.

Order.

Order.

Order.

Order. Please sit down, Dr Simpson.

I will make the chairing suggestions, thank you.

Order.

Carry on, Miss Ullrich.

That is not a point of order. Carry on, Miss Ullrich.

I will be the judge of the time, Miss Ullrich. Please carry on.

Is it a genuine point of order, Mr Brown?

That is not a point of order, Mr Brown. Miss Ullrich, please carry on. I am keeping a close watch on your time.

Will you wind up, please?

Order.

Order

We will not have members addressing one another across the chamber. Members will address the chair. Please continue, minister.

There are two questions to be put at decision time today. The first question is, that motion S1M-1079, in the name of Mr Jim Wallace, which seeks agreement that the Bail, Judicial Appointments etc (Scotland) Bill be passed, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the Bail, Judicial Appointments etc (Scotland) Bill be passed.

The second question is, that motion S1M-957, in the name of Ms Sarah Boyack, which seeks agreement that the National Parks (Scotland) Bill be passed, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the National Parks (Scotland) Bill be passed.

The final item of business today is a members' business debate on motion S1M-756, in the name of Allan Wilson, on West Kilbride: Scotland's craft town. The debate will be concluded after 30 minutes without any question being put.  Motion debated,  That the Parliament welcomes the consultant's report confirming the feasibility of establishing West Kilbride as Scotland's Craft Town; congratulates Councillor Elizabeth McLardy and the West Kilbride Initiative on the vision and persistence with which they have pursued this objective; recognises the economic and social impact which the initiative can secure for West Kilbride; believes that it can provide a new and important focal point for the Scottish crafts industry as a whole, and looks forward to rapid progress towards a successful outcome.

Do we agree that a motion without notice should be moved?

That means that there will be a slight hiatus.

The next item of business is stage 3 proceedings on the National Parks (Scotland) Bill. We will follow the same procedure as in our stage 3 consideration of the Bail, Judicial Appointments etc (Scotland) Bill. We will first deal with amendments to the bill and then move to a debate on the question that the bill be passed. Members should have in front of them the bill, as amended at stage 2—SP bill 12A—the marshalled list, which contains all the amendments that have been selected for debate, and the groupings that have been agreed.

You are absolutely right about the duties and responsibilities of the Presiding Officer, Mr Ewing. However, I refer you to paragraph 4.9 of the "Guidance on Public Bills", which says: "Although the Presiding Officer receives advice from the clerks on aspects of selection, the decisions involved are entirely for him to make, given the political sensitivity they may involve." The Presiding Officer is perfectly within his rights in this case.

As you are aware, Mr McLetchie, it is open to any member, not just the Presiding Officer, to refer matters to the Procedures Committee. You may do so if you wish.

Thank you for that information.

We move to amendment 1, which stands on its own. I call the minister to move and speak to the amendment.

The question on the motion to pass the bill will be put at decision time.

We move to amendment 5, which is grouped with amendment 6.

That concludes consideration of the amendments to the bill.

The next item of business is the debate on motion S1M-1079 in the name of Jim Wallace, which seeks agreement that the Bail, Judicial Appointments etc (Scotland) Bill be agreed to.

We now come to amendment 27, which stands on its own.

We now come to amendment 28.

The question is, that amendment 25 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 16, Against 93, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 25 disagreed to.  Amendment 26 not moved.

Before I call the minister, I ask members to keep the noise level down, as it is beginning to creep up. I call Angus MacKay to speak to amendments 25 and 26.

Amendment 21 has already been debated with amendment 17. Do you wish to move the amendment, Mr Gallie?

Amendment 4 is grouped with amendments 22 and 23.

I would prefer if you only spoke to amendment 4 at this point.

I now invite the minister to speak to amendments 22 and 23.

We now move to amendment 25, which is grouped with amendment 26. I call Phil Gallie to speak to and move amendment 25, and to speak to amendment 26.

The question is, that amendment 19 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division. Members have two minutes in which to cast their votes.

The result of the division is: For 42, Against 65, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 19 disagreed to.  Amendment 20 not moved.

I call Phil Gallie to speak to amendments 18 and 21.

We now come to amendment 16.

I now call Roseanna Cunningham to speak to and move amendment 17, which is grouped with amendments 18, 3, 19, 20 and 21.

The question is, that amendment 13, in the name of Phil Gallie, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 16, Against 90, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 13 disagreed to.

I call Phil Gallie to speak to and move amendment 14.

We now move to amendment 1, which is grouped with amendment 2.

Before the minister continues, I ask members to keep the noise level down so that they can hear his speech.

We now move to the closing speeches. I call Rhoda Grant to speak for the Labour party. You have four minutes.

The minister will now take questions on the issues raised in her statement. I intend to allow up to 20 minutes for questions, after which we will move to the next item of business.

Many members have indicated that they wish to ask questions, so it would be helpful if questions could be as brief as possible.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S1M-1062, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out the business programme.

The question is, that motion S1M-1062 be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a statement by Jackie Baillie on the active communities initiative. The minister will take questions at the end of the statement, so there should be no interventions.

We move now to a brief open debate. Members should keep their comments to a maximum of three minutes.

Please wind up.

I have not recognised the member. Sit down, please. It is entirely up to the minister to indicate whether he wishes to take an intervention. He is not doing so at the moment.

To ask the First Minister what progress has been made on the action programme for youth. (S1F-451)

Does the Deputy First Minister agree not only that the voice of young Scots must be heard, but that their ideas must be acted upon, to show that our new democracy is genuinely inclusive? Will he give an assurance that the Executive will respond publicly to the ideas and issues that were raised at the summit?

It is entirely up to you whether to accept an intervention, Mr Davidson, but you are running close to your time limit.

Mr Rumbles, you really should be winding up now.

Such points have been raised in the past. I will double-check the Official Report —as I have on previous occasions—and take appropriate action.

Before I close this evening's debate, I can advise members that musicians will be playing in Mylne's Court as members leave.  Meeting closed at 19:01.

When chairing meetings of the Parliament, Presiding Officers are often asked to turn a blind eye, but I have never before been asked to turn a blind ear.

In order to accommodate all the members who wish to speak, I ask members to keep their contributions to three minutes.

Before calling the next member to speak, I should like to make it clear that the three-minute limit to speeches still applies, out of fairness to members who spoke earlier.

Yes.  Motion moved,  That the debate be extended for up to 30 minutes.— [Trish Godman.]  Motion agreed to.

It would be inconsistent of me not to point out that members of the public in the gallery should refrain from making any noise, understandable though it might be.

Can you wind up now, please?

It will come as no surprise that more members wish to speak than we have time available. I ask members to keep their speeches as short as possible, preferably around three minutes. I will try to accommodate everyone who wishes to speak, but I must warn members that that is unlikely to be possible.

We now move to open debate. Many members want to speak, and the time is limited; therefore, I would be grateful if members could keep their speeches to four minutes.

The minister mentioned the Scottish university for industry. Does the Executive have any plans to target access to it among people who live in social inclusion project areas?

There are seven questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S1M-935, in the name of Mr John Swinney, on behalf of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, on a local economic development services inquiry, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament notes the 1st Report 2000 of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee on local economic development services (SP Paper 109) and commends the conclusions to the Scottish Executive in the context of its current review of economic development structures.

The second question is, that amendment S1M-966.1, in the name of Mr Duncan Hamilton, which seeks to amend motion S1M-966, in the name of Mr Iain Gray, on the learning disability review, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 30, Against 78, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The third question is, that motion S1M-966, in the name of Iain Gray, on the learning disability review, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament notes that the report of the Learning Disability Review, The same as you?, was issued on 11 May to a wide range of consultees, calls for the fullest possible debate on how its recommendations should be implemented, and looks forward to a future where all relevant agencies work together with people with learning disabilities to ensure that they can live as full lives as possible in our communities.

The fourth question is, that motion S1M-973, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, on the designation of lead committees, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the Transport and the Environment Committee is designated as Lead Committee in consideration of the Transport (Scotland) Bill; other Committees will be the Local Government Committee and the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee.

The fifth question is, that motion S1M-972, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, on the Scotland Act 1998 (Transfer of Functions to the Scottish Ministers etc) Order 2000, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the Scotland Act 1998 (Transfer of Functions to the Scottish Ministers etc.) Order 2000 (SSI 2000/draft) be approved.

The sixth question is, that motion S1M-971, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, on the designation of lead committees, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees the following designations of Lead Committees— The Health and Community Care Committee to consider the Animal Feedingstuffs from Belgium (Control) (Scotland) Revocation Regulations 2000 (SSI 2000/158) The Health and Community Care Committee to consider the Food (Animal Products from Belgium) (Emergency Control) (Scotland) Revocation Order 2000 (SSI 2000/159).

The seventh question is, that motion S1M-969, in the name of  Mr Tom McCabe, which proposes that rule 9.5.3 of the standing orders be suspended for the purposes of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Scotland) Bill and the Bail, Judicial Appointments etc (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that Rule 9.5.3 of the Standing Orders be suspended for the purposes of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Scotland) Bill and the Bail, Judicial Appointments etc (Scotland) Bill.

Members' business this evening is a debate on motion S1M-908, in the name of Elaine Thomson, on women's pay 30 years on from the Equal Pay Act 1970. The debate will be concluded after 30 minutes without any question being put. Would members who are leaving the chamber please do so quickly and quietly.  Motion debated,  That the Parliament notes with concern that 30 years after the introduction of the Equal Pay Act women earn only 73.3% of average male earnings; notes further that Aberdeen has the widest discrepancy between men and women's earnings in Scotland, with women in Aberdeen earning only 64.2% of men's earnings; believes that these figures clearly show that legislation in itself has failed to deliver parity in the labour market; believes that the Scottish Executive and its economic development agencies should pursue policies that would assist in the equalisation of pay between the genders, and asks the Scottish Executive, whilst pursuing the creation of a knowledge economy, to put in place adequate monitoring and evaluation to ensure that women will become equal players in the labour market.

The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motions S1M-973 on the designation of lead committees, S1M-972 on the Scotland Act 1998 (Transfer of Functions to the Scottish Ministers etc) Order 2000, S1M-971 on the designation of lead committees, and S1M-969, which proposes that rule 9.5.3 of the standing orders be suspended for the purposes of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Scotland) Bill and the Bail, Judicial Appointments etc (Scotland) Bill.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the Transport and the Environment Committee is designated as Lead Committee in consideration of the Transport (Scotland) Bill; other Committees will be the Local Government Committee and the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee. That the Parliament agrees that the Scotland Act 1998 (Transfer of Functions to the Scottish Ministers etc.) Order 2000 (SSI 2000/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees the following designations of Lead Committees— The Health and Community Care Committee to consider the Animal Feedingstuffs from Belgium (Control) (Scotland) Revocation Regulations 2000 (SSI 2000/158) The Health and Community Care Committee to consider the Food (Animal Products from Belgium) (Emergency Control) (Scotland) Revocation Order 2000 (SSI 2000/159). That the Parliament agrees that Rule 9.5.3 of the Standing Orders be suspended for the purposes of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Scotland) Bill and the Bail, Judicial Appointments etc (Scotland) Bill.— [Mr McCabe.]

We now move to the winding-up speeches. I apologise to the members who were not called to speak.

I am pleased that the minister recognises that there should be a co-ordinated approach to health care, which is provided by LHCCs. My experience in my constituency is that they work particularly well and provide a great opportunity for professionals to come together. Is the Executive undertaking any work, perhaps across departments, to find out what can be done to establish LHCCs within social inclusion partnership areas, where health statistics are usually much worse than in other parts of our communities?

I call Allan Wilson.

Good morning. The first item of business is a statement on diligence by the Deputy First Minister. The minister will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions.

The minister will now take questions on the issues raised in his statement. I intend to allow around 20 minutes for questions, after which we will move to the next item of business. It would be helpful if members would press their request-to-speak buttons now.

I am relieved that, for once, we are dealing with human error and not a technical hitch.

I ask members to keep their questions brief or we will run out of time.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S1M-935, in the name of Mr John Swinney, on behalf of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, on the local economic development services inquiry.

I ask members to keep the noise level down while the minister is speaking.

You were, Mr Galbraith.

Mrs Eadie, do you wish to press your amendment?

The amendment is not pressed.

That is absolutely correct. The question is, that amendment 44, in the name of Helen Eadie, be withdrawn. Are we agreed?

I am told that we cannot have a division on this. We must vote on the amendment. The question is, that amendment 44 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 36, Against 77, Abstentions 1.  Amendment 44 disagreed to.

Amendment 45, in the name of Dennis Canavan, has been debated with amendment 42.

My apologies, Mr Canavan. You are absolutely correct.  Amendment 45 not moved.  Amendment 10 moved—[Mr Galbraith]—and agreed to.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S1M-877, in the name of Mr Sam Galbraith, which proposes that the Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Bill be passed.

Mr Monteith, do you intend to withdraw your amendment?

The question is, that amendment 41 be agreed to. Are we all agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 44, Against 70, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 41 disagreed to.

We now move to amendment 42, which is grouped with amendment 45.

I am afraid that the clock is against us once again. I am forced to move straight to the minister.

The question is, that amendment 42 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 33, Against 82, Abstentions 1.  Amendment 42 disagreed to.

The question is, that amendment 43 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 17, Against 100, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 43 disagreed to.

We move to amendment 44, which stands on its own, in the name of Helen Eadie.

I ask Peter Peacock to be brief.

The question is, that amendment 31 be agreed to. Are we all agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 15, Against 68, Abstentions 29.  Amendment 31 disagreed to.

We now come to amendment 33, in the name of Dennis Canavan. I ask Mr Canavan to be very brief.

I ask the minister to be equally brief.

Mr Canavan?

The question is, that amendment 33 be agreed to. Are we all agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 50, Against 65, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 33 disagreed to.

Amendment 34 has already been debated in the third group.  Amendment 34 moved—[Michael Russell].

The question is, that amendment 34 be agreed to. Are we all agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 36, Against 62, Abstentions 17.  Amendment 34 disagreed to.

Amendments 35, 36, 37 and 38 have already been debated, in the fifth group. Mr Stone, are you moving these amendments?

We now come to amendment 40, in the name of Cathy Jamieson. Please say only two sentences in moving the amendment.

We have no time to take any other speakers. Will Mr Peacock indicate his position?

We now come to amendment 7, which is grouped with amendments 8 and 9.

I call Mr Monteith to move amendment 41.

I have had no indication that any other member wants to speak to the amendment, but I am conscious that the computer screens are not working particularly well.

It is up to you, Mr Monteith, so proceed if you wish.

As we have a number of items of business to get through before 5.5 pm, I will go straight to the minister.

No. When Mr Reid was in the chair, he called amendment 31, which is grouped with amendment 43. It is normal practice for members to address all the amendments in a group.

When Mr Monteith asked me whether I wished him to carry on, I said that it was entirely up to him. He had that opportunity. I will allow Mr Monteith to speak to amendment 43 if he is very brief, then I will return to the minister. Minister, I apologise for that.

Several members have asked to speak in this debate. To accommodate all the members who wish to take part, I ask for speeches to be kept to three minutes.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S1M-923, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out the business programme. I call Iain Smith to move the motion.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees Wednesday 7 June 2000 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Debate on the Standards in Scotland's Schools Bill 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - Debate on the subject of S1M-787 Ms Margo MacDonald: Standard Life Mutuality Thursday 8 June 2000 9.30 am Ministerial Statement followed by Committee Business - Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee Debate on Local Economic Development Services in Scotland 12.00 pm Ministerial Statement followed by Business Motion 2.30 pm Question Time 3.10 pm First Minister's Question Time 3.30 pm Debate on Learning Disability Review 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - Debate on the subject of S1M-908 Elaine Thomson: Women's Pay - 30 Years on from the Equal Pay Act Wednesday 14 June 2000 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Ministerial Statement followed by Stage 1 Debate on the Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Scotland) Bill 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 15 June 2000 9.30 am Non-Executive Business - Scottish Conservative & Unionist Party 12.15 pm Ministerial Statement followed by Business Motion 2.30 pm Question Time 3.10 pm Open Question Time  3.30 pm Debate on Early Education and Childcare followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business— [Iain Smith.]

As no member has indicated that they wish to speak against the motion, the question is, that motion S1M-923 be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a members' business debate on motion S1M-822, in the name of Mr Keith Harding, on Bell Baxter High School in Cupar. The debate will be concluded at the end of 30 minutes without any questions being put. Members who wish to speak in the debate should press their request-to-speak buttons as soon as possible.  Motion debated,  That the Parliament notes that Bell Baxter High School in Cupar, Fife has operated on a split-site for the past 40 years, that pupils must walk along busy roads between both sites to attend classes with a loss of teaching time, and that Fife Council's capital programme for the school will take four years to implement and will nevertheless omit the refurbishment of the swimming pool and gymnasium and the provision of community facilities, and believes that the Scottish Executive should review the situation as a matter of urgency in order to determine whether it is able to assist Fife Council to resolve this problem at the earliest opportunity.

Order.

Order.

I call Alasdair Morgan to wind up for the Rural Affairs Committee.

A perfect four minutes. Brian Adam, you have five minutes to wind up for the SNP.

We now move to winding-up speeches. As we are almost five minutes over time, I will have to be particularly tight with timings.

I call Allan Wilson to open for the Labour party. He has five minutes. I now see that Mr McNeil will do so.

Wind up, please.

I have asked John Scott to wind up, so he should not take any interventions. I ask him to close, please.

Yes, it is. Mr Lochhead was on his feet, trying to make an intervention when I asked John Scott to wind up, so he was aware that the speech was coming to a close.

There are seven questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S1M-890.1.1, in the name of Angus MacKay, which seeks to amend amendment S1M-890.1 in the name of David McLetchie, on Mike Tyson, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of  the division is: For 78, Against 1, Abstentions 34.  Amendment to the amendment agreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S1M-890.1, in the name of David McLetchie, as amended, which seeks to amend motion S1M-890, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, on Mike Tyson, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 77, Against 35, Abstentions 0.  Amendment, as amended, agreed to.

That has now been registered in the Official Report .

I am sure that Mr Jenkins will thank you for that clarification, Mr Sheridan. The third question is, that motion S1M-890, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, on Mike Tyson, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 79, Against 34, Abstentions 1.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved, That the Parliament regrets the determination of the SNP to promote an agenda designed to wreck rather than address the issues for which the Parliament is responsible; recognises and supports the current constitutional settlement, which was endorsed by a referendum of the Scottish people and which leaves immigration policy in the hands of the Home Secretary, and accordingly notes that the Home Secretary is the proper person to take the decision on whether Mike Tyson should be allowed into this country and, whilst recognising the widespread concerns, in this Parliament and elsewhere, about the proposed visit, believes that this Parliament should use its time to discuss and to take decisions on matters within its competence and so help to build a Scotland true to the values of fairness, equality and justice, and supports the work of the Scottish Executive in tackling domestic abuse and supporting its victims, in particular in developing effective intervention and service provision to prevent male violence against women and their children.

The fourth question is, that amendment S1M-888.1, in the name of Susan Deacon, which seeks to amend motion S1M-888, in the name of Kay Ullrich, on the Scottish heart transplant unit, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 77, Against 2, Abstentions 33.  Amendment agreed to.

The fifth question is, that motion S1M-888, in the name of Kay Ullrich, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved, That the Parliament welcomes the arrangements which are being put in place to secure the long-term future of heart transplantation service in Scotland; notes the efforts being made to minimise the effect of change on patients; welcomes the commitment of staff at the North Glasgow University Hospitals NHS Trust to continue with high quality support, assessment and follow-up of transplant patients in the interim period; notes the effective co-operation with the Freeman Hospital in Newcastle and arrangements for transplant patients, and notes the importance of patients and the public being reassured that interim arrangements are in place and that steps are being taken for the long-term.

The sixth question is, that motion S1M-770, in the name of Sarah Boyack, on the National Parks (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the National Parks (Scotland) Bill.

The seventh question is, that motion S1M-716, in the name of Mr Jack McConnell, on the National Parks (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the National Parks (Scotland) Bill, agrees to— (a) the expenditure out of the Scottish Consolidated Fund of the expenses of the Scottish Ministers in consequence of the Act, and (b) payments by National Park authorities to the Scottish Ministers.

That concludes decision time. Members who are leaving before the members' business debate should please do so quickly and quietly.

The final item of business today is a members' business debate on motion S1M-724, in the name of Johann Lamont, on jobs and training in the construction industry. The debate will be concluded after 30 minutes without any question being put. Those members who wish to speak in the debate should press their request-to-speak button as soon as possible.  Motion debated,  That the Parliament notes the increasing opportunities for construction work in Pollok, Glasgow and in Scotland as a whole; believes that the construction industry, working along with the construction unions and Construction Industry Training Board, should provide real training and apprenticeships for young men and women, work to improve safety and regulation in the construction industry and ensure, in conjunction with the Executive, local authorities, Social Inclusion Partnerships and other agencies, that those most excluded in society by poverty and disadvantage are provided with the opportunities to benefit from the jobs created by the boom in the construction industry, and further believes that the Executive should do everything within its power to support these aims.

Before the minister responds to that question, I ask members to be quieter. It is becoming very noisy in the chamber.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S1M-716, in the name of Mr Jack McConnell, on a financial resolution on the National Parks (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the National Parks (Scotland) Bill, agrees to— (a) the expenditure out of the Scottish Consolidated Fund of the expenses of the Scottish Ministers in consequence of the Act, and (b) payments by National Park authorities to the Scottish Ministers.— [Mr McConnell.]

I have decided to give that permission.

The question is, that motion S1M-906 be taken without notice. Are we all agreed?

No member has indicated that they wish to speak, so I will put the question. The question is, that motion S1M-906, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.

Will the member wind up, please?

The member must close.

Mr Tosh, you must come to a close.

Order. The  minister has indicated that she is not taking interventions.

I have a point of order.

I have a point of order.

We have a point of order. Will you address it to your microphone, Ms White?

That is not a point of order. Pauline McNeill, your time will be adjusted accordingly.

I apologise to those members who wanted to speak in this debate and whom it has not been possible for me to call.

Mary Scanlon was giving way to Dr Simpson.

Please wind up now.

The minister is winding up.

Please wind up now.

Please come to a close.

That is not a point of order, Mr Russell. I would be grateful if members would not indulge in banter across the chamber.

Before I call the minister, I emphasise that I will adhere to time limits very strictly as very little time for the debate remains.

Please wind up.

Wind up, please.

No. Come to a close, please.

The minister will now take questions on issues arising from his statement. I will allow approximately 20 minutes for questions. It will be helpful if any member wishing to ask a question presses their request-to-speak button now.

Before calling the next member, I ask the minister not to turn away from the microphone when he responds. I know that it is tempting not to speak with one's back turned to a member, but turning round makes it very difficult for people to hear the minister.

That concludes questions on the minister's statement.

We will consider that point, and it would be very helpful if the member could drop me a note about it.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S1M-852, in the name of Tavish Scott, on the general principles of the Sea Fisheries (Shellfish) Amendment (Scotland) Bill.

That ends the open part of the debate. We now move to the winding-up speeches. I call Margaret Smith to close for the Liberal Democrats.

Come to a close, please.

I call Cathie Craigie, to be followed by Dorothy-Grace Elder. I ask both members to keep their speeches as tight as possible.

I ask John Munro to finish his speech now.

Quickly, please.

We have only a short time remaining, but I am anxious to try to call the two members who still want to speak. They should both keep their speeches as short as they can.

Many members want to speak in this debate. To allow as many as possible to do so, I ask members to keep their speeches to less than four minutes.

Winding-up speeches will be trimmed by one minute in each case. I call Donald Gorrie to speak on behalf of the Liberal Democrats.

Wind up, please.

Make it very brief.

You were, in fact, 52 seconds over it.

Several of those who wished to speak have dropped out of the debate. Two are left. I shall call both of them, provided that they keep their speeches to less than three minutes.

The member is not giving way.

As a Glasgow MSP, I should be glad that we can generate this level of passion about a subject that is dear to my heart. However, I would like a bit more light and a lot less heat to be cast on the debate. Glasgow, as others have said, is a city of contrast. On the one hand, it is a vibrant, exciting city to live in, but on the other hand, it is a city of great poverty and deprivation. That is the challenge that the Parliament and its members—whether or not we are Glaswegians—have to face. I had been going to say that the gall of Bill Aitken never ceases to amaze me, but Bill was followed in quick succession by Phil Gallie and Murray Tosh. It is probably fairer just to say that the gall of the Tory group never fails to amaze me. It tries to claim credit for initiatives that happened in Glasgow during the troubled 1980s when Mrs Thatcher was in power, and at the same time tries to rubbish the city council in Glasgow. I am proud of Glasgow's council during that period, because it was that council—and Strathclyde Regional Council—that protected the citizens of this city from many of the outrages perpetrated on it by Mrs Thatcher and her Government. The Tories might forget that, but I can assure them that members on the coalition  benches and the citizens of Glasgow will never forget it. Bill Aitken was right about one thing: the number of Glaswegians who move out of the city and the number of jobs that are taken up by people who live outwith its boundaries. I agree completely with my colleague, Johann Lamont, who called for consideration of metropolitan status for Glasgow. Bill Aitken was quick to disregard the idea—

I call John Young on a point of order.

Oh. Briefly, then.

No, but John Young intervened at the right time—and I thought he would know that it is Ms Ferguson, not Mrs. The point I was about to make, first, was that it is no good trying to gerrymander council boundaries to create Tory fiefdoms. People do not believe that any more. It did not work for the Tories in 1997, or in 1999, so perhaps the Tories will have to think again about what to do next time. Secondly, it is not about putting up a wall around Glasgow and asking for people's passports when they enter the city, but it is about ensuring that people who use Glasgow's services contribute towards providing those services. That is very different from gerrymandering the boundaries. Bill Aitken's point about people moving out of Glasgow is genuine. That is why the Glasgow alliance has produced ambitious plans, in partnership with Glasgow City Council, to try to sustain our city's existing communities and halt the move to the suburbs. It is not just the peripheral estates, about which we have heard a lot today, that need to be bolstered. Many areas in my constituency are not peripheral estates, but are pre-war estates that have come to the end of their life, as far as housing is concerned. They need to be redeveloped and their people need to be given confidence and the ability to take up the employment that is now becoming available rapidly. We must remember that that can be  achieved only through partnership. It could not be achieved in the 1980s because we did not have partnership; we had the councils fighting for their people, working with the community groups, but we did not have the support of central Government to sustain many of those developments. Many community groups function to support the communities in partnership with the councils and the development agencies. I recognise the good and hard work that is done by many of our community organisations, especially the social inclusion partnership work that is going on in many areas of the city. Many members still want to speak, and I would like to hear a lot of them, but I want to mention one further point. Over the years—in fact, during the debate today—Glasgow has been called many things. It was called a mean city, but I like to remember Glasgow as the friendly city. I mention that specific title because, all through the years, Glasgow—in spite of its problems—and its people have put out a hand of welcome to those who have suffered oppression overseas and felt the need to escape from that oppression. Those people have always been welcome in Glasgow and have brought with them skills and diversity that have made the city what it is today. At a time when refugees are coming into our city, and some people are not recognising the contribution that those refugees make, it is important that the Parliament and the city recognise the achievement that the refugees will no doubt bring. We welcome them, and we hope that they, too, find Glasgow to be the friendly city that those of us who have lived here all our days know it to be.

That concludes this part of the debate; the debate will continue after lunch.

The next item of business is a statement by Ross Finnie on the agricultural holdings white paper. The minister will take questions at the end of the statement. There should, therefore, be no interventions.

Wind up, please.

Order.

Wind up now, please.

Come to a close, please, Mr Gallie.

No. Close please, Mr Gallie.

Close please.

There is little time remaining for the debate, so I ask members to keep to the four-minute time limit.

Wind up, please.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it plans to take as a result of the recent survey into begging and homelessness carried out by the University of Glasgow on behalf of the Joseph Rowntree Foundation. (S1O-1665)

Does the minister agree that the magazine The Big Issue in Scotland  provides a valuable source of income for homeless people and often helps them to avoid crime? Does he also agree that any resettlement package that is put together with homeless people in mind should take account of the fact that there is a need to provide all-round support and assistance, particularly with regard to income?

We move to the open part of the debate. Members will have four minutes.

I call Nick Johnston to open for the Conservatives. You have eight minutes, Mr Johnston.

I thank members for keeping their speeches fairly close to the specified time. I call Sarah Boyack to respond on behalf of the Executive.

Several members have indicated that they wish to speak, and we will be able to accommodate all of them if they keep their remarks to three minutes.

We will check that out for you, Dr Simpson. I am sure that it was just a glitch.

Please come to a close.

I must ask you to close, minister.

Until 5 o'clock.

Does the member agree that one of the truly fascinating things about the development of shinty in the past few years is its inclusive policy towards women and girls? What would seem to outsiders to be a very macho game is making itself as open as it can to young people of pre-school age—by first using plastic sticks—and especially to women.

Finally, with apologies to members who have not been called, Dennis Canavan.

Order.

The member has indicated that she is not taking an intervention. Please sit down.

I, too, add my thanks to Gordon Jackson for securing this debate. I welcome the representatives of the workers at Govan who are here today. In particular, I welcome Jamie Webster, who, I am proud to say, is my constituent. I will not echo the many important things that have been said, particularly by Gordon Jackson and Duncan McNeil, as many members wish to speak and it is important that they can do so. I remind David Davidson that it was the Conservative Government that decided that the contract should not be classified as an MOD one, even though it has become clear that about 71 per cent of the use of the vessels would be for military purposes. The classification that was made could be challenged, even at this late date. The European rules on tendering do not stipulate that the cheapest price must be accepted. We are also obliged to consider value for money. I think that we can take lessons from no one around the world on value for money. I suspect that we certainly cannot take such lessons from the Koreans. If we compare like with like, it is clear that a British yard employing British workers must represent the best value for money for a British Government—I make no apologies for using the word "British" in this context. I ask the minister to take up that point with his colleagues down south.

The workers and management in Govan have demonstrated the skills, technology, dedication and commitment to play on any playing field. However, the minimum  that we should be offered is a level playing field. Two weeks ago, when I was campaigning on the streets of Maryhill with Jamie Webster, I found that people were delighted to have the opportunity to express their feelings about what the order meant to them. I do no disservice to my constituents when I say that they did not always understand the technicalities of MOD orders or of European Commission tendering processes. However, as Glaswegians, they were instinctively sure that the order was necessary and important for workers at Govan and Scotstoun and that it was vital for the future of Glasgow and the Clyde.

The question is, that amendment 26 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 29, Against 55, Abstentions 14.  Amendment 26 disagreed to.  Amendments 27, 28, 29 and 30 not moved.  Amendment 31 moved—[Fergus Ewing].

The question is, that amendment 31 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 30, Against 52, Abstentions 13.  Amendment 31 disagreed to.  Section 19—Reallotment of real burden by order of Lands Tribunal

We now come to amendment 32.

The question is, that amendment 3 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division. As this is the first division in this section, there will be two minutes for voting.

The result of the division is: For 41, Against 58, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 3 disagreed to.   Section 17—Reallotment of real burden by nomination of new dominant tenement

We come to amendment 25, which is grouped with amendments 26, 27, 28, 29, 30 and 31.

Will you wind up, please?

Order.

Mr Gallie, I realise that you are about to try to make another point of order. I caution you to ensure that it is a new point of order, rather than one that has already been raised.

There is a convention that members who are called to speak will have been in the chamber for the opening speeches. That it is helpful and the member's presence during opening speeches is taken into consideration. On several occasions, members from all parts of the chamber who for one reason or another have not been in the chamber for the opening speeches have still been called to speak. That will apply again today. Please continue, Mr Robson.

I have been in the chair for some time, so I have no idea what the First Minister's press officer is doing. I am sure that that point will be covered when the Executive winds up. We will check the matter when I leave the chair, to find out what is happening—

I understand that. As I said, we will find out the truth behind this when the Executive comes to it, unless Mr Wallace—

Sit down please, Mr Neil.

I will call you for a point of order.

I understand your point, and if you had let me finish, I would have said that we will find out the truth when the Executive winds up, unless Mr Wallace wishes to tell us anything now. Mr Wallace?

Mr Gallie, as I  have already indicated, I will look into that matter.

If it is the same point of order, Mrs Ewing, I will not take it.

No.

We now move to the closing speeches. Unless you have another point of order, Mr Sheridan, I must ask you to sit down.

There are several members who have indicated that they wish to speak in the debate. As I was about to say, we are moving to winding-up speeches and so I will not be able to call those members. I apologise for that. I call Euan Robson to wind up for the Liberal Democrats.

Please sit down. I call Mr Robson.

We will no doubt hear that in due course. We will now hear Mr Robson winding up on behalf of the Liberal Democrats. [Interruption.] Order.

I did not hear anything of that nature, but we will check the Official Report . I would be grateful if Ms White would write to me.

The member has indicated that he will not take any interventions. Please carry on, Mr Monteith.

Please wind up.

Come to a close, please.

Come to a close, please, Mr Monteith.

A number of members wish to speak in the debate; if we are to accommodate anything like the majority of them, it will be necessary to stick a bit more closely to time.

We now move to the open part of the debate.

l would like to see some order in the chamber—members will not conduct conversations across benches without having indicated their wish to intervene. Please continue, Miss Goldie.

Wind up, please.

We now move to the winding-up speeches. I apologise to the members who were not called.

Alasdair Morgan took us all by surprise there.

I call Margo  MacDonald to close for amendment S1M-720.1.

Mr Gallie, your microphone has been switched off because that is not a point of order. I think that you know that, because you have made that point before.

The decision to call speakers is made with that consideration in mind, as has happened this afternoon.

It is of interest to the public and the Parliament to know the views of the parties on these matters. Miss Goldie is to wind up for the Conservatives.

Those things are not related, Mr Rumbles, and I do not have to  explain my ruling to you.

I agree. I ask members to respect Miss Goldie's right to continue.

Thank you for that clarification. I call Mr Alex Salmond to speak on behalf of the SNP.

We now move to closing speeches. I call Miss Annabel Goldie to wind up for the Conservative party. It appears that she is not here.

That is not the case. We were expecting Miss Goldie to close for the Conservatives.

We were about to start without you, Miss Goldie. Welcome back. You have five minutes.

Please wind up.

I call Christine Grahame and ask her to keep her speech as short as possible.

Please wind up.

It is entirely possible, if the minister is happy for that to happen.

Thank you.  Meeting closed at 17:37.

We now come to winding-up speeches, and I apologise to members whom I have not been able to call. I thank the closing speakers for giving some of their allotted time in order to accommodate as many members as we did. I now call Robert Brown, who has three minutes.

The time for this debate is extremely tight and we will move to closing speeches at 16:40. If members can keep their speeches to three minutes, I will be able to call three speakers.

The minister will now take questions on the issues raised in his statement. I intend to allow around 20 minutes for questions, after which we will proceed with the next item of business. It would therefore be helpful if those members who wish to ask questions would press their request-to-speak buttons.

Because of the brevity of that question and answer, I can get one more question in. I call Kenny Gibson. I hope that you will be brief.

The next item on the agenda is consideration of business motion S1M-713, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out our business programme.

The question is, that motion S1M-713, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.

Before moving on to the next item of business, I remind members that a presentation and question-and-answer session on the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body's report on the Holyrood building project, which includes the Spencely report, will take place in committee room 1 at 1.30 pm today. There will be an opportunity to discuss the reports with the SPCB and John Spencely.

The next item of business is a statement by Mr Jack McConnell on spending allocations for 2000-01. The minister will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions.

I apologise to those members whom I have been unable to call this morning. I call Robert Brown to wind up on behalf of the Liberal Democrats.

We now move into the open part of the debate. As time for the debate is limited, I ask members to adhere as much as they can to the four-minute limit for speeches. I apologise in advance to those  members whom I will be unable to call.

Good morning. The first item of business this morning is a Scottish Socialist party debate on motion S1M-700, in the name of Tommy Sheridan, on a Scottish service tax. There are two amendments to that motion. I call Tommy Sheridan to speak to and move the motion. You have 10 minutes, Mr Sheridan.

There are two questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S1M-693, in the name of Angus MacKay, which seeks agreement that the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Bill be passed, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Bill be passed.  [Applause.]

The second question is, that motion S1M-712, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, seeking approval of the draft Housing Support Grant (Scotland) Order 2000, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Housing Support Grant (Scotland) Order 2000 be approved.

Two back-bench members have  indicated that they wish to speak before the minister winds up.

The result of  the division is: For 32, Against 78, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 139 disagreed to.  Amendments 140 and 141 moved—[Iain Gray]—and agreed to.

I call the minister to speak to and move amendment 142, which is grouped with amendment 30.

Minister, I must ask you to wind up on this point.

The question is, that amendment 139 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division. As this is the first vote on this section, the voting period will be two minutes.

Will you wind up, please?

Come to a close, please.

Members  should try to limit their speeches to four minutes.

Mr Gallie, you  already moved the amendment. You must seek agreement to withdraw it.

Before we debate amendments 138 and 139, I should point out that, if either amendment is agreed to, amendments 140 and 141 cannot be called. Amendment 138 is grouped with amendments 139, 140 and 141.

We are following the marshalled list, rather than the strict numerical order of the amendments, both for votes and for debates.

We now come to amendment 19, which is grouped with amendments 20 to 22.

Amendment 27 is grouped with amendments 118 and 73.

Does the minister wish to respond?

We now come to amendment 114, in the name of Mr Jim Wallace, which is grouped with amendments 3, 5, 8, 11, 14, 17, 24, 25, 77 to 88, 158 and 89 to 102.

Do you wish to reply, minister?

I am sure that the minister will assist you with that.  Amendment 114 agreed to.

We now come to amendment 2, which is grouped with amendments 4, 7, 9, 10, 13, 15, 16, 18, 35 to 38, 40 to 42 and 72.

We now come to amendment 115, which is grouped with amendments 116 and 154.

I call the minister to move amendment 12, which is grouped with amendment 133.

The question is, that amendment 128 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

In that case, there will be a division. Rather than allowing two minutes in which members can come to the chamber, I propose that we have a two-minute division, during which members already in the chamber can vote and members not in the chamber can come in to vote.

The result of the division is: For 19, Against 78, Abstentions 1.  Amendment 128 disagreed to.  Amendment 129 moved—[Michael Matheson].

The question is, that amendment 129 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 49, Against 57, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 129 disagreed to.

I would like to squeeze in Mike Watson and Dorothy-Grace Elder, but their speeches will have to be in headlines or bullet points—they have two minutes each.

I will not presume to give Sarah Boyack a lecture on the make-up of Maryhill. She is very familiar with it, given that she used to live there and that her mother and brother are still constituents of mine, I am pleased to say. I thank Bill Aitken for raising the matter in Parliament, and it is valid that we examine the issues. As Bill mentioned, we have had a bus corridor in Maryhill for some years. Originally, it seemed to most of us who lived on or near Maryhill Road to be a fairly attractive proposition. A great deal of traffic came into the city centre via Maryhill Road, mainly, I have to say, from Bearsden and Milngavie, but also from other areas of Glasgow, taking Maryhill Road as an alternative to other main roads. A reduction of three minutes in the average bus journey, with the concomitant reduction in the pollution from standing vehicles, seemed an excellent way forward. The scheme still has some merits, but over the years, two factors have emerged that are perhaps not so attractive to the residents or to the shopkeepers of the area. The first factor is that a new development of modern houses at Celtic Street has become a car park for Maryhill railway station. People from outside the city come into Glasgow, park their cars there and make their way into the city centre by train. The result for the people of Celtic Street is that they cannot park anywhere near where they live. The shops on Maryhill Road have suffered in recent years as a result of the bus lanes. I do not blame the bus lanes entirely for all the closures of small shops on Maryhill Road. People's shopping trends have changed in recent years, too, and there is more of an emphasis on people concentrating their shopping in out-of-town developments or in the city centre. However, the bus lanes have, at the very least, exacerbated the situation. As a result, long stretches of Maryhill Road—a major route into the city—have become festooned with "To Let" and "For Sale" signs. Tenements above empty shops encounter problems with dampness penetrating from below and it is difficult  to trace owners, tenants, factors or anyone who will take responsibility for the property, which is, of course, also vulnerable to vandals. I hope that the minister urges Glasgow City Council to limit the use of bus lanes to peak times. That would be of great benefit to traders. I hope that the city council considers alternative uses for the shops that are lying empty on Maryhill Road. It has already been suggested that they be turned into ground-floor accommodation for people with special needs, although that might not be possible with all the shops. We should think about having cheap rental packages and incentives to encourage back into the area the small shops that used to proliferate on Maryhill Road. The local councillors and I have put our concerns to Glasgow City Council, which is prepared to consider those ideas. I ask the minister to urge the council to take on board the concerns of the communities where bus lanes are proposed and to consider assisting communities such as Maryhill which already have bus lanes and the associated problems.

We now move to closing speeches. I apologise to those members whom we were unable to call this afternoon. I call Dr Elaine Murray to close for the Labour party.

I ask members to keep their speeches as short as possible to enable us to accommodate everyone who wants to speak.

Order.

Mr Peacock, I must interrupt you—there is a point of order. Mr Ewing, I hope that this is a genuine point of order.

No, Mr Ewing. I think you know that that is not in contravention of the standing orders. Please continue, Mr Peacock. I am sorry about the interruption.

Nothing in the standing orders covers that point, Mr Salmond.

Come to a close please, Mr Tosh.

You are considerably over them. Please close.

I call Murray Tosh to wind up for the Conservative party. Mr Tosh, you have up to eight minutes.

That brings the open part of the debate to a close. I call John Munro to close for the Liberal Democrats.

I hope that, in future when I recommend brevity, members will listen to me as assiduously as they have done this evening.

To accommodate all those who wish to speak this evening, members should adhere to a three-minute time limit.

I ask members who wish to speak in the debate to press their request-to-speak buttons now, please. The final item of business is a members' business debate on motion S1M-451, in the name of Mr Kenny MacAskill, on Lothian and Borders police. The debate will be concluded after 30 minutes without any questions being put.  Motion debated,  That the Parliament, recognising the additional burden placed on Lothian and Borders Police by the arrival of the Parliament and the security and public safety implications thereof, notes that in London additional resources are made available to the Metropolitan Police; seeks that due cognisance be given of this situation; and recognises the importance of ensuring that sufficient and adequate resources are made available to the Lothian and Borders Police to meet the additional requirements facing them.

We move now to the open part of the debate. Members will have four minutes. As the Presiding Officer indicated, it is very unlikely that everyone who wants to speak will be called. For that reason, I ask members to stick to the time limit as far as they can.

Does the minister accept that for many local communities, playing fields attached to schools, which may be considered to be surplus, are often the only recreational facilities? In such cases, will the minister ensure that councils are encouraged to adhere to the guidelines in the national plan and guideline No 11?

Does the member accept that one of the main priorities in bringing out this addition to the code of conduct was our anxiety to protect members of staff and to ensure that situations did not arise where they could be accused of something that they had not done? We wanted to provide a framework so that members' staff understood the parameters within which they worked.

We are running about five minutes ahead of time. If Jackie Baillie wishes to move a motion for a suspension for a few minutes, I would be willing to accept such a motion. Otherwise, she may stretch her speech out until two minutes to 5.

With the greatest pleasure.

We now move to the open part of the debate. Unusually, no opening speaker has overrun, and we are considerably ahead of ourselves. Several members have indicated that they want to speak, and I shall be reasonably flexible.

To ask the Scottish Executive how many anti-social behaviour orders have been issued in Glasgow and how many applications for such orders are currently before the courts. (S1O-1317)

As a relatively low number of orders has been requested, does the minister consider that such orders continue to be a deterrent to those who might indulge in anti-social behaviour?

Nick Johnston.

You must wind up, Mr Lyon.

You must wind up, Mr Lyon.

We now move to speeches from other members. Members will have four minutes—five if they take interventions.

rose—

The member is not giving way.

All the male members of the Parliament are welcome to stay for the debate. As members know, today is International Women's Day—a day that women throughout Scotland and much of the rest of the world will celebrate as their day. It is also the 90 th year in which we have celebrated International Women's Day, which was first suggested by Clara Zelkin at the Socialist Women's International in 1910. Our celebrations will take many forms and will highlight the diversity of women's lives and experiences by bringing together women from different cultures. A number of events are going on in my constituency—which is not surprising, given that we have a female MP, a female MSP and several female councillors. I was very pleased to open the Possilpark International Women's Day event, which took place this morning. I would also like to mention the Ruchill and Milton unemployed and community resource centres celebrations—events that are going off with some style. My friend Sandra Macdonald in Aberdeen has also asked me to mention her event, but I promise that it will be the last one that I will mention. Today, for one day only, buildings on Glasgow University's campus—in Pauline McNeill's constituency—that bear the names of famous men will be renamed in honour of their less celebrated but equally remarkable sisters. Half the members of the Scottish Labour group  in this Parliament are women—a proportion that I hope will go up shortly. I had not planned to refer to the by-election, but as many other members have done so, I thought that I would. Given the proportion of Labour members who are women and the fact that just over one third of the total membership of the Scottish Parliament is female, it seems fitting that we, too, should mark International Women's Day. I hope that we can use the debate to celebrate the contribution of women to the life of Scotland, and to recognise that there is still much to be done. What has the Scottish Parliament done for women? It has made available additional resources over the next three years to help local authorities to implement the child care strategy. Through the new opportunities fund, it is helping to create additional out-of-school care places for Scotland's children. It is also funding a programme that assists families in rural areas with their child care needs. In women's health—an area that is near to my heart—it is committed to creating an additional 80 one-stop breast clinics by 2002 and has issued new guidelines to general practitioners to help to speed up the diagnosis of breast cancer. Child health and maternal health, too, have been made a top priority, and initiatives have been introduced to improve diet, increase the level of breast-feeding, and encourage pregnant women to give up smoking. The Executive is working to increase the representation of women in public appointments. In January it launched a consultation paper, "Towards an Equality Strategy", to ensure that equality issues are at the heart of policy making, and that the representation of people with disabilities and people from the ethnic minorities is widened, particularly in the senior civil service. The Parliament is also working with the Women's Aid movement to support victims of domestic abuse. I am sure that we can rely on the Equal Opportunities Committee to maintain a watching brief on all the Government's policies, to ensure that they have women's needs and aspirations at their core. However, the picture is not all rosy. It is 30 years since the passing of the Equal Pay Act 1970, yet women are still paid less than men in equivalent jobs. Perhaps the moral of this story is that if we want to prepare our daughters for work, we should give them less pocket money than we give our sons—I hope that that is not the moral. There is a long way to go, but I believe that we have started well and that our Scottish Parliament is now on a long march towards a more equal society. Wherever I go in my constituency, the majority of community activists are women, so why do so few women make the transition from activist to elected representative? I think that many  women who would not or could not consider standing for elected office at the moment might do so if they were given the chance and if there were a proper framework of support. The timing of meetings and the structure and culture of authorities need to be more women and family friendly. Our Parliament must offer to women in all the communities of Scotland practical policies that will enable them to realise fully their potential. Such a release of talent can only serve the cause of a better, and more prosperous, tolerant and equal Scotland. Much has been said about our Parliament being open and accessible. It should be not just physically accessible, but accessible in that its policies lead to a more open and just Scotland. I hope that the Parliament—in particular its women members—will campaign to ensure that all women can achieve their potential. If we do not, we will squander a tremendous opportunity. If we succeed in that endeavour—I believe that we must—future generations of Scots will find that the buildings of our universities are named after Scotland's women as well as her men.

You have eight minutes.

Can we have some order, please.

Wind up, please.

I call Alex Neil to close the debate for the Scottish National party.

We now move to closing speeches. I call Euan Robson to wind up for the Liberal Democrats.

We now move to the open part of the debate. Due to overruns by  all the opening speakers, we will be able hear only two back-bench members.

I will check the Official Report to see what the minister said. If further action is needed, it will be taken. The minister was winding up when he refused interventions. That is understandable in that circumstance, but we will check the record and see whether anything should be acted upon.

We now move to the open part of the debate. Members will have four minutes for their speeches; they should try to stick to the timetable so that we can accommodate everyone who wishes to speak. I call Lewis Macdonald, who will address some of his remarks in Gaelic.

I call John Farquhar Munro to open for the Liberal Democrats.

Yes—in which case it was out of  order. Given Mr Munro's previous participation in debates, it is safe to assume that he can understand Mr Monteith.

To ask the First Minister what plans the Scottish Executive has to mark international women's day. (S1F-168)

Does the First Minister agree that the relatively large number of women members in this Parliament has contributed a great deal to the work of the Parliament and to the quality of the debate? Does he think that there are lessons to be learned from our experiences in the Parliament that could be used to encourage women to take their rightful place at all levels of government—particularly in local government, where there are so few women members?

I call the minister to wind up for the Executive and apologise sincerely to those members who have been unable to speak in the debate.

Will Mr Aitken wind up, please.

Des McNulty.

I now call Robin Harper.

Thank you. I now call Euan Robson.

I called Euan Robson.

It is an easy mistake to make, Robin, I know.

Thank you. I remind members that, from now on in the debate, they have a four-minute time limit.

Please wind up, minister.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S1M-586, in the name of Mr Jim Wallace, on the physical punishment of children, and amendments to that motion.

I now call on Roseanna Cunningham to close for the Scottish Conservative—I am sorry, for the Scottish National party. [Laughter.] Sorry about that. You have five minutes.

I now call Allan Wilson, to be followed by Ian Jenkins.

We now move to the open part of the debate.

In closing this meeting, I would like to say thank you to all members of the public who stayed for this debate and to the MSPs, and a particular thank you to our interpreters. [Applause.]   Meeting closed at 17:45.

I will come back to the member on that at the end of her speech.

Cathie Craigie asked that the debate be extended. I am minded to accept a motion along such lines, if a member will move one. Before any member does so, and so that we do not completely exhaust our signers, I will say that the motion should be to extend the debate for no more than 10 minutes.  Motion moved,  That the debate be extended by 10 minutes.— [Dr Winnie Ewing.]   Motion agreed to.

Please begin to wind up.

We now move to the open part of the debate. Members who wish to speak should press their request-to-speak buttons. Speeches will be limited to four minutes.

You must wind up, Mr Sheridan.

I call Tommy Sheridan to speak to and move amendment S1M-459.1. You have five minutes, Mr Sheridan.

Before calling the next speaker, I must remind visitors in the gallery that they are obliged to observe proceedings quietly, if not silently. I now call Michael Matheson to speak to amendment S1M-509.1.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S1M-509, in the name of Mr Brian Monteith, on the proposed repeal of section 2A of the Local Government Act 1986, and on amendments to that motion. I call Miss Annabel Goldie to speak to and move the motion. You have 15 minutes, Miss Goldie.

I will make no comment on that contribution to the knowledge economy. We now come to the first of the winding-up speeches.

We now move to the open section of the debate. Members will have four minutes for their speeches.

Before I call Maureen Macmillan, I should tell Parliament that recycling is a matter for the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body and that the Presiding Officer will respond by letter to members who have raised points on the issue. I hope that that is helpful.

To ask the Scottish Executive what help and guidance it can give to organisations in Glasgow to encourage them to apply for funding from the national lottery's community involvement and poverty and disadvantage programmes. (S10-1035)

Given that health and deprivation problems in Glasgow have been highlighted recently, and given the Scottish Executive's serious commitment to eradicating such problems, does the minister agree that further action is required to increase the proportion of successful bids by organisations in the cities from the unrepresentative levels of 10 per cent and 26 per cent of total awards in September and December respectively?

The member has come to a conclusion.

There is very little time left for open debate, so I ask members to stick strictly to the four-minute time limit.

Mr Tosh, wind up, please.

Mr Tosh is winding up.

Wind up please.

Mr MacAskill, I was expecting you to move the motion. [Laughter.]

The next item of business is a debate on motion S1M-483, in the name of Mr Kenny MacAskill, on air passenger and freight links to Scotland, and amendments to that motion. I call Kenny MacAskill to speak to and move the motion.

We now have to move to the winding-up speech of the Deputy Minister for the Highlands and Islands and Gaelic. I apologise to Jamie McGrigor and John Farquhar Munro, whom I was unable to call.

Several members want to speak this evening. I apologise in advance, as it is unlikely that I shall be able to call everyone. I ask members to keep their speeches to less than four minutes.

In calling George Reid, I apologise for promoting and moving his party earlier, when I referred to him as John Reid. That was entirely accidental. I now call John Reid—sorry, George Reid. I have done it again. As George Reid is the Parliament's representative on the British-Irish Council, I intend  to allow him some laxity of time.

I now call John McAllion, to be followed by John Reid.

That closes the open part of the debate. Four members who had hoped to speak have not been able to, and I apologise to them.

Thank you for making that point. As I have mentioned before, we take note of members who are not called in a debate, and we try to accommodate them the next time that they wish to speak. I am sorry about your situation. Thank you for letting us know about it. I call Nicola Sturgeon to wind up the debate for the Scottish National party.

I am sorry—I call Brian Monteith to wind up for the Scottish Conservative party.

Is the Minister considering the issue of the threshold for the definition of a house in multiple occupancy, with a view to having a common threshold throughout Scotland?

Order. Please continue, Mr Lyon.

Order.

Order.

We now move to the open session of the debate. As normal, members will have four minutes to speak.

Very little.

I apologise to those speakers whom I have been unable to call. I have to bring the open part of the debate to a close and ask Angus MacKay to respond to the debate on behalf of the Executive.

You must wind up, Mr Raffan.

Unfortunately, this was scheduled as a very tight debate. The statement ran on, so we are very short of time. I apologise in advance to members who will not be called. I do not intend to reduce the time limit on speeches, which will be four minutes, but I ask members to consider the fact that we will get more in if they speak for a slightly shorter length of time.

Please   wind up.

I would be grateful if you would wind up, Mr Davidson.

In spite of my earlier comments, it looks as though I might be able to accommodate all members in the debate. One more member, Dr Richard Simpson, wishes to speak and I will call him if he will keep his comments brief.

A number of members have indicated that they want to speak and I apologise that it will not be possible to call them all. I ask members to keep their speeches as brief as they can, so that we can accommodate as many as possible.

We will now move to the closing sections of the debate. Seven members were not called in that section of the debate, but I should say that we make a note of such members and we try to make recompense in future. I call Euan Robson to wind up for the Liberal Democrats.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to encourage women, particularly those in the most vulnerable groups, to attend for breast screening. (S1O-956)

Given that the target for take-up across Scotland stands at 75 per cent, what action would the minister recommend to Greater Glasgow Health Board—which covers an area where the take-up is only 64 per cent—to encourage women to attend for that vital screening?

Before moving to the next item of business, I close this part of the debate and remind members that the second part will commence this afternoon at 3.30, immediately after First Minister's question time.

We now move to the next item of business, consideration of business motion S1M-438, in the name of Mr McCabe, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees a) the following programme of business— Wednesday 26 January 2000 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Ministerial Statement on Water Charges followed by Stage 1 Debate on the Budget Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—debate on the subject of S1M-253 Mr Gil Paterson: Protection of Victims in Rape Cases Thursday 27 January 2000 9.30 am Executive Debate on the British-Irish Council followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Question Time 3.10 pm First Minister's Question Time 3.30 pm Executive Debate on Sustainable Development 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—debate on the subject of S1M-361 David Mundell: Rural Sub Post Offices Wednesday 2 February 2000 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Executive Debate followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 3 February 2000 9.30 am Non Executive Business on a Motion by the Scottish National Party followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Question Time 3.10 pm First Minister's Question Time 3.30 pm Executive Debate on The Census (Scotland) Order 5.00 pm Decision Time  followed by Members' Business and b) that the Subordinate Legislation Committee reports to the Parliament on The Census (Scotland) Order 2000 by Wednesday 2 February, and c) that Stage 1 consideration of The Budget Bill be completed by 26 January 2000.— [Mr McCabe.]

The question is, that motion S1M-438 be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.

Those questions will be put at decision time at 5 pm.

I remind members of the four-minute limit in this part of the debate. So that we can accommodate as many members who wish to speak as possible, it would be helpful if members adhered to that.

We now move to the open part of this debate. Members will have four minutes to speak. A number of members have indicated that they wish to speak, and it will not be possible to accommodate all of them this morning. However, names will be carried forward to this afternoon.

In light of an incident in my constituency yesterday, in which a constituent discovered a bottle of methadone outside a primary school, does the minister intend to review how methadone is dispensed, particularly during holidays?

I am not sure that I can cover the number of issues and figures that Robin Harper managed to cover at such breakneck speed, but I will try to get in as many points as I can. I am delighted that we are having this debate. As John McAllion mentioned, one of the triumphs of the Parliament is that members have time to discuss issues such as this in detail. It is at the heart of the Executive's social policy. Since the Labour Government came to power in 1997, much has been done, such as the warm deal, to recognise and address the problems that undoubtedly exist in housing. The warm deal has had substantial mention today and I do not intend to discuss it in any great detail, except to say that, unbelievably, there were some inaccuracies during BBC2's "Newsnight Scotland" programme last night. My colleague Des McNulty, who used to be the councillor for the area that was mentioned in the programme, will deal with that issue in detail if he is called to speak. I particularly welcome the opportunity being given to Glasgow to make a fresh start on housing through the community housing trust, to wipe out the debt burden that has hung over the city for so long and, more important, to lever in much-needed funding to improve people's homes. As we have heard already, that opportunity will also give tenants a much greater say in the management of the areas in which they live.  Those of us who have been involved in tenant-management co-operatives in our constituencies know how effective they have been in stabilising estates and in giving residents a sense of ownership of and achievement in their areas. By giving tenants the opportunity to participate in the running of their areas, through non-profit making organisations, I believe that we can make significant improvements to the quality of socially rented housing in Glasgow. For example, by installing new windows and central heating, we will eradicate, once and for all, the problem of dampness that for too long has been a scourge on the health of that city. With all due respect to Lord James, I find it rather ironic that, in his speech, he recognised the link between poor housing and health, given that a Tory Government suppressed the Black report in the 1980s. Had he recognised the problem then, we might not have such a significant problem to deal with today. My only caveat about the new community housing trust in Glasgow was raised by my colleague Margaret Curran this morning. It concerns the participation of tenants and trade unions in the process. I am relieved to hear that there will be some progress on that issue in the weeks to come—I was sure that, ultimately, there would be, and I welcome it. We have heard much in recent weeks about the extension of the single social tenancy and of the right to buy, about which I seek reassurance from ministers. As ministers know, there are several excellent housing associations in my constituency, which work hard to provide good-quality housing. I have discussed with several of them the impact of these proposals on their operations and I will use an example of one of them to illustrate a problem faced by many. Queens Cross Housing Association has a waiting list of 1,002 people and families and an average turnover of 150 properties a year. Based on those figures, it will take nine years to meet current demand. Queens Cross is in an attractive area of my constituency, where some former housing association properties sell for £60,000 on average. The incentive to buy will be high, and both I and the housing association are concerned that those policies will damage the social mix that it has helped to achieve in the area, with good housing disappearing into the private sector and fewer good houses available for rent. I am sure that ministers have not overlooked that point, but I ask them to consider further the reform of the discount system and to allow local authorities and housing associations to vary the available discounts. I also ask for consideration to be given to areas of particular pressure, so that there can be local flexibility.  For many people, the opportunity to own their own home is light years away, because they do not even have the prospect of living in their own home. Recently, I had the opportunity to spend a night with the Simon Community's street work team in Glasgow, working with homeless people and finding out about their needs. I wish to pay tribute to the people who do that job day in, day out, as it is a hard job that requires a considerable amount of dedication. I echo Elaine Murray's comments about the need to ensure that if at all possible people do not find themselves homeless and about supported accommodation becoming the norm, rather than remaining an unusual feature of housing provision. I am conscious of the time and will be brief in drawing attention to the difficulty many of the ethnic minority people I represent experience when trying to find socially rented accommodation. That is of particular concern to me. I hope that that will be addressed in the bill that is to be introduced to the chamber.

I must ask the member to close now.

You got slightly longer than four minutes, John, but we will pass over that.

Normally I close by thanking the minister for his response, but I think that he has already been thanked. Thank you anyway.  Meeting closed at 17:29.

Just seven minutes are left for speeches; two members wish to speak. It would be helpful if they kept their remarks to under four minutes.

That concludes the open debate. I call Margaret Smith to wind up on behalf of the Liberal Democrats. You have four minutes, Mrs Smith.

Wind up, please.

Very quickly.

Come to a close, please.

If the member does not want to give way, Mrs Ullrich, he does not have to do so. Carry on please, Mr Brown.

To ask the Scottish Executive what measures it will implement to encourage and support people in Scotland who wish to cease smoking cigarettes. (S1O-854 )

Given the tragic toll of ill health caused, particularly in the west of Scotland, by the smoking of cigarettes, does the minister agree that not just national initiatives such as  those she mentioned, but local initiatives such as that organised by Maryhill health forum in my constituency, where nicotine patches are available at half the normal retail price, are to be welcomed?

I am sure that the invitations will be coming in thick and fast now, Mr Gorrie. I call Michael McMahon.

I apologise to Scott Barrie, Maureen Macmillan and Tommy Sheridan, who indicated a wish to speak in this debate—unfortunately, time was against us.  Meeting closed at 17:47.

Before moving to the open part of the debate, I remind members that if they wish to speak, they should indicate it by pressing the request-to-speak button. There will be a four-minute time limit on speeches this afternoon.

Wind up, please.

Please bring your comments to a close, Mr Raffan.

Come to a close, please, Mr Raffan.

Close, please.

We now move on— [Interruption.]  I realise that we are in the pantomime season, but I would be grateful if members observed some decorum in the chamber. We now move to the open part of the debate. Members have four minutes.

You are in your winding-up period, so you should push on.

As someone who, for much of the Standards Committees discussion on this subject, was on a sabbatical, I had not planned to speak this morning. However, there are two points that I would like to make. First, I congratulate my colleagues on the Standards Committee and the committee clerks, who have put in a great deal of work, on producing an excellent set of proposals. Secondly, I would like to highlight the fact that the Scottish Parliament is leading the way in this area. Such regulation is not to be found elsewhere in Britain. It is good that Scotland is seen to be regulating cross-party groups to allow the general public, civic Scotland, as Tricia Marwick mentioned, and our parliamentarians to understand what is expected of cross-party groups. The framework is straightforward, but will cover future eventualities. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton outlined several groups that have already been established. I  expect that Des McNulty will answer Robin Harper's specific question about those groups that have already been established. The regulations go some way towards being flexible for such groups. The layout of the regulations allows civic Scotland—those people who want to work with the Parliament—to understand what we mean and what we are doing. It is not a set of rules for the sake of a set of rules, but one that will support the work of the cross-party groups. I recommend the regulations to the chamber.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to encourage Scotland's banks to provide banking facilities in local communities. (S1O-798)

Does the minister agree that the lack of commercial banking facilities in many of our communities means that many of the services once provided by banks are now provided by credit unions, such as the Maryhill and Greater Milton credit unions in my constituency? Does she agree that the role of credit unions is particularly important in preventing debt and consequent reliance on loan sharks?

We now move into the open part of the debate. The time limit for speeches will be four minutes. I advise members that it will be impossible to call everyone who wants to speak.

Thank you, minister. I thank Mr Robson and the other members present for this debate.  Meeting closed at 17:39.

I ask members to keep their speeches to no more than four minutes, so that we can fit everyone in. I call Mr Murray Tosh.

As there has been a change to the list of SNP speakers, I call Dr Winifred Ewing.

Very briefly, please, Mr Rumbles.

We now move into the open part of this debate. Several members want to speak in what will be a relatively short debate. I therefore ask members to keep their speeches to no longer than four minutes.

I am not sure what the minister was referring to, but no doubt she will—

Yes, I heard what she said. I am simply not aware of what she is speaking about. I will ask her to clarify.

It is an intervention.

That concludes the debate. I thank members for staying behind and I apologise to those who were not called to speak.  Meeting closed at 17:41.

There are a great many members who want to speak in this evening's debate, so I must ask members to keep to a four-minute limit.

Please carry on.

Please wind up now.

Please come to a close now.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it considers that the introduction of mandatory licensing of houses in multiple occupancy will ensure that such accommodation is safe and does not in itself present a health and safety risk to those occupying it. (S1O-777)

Does the minister believe that licensing will strengthen the powers of local authorities to prevent situations from arising such as the one that occurred in my constituency earlier this year, when two young men lost their lives unnecessarily?

That concludes the debate on older people. Before we move to the next item of business, I apologise to members who were not called in the debate, which was considerably oversubscribed. We attempted to fit in as many members as possible.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S1M-340, in the name of Tom McCabe, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 8 December 1999 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Ministerial Statement on Local Government Finance followed by Debate on Executive Motion on Sea Fisheries followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Executive motion on Sea Fishing Grants (Charges) Bill 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—Debate on the subject of S1M-319 Mr Euan Robson: Hawick Thursday 9 December 1999 9.30 am Ministerial Statement on National Waste Strategy 10.00 am Ministerial Statement 10.30 am Debate on a motion on a Procedures Committee Report followed by, no   later than 11.30 am Stage 1 Debate on the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion 2.30 pm Question Time 3.00 pm Open Question Time followed by, no   later than 3.15 pm Continuation of Stage 1 Debate on the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Bill 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—Debate on the subject of S1M-275 Nicola Sturgeon: Pollokshaws Sports Centre Wednesday 15 December 1999 9.30 am Debate on a motion on a Standards Committee report on Cross Party Groups 10.00 am Debate on draft 2000-2001 budget—level 2 figures 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Stage 1 Debate—Abolition of Feudal Tenure etc. (Scotland) Bill  followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 16 December 1999 9.30 am Non-Executive Business—Scottish National Party motion followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Question Time 3.00 pm Open Question Time followed by, no   later than 3.15 pm Debate on Executive motion on Health 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business— [Mr McCabe.]

No member has asked to speak against the motion. [Interruption.] Order. We are still discussing business. The question is, that business motion S1M-340 be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.

The question on this motion will be put at decision time.  Question, That the meeting be now adjourned until 2.30 pm today, put and agreed to.—[Iain Smith.]  Meeting adjourned at 12:35.   On resuming—

Order.

That is not a point of order. The minister will continue her speech and wind up.

Order.

Order.

Please wind up.

Come to a close, please.

Before we move into open debate, I advise members that there will be a four-minute time limit on speeches.

I invite Mr McConnell to move motion S1M-320.

No, Mr Davidson.  Amendment 27 agreed to.   Amendments 17 to 21 moved—[Mr McConnell]—and agreed to.

I call Mr McConnell to move amendment 5, with which we are debating amendment 22.

We will come on to those, Mr Swinney. We are following the order in the marshalled list.

The minister will now move amendment 7, with which we will also debate amendment 8.

I am sure that that is very reassuring.  Amendment 7 agreed to.  Amendment 8 moved—[Mr McConnell]—and agreed to.

I call Mr McConnell to move amendment 2, with which we will debate amendments 20 and 21.

I am not making a deal with you, Mr Gibson—we will see how it works out.

Please wind up.

Come to a close, please.

Quickly, please.

Mr Gibson, close now, please.

Will you wind up please?

You have one sentence, Mrs McIntosh.

I am afraid that you will have to come to a close then.

We now move to the open part of the debate. Members have four minutes for their speeches.

You must wind up now.

The first item of business this morning is a non-Executive debate on motion S1M-316, in the name of Phil Gallie, on law and order, and amendments to that motion. I call Phil Gallie to speak to and move the motion. You have 20 minutes, Mr Gallie.

That brings this evening's business to a close. I thank members for their attendance.  Meeting closed at 18:16.

There are seven questions to be put following today's business. The first question is, that amendment S1M-314.2, in the name of Mr Alex Salmond, seeking to amend motion S1M-314, in the name of Ms Wendy Alexander, on social justice targets, be agreed to. Are we all agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 32, Against 83, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S1M-314.1, in the name of Bill Aitken, seeking to amend motion S1M-314, in the name of Ms Wendy Alexander, on social justice targets, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 19, Against 96, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The third question is, that motion S1M-314, in the name of Ms Wendy Alexander, on social justice targets, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 64, Against 33, Abstentions 18.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that social justice should be the hallmark of Scottish society; welcomes the publication by the Scottish Executive of the groundbreaking report Social Justice ...a Scotland where everyone matters and the targets, milestones and developments in budgetary mechanisms that it contains, and commends this as an example of the success of the Partnership Agreement and as an appropriate opportunity to work with the UK Government for the betterment of Scotland.

The fourth question is, that amendment S1M-313.2, in the name of Mr Alex Salmond, which seeks to amend motion S1M-313, in the name of Mr Jim Wallace, on land reform, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 33, Against 82, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The fifth question is that amendment S1M-313.1, in the name of Alex Johnstone, which seeks to amend motion S1M-313, in the name of Mr Jim Wallace, on land reform, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 18, Against 97, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The sixth question is, that motion S1M-313, in the name of Mr Jim Wallace, on land reform, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 62, Against 18, Abstentions 1.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament commends the openness of the Scottish Executive's approach to land reform, as demonstrated by the extensive consultations on the Land Reform White Paper published in July; recognises the scale of their overall commitments to legislation and other action on land reform as set out in the Land Reform Action Plan published in August, and welcomes the progress to date as shown in the first Progress Report published earlier this month.

The seventh question is, that motion S1M-307, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, on the approval of the draft Scotland Act 1998 (Transitory and Transitional Provisions) (Appropriations) Amendment Order 1999, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Scotland Act 1998 (Transitory and Transitional Provisions) (Appropriations) Amendment Order 1999 be approved.

We now move on to members' business. I ask members who are leaving the chamber to do so quietly. The final item of business is a debate on motion S1M-250, in the name of Ms Irene Oldfather, on the subject of tobacco sales to under-age children. The debate will conclude, without any question being put, after 30 minutes. Members who wish to speak in the debate should press their request to speak buttons now.  Motion debated,  That the Parliament notes that surveys by trading standards officers in North Ayrshire and the Borders indicate that tobacco continues to be sold to under-aged children; notes that those retailers who are successfully prosecuted are treated leniently; and supports the establishment of a system of negative licensing under the jurisdiction of local licensing boards, whereby retailers who repeatedly sell tobacco to young people will lose their right to sell age restricted products altogether.

Will you wind up now please, Mr MacKay?

The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motion S1M-307. I ask Iain Smith to move that motion on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau.

I have to interrupt you, Ms Baillie. I ask members to have the courtesy to listen to the minister's response and not to shout from the sidelines. If members want to intervene, they should indicate that that is what they want to do. That is not happening.

As you know, Mr McLetchie, that is entirely up to her. Please continue, minister.

I remind all members that it is not appropriate for them to address one another across the chamber. That is the point that I was making.

Members will keep order while this debate continues. Things are getting out of hand and it is impossible for members to speak. Carry on, please, minister.

We now move on to the next item of business, which is motion S1M-313 on land reform, in the name of Mr Jim Wallace.

I am coming to that, Mr Fergusson. We are starting the debate slightly later than was programmed because of the number of points of order that were made at the beginning of the previous debate. You have 15 minutes, Mr Wallace.

Wind up, please.

Mr Sheridan, I must ask you to wind up quickly.

Carry on.

Bring your speech to a close, please.

A large number of members want to speak in the debate, and we have only a relatively short time. For that reason, I will apply the four-minute rule strictly.

I will now call George Reid, if he can be particularly brief.

I have been fairly lenient about timings until now, but to accommodate everyone who wants to speak, it will be necessary for members to stick to four minutes from now on.

I will now open the debate to members. Speeches should last approximately four minutes.

I apologise to Fiona McLeod, on behalf of whichever member was inconsiderate enough to leave their new technology switched on before they left the building.

Will you wind up please, Mr McAllion?

I hope that you will finish quickly.

We now move to the open part of this debate. I ask members to keep their speeches to four minutes or less.

Thank you. I now close this meeting of the Parliament.  Meeting closed at 17:31.

Things have obviously changed in Ayr since my day.

Several members want to speak in this debate. If members keep their speeches to roughly three minutes, we will be able to accommodate everyone.

Our time for reflection leader today is the Most Reverend Richard Holloway, Primus of the Scottish Episcopal Church.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S1M-285 in the name of Mr Sam Galbraith, on the Scottish Executive's child care strategy for Scotland, and an amendment to that motion.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S1M-266, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme. Before asking Mr McCabe to move the motion, I advise members that the Presiding Officer has accepted a request from the Executive for a ministerial statement this afternoon on temporary sheriffs. The statement will be made immediately after open question time.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 17 November 1999 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Debate on an Executive motion on Childcare Strategy followed by Parliamentary Bureau motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Debate on the subject of S1M-219 Phil Gallie: Proof of Age Card Scheme Thursday 18 November 1999 9.30 am Ministerial Statement on Publication of draft Ethical Standards in Public Life Bill followed by Debate on an Executive motion on the Modernisation of the Scottish Economy followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Question Time 3.00 pm Open Question Time followed by, no later than 3.15 pm Debate on an Executive motion on Digital Scotland 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Debate on the subject of S1M-189: Michael Matheson: Pollution of Bo'ness Domestic Water Supply Wednesday 24 November 1999 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Debate on an Executive motion on Social Inclusion Targets followed by, no later than 3.45 pm Debate on an Executive motion on Land Reform followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 25 November 1999 9.30 am Debate on a motion by the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Question Time 3.00 pm Open Question Time followed by Ministerial Statement on Freedom of Information followed by, no later than 3.45 pm Debate on an Executive motion on Carers' Strategy 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business— [Mr McCabe.]

No member has asked to speak against the motion, so I shall put the question. The question is, that business motion S1M-266 be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Mr McCabe to move motion S1M-257 on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the Food Protection (Emergency Prohibitions) (Amnesic Shellfish Poisoning) (North Coast) (Scotland) Order 1999 (SSI 1999/125) be approved.— [Mr McCabe.]

The motion will be decided at this afternoon's decision time.  Question , That the meeting be now adjourned until 2.30 pm today, put and agreed to .— [Mr McCabe.]  Meeting adjourned at 12:30.   On resuming—

I call Fergus Ewing to wind up on behalf of the Scottish National party.

Mr Salmond, I must ask you to wind up now, please.

I must ask the First Minister to come to a close.

That was not a point of order, Mrs Eadie. Carry on please, Mr Tosh.

I shall now open up the debate, which will end just before 5 o'clock. I ask members to keep their contributions strictly to four minutes. I call Tavish Scott.

I call Murray Tosh to open the debate for the Conservative party. You have 10 minutes, Mr Tosh.

Wind up, please.

Please come to a close.

You will have to come to a close, Mr McGrigor.

Will you wind up now, Mr McGrigor?

Mr McGrigor, we have a point of order.

Mr McGrigor, you have been asked twice already. Please come to a close on the sentence that you are on.

I ask Mr McLetchie and other members to keep their interventions brief. Mr Rumbles, I will take into consideration the amount of time that intervention took.

Mr Finnie, Mr Johnstone has not given way. Please carry on, Mr Johnstone.

Mr Johnstone,  you are in your last minute.

As I close this evening's meeting, I wish to thank members, visitors and the staff of the Parliament for waiting behind so late.  Meeting closed at 17:53.

I call Nicol Stephen to wind up the debate.

Two more members wish to speak. Under the standing orders, I am obliged to close the debate after 23 minutes, which is about now, unless anyone wishes to—

We can agree then that we will continue for perhaps another 15 minutes.  Motion agreed to.

Wind up, please.

I must ask you to wind up, please.

Just a second. Members must conduct debate through the chair and not across the floor.

Members should restrict their speeches to about three minutes, please.

There are five questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is that amendment S1M-230.2, in the name of Mr Alex Salmond, which seeks to amend motion S1M-230, in the name of Mr Jack McConnell, on European structural funds, be agreed to. Are we all agreed?

We have a division. Members should vote now, please.

The result of the division is as follows: For 30, Against 73, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The second  question is, that motion S1M-230, in the name of Mr Jack McConnell, on European structural funds, be agreed to. Are we all agreed?

There will be a division.

Order. I am sorry, Mr Brown, I could not hear what you said. Do you want to repeat it?

We appear to have corrected the difficulty. The machinery was working for the division.

The result is: For 62, Against 30, Abstentions 16.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament welcomes the intention of the Executive, in preparing for the new round of European Structural Funds Programmes in consultation with local and national partners throughout Scotland, to ensure that the new plans for Scotland complement the policy priorities in the Programme for Government.

The third question is, that amendment S1M-227.1, in the name of Mr John Swinney, which seeks to amend motion S1M-227, in the name of Nicol Stephen, on the Scottish university for industry, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The fourth question is, that motion S1M-227, as amended, in the name of Nicol Stephen, on the Scottish university for industry, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  That the Parliament welcomes the publication on 27 October of The Shortest Route to Learning , the Scottish Executive's progress report on the development of the Scottish University for Industry and supports the creation of the Scottish University for Industry which will enable people to access learning opportunities and learn throughout life on their own terms, so increasing individual employability and economic competitiveness and requires that the project to establish a Scottish University for Industry must clearly establish that value is being added by the project to existing provision and that adequate performance measurement be undertaken to enable the Parliament to judge the effectiveness of this initiative.

The fifth question is, that motion S1M-232, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, on the designation of a lead committee, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees the following designation of Lead Committee— The Rural Affairs Committee to consider the Organic Aid (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 1999 (SSI 1999/107).

That concludes decision time.

We now move to members' business. I ask those who are leaving to do so quickly and quietly. The final item of business today is a debate on motion S1M-128, in the name of Allan Wilson, on regional selective assistance. The debate will be concluded, without any question being put, after 30 minutes.  Motion debated,  That the Parliament calls for the retention and development of the regional selective assistance priority scheme in areas of high and persistent unemployment.

I call Fergus Ewing to wind up for the Scottish National party.

As the previous two speakers were admirably brief, I will just about manage to get in one more if he or she will also be brief. I call Des McNulty.

Will you begin to wind up, please.

Will you wind up, please.

Thank you very much. That brings the debate to a close for this evening. I thank members for their attendance.  Meeting closed at 17:50.

While we are reaching the point where the debate should come to a close, a number of members have indicated that they wish to speak in the debate.

I call Elaine Thomson—sorry, I call Elaine Smith; I called the wrong member. [Interruption.] Please put your card in, Elaine.

I am minded to accept that motion. Can you give me an idea of how much time is required? Thirty minutes, perhaps?

I will accept the motion, if that is acceptable to members. That does not mean that we must run on until 6 o'clock, but it will give other members an opportunity to speak.

I am not aware of that having been said in that exact way. My understanding is that the standing orders allow a member to move a motion to extend. For that reason, I will accept the motion. However, we shall double-check the position, just to be on the safe side. The question is, that the motion be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.

Many members wish to speak in the debate. Speeches will be restricted to four minutes. I remind members that we now have clocks that show how long they have been speaking. In case there is any doubt, the clocks are located above me and on both sides of the chamber.

Please wind up.

I call Richard Lochhead to wind up on behalf of the Scottish National party.

I call Mr McGrigor.

As members have said, only a short time is available for the debate. It would be helpful if speeches by those participating lasted no longer than four minutes.

The minister will now take questions on the issues raised in her statement. I intend to allow 20 minutes for questions, after which we will move on to the next item of business. I remind members who want to speak to press their request buttons.

We now move to the debate on motion S1M-185, in the name of Ross Finnie, on Agenda 2000 and the development of agriculture in Scotland, and amendments to that motion.

As I have no indication that anyone wishes to speak against the motion, I will put the question to the chamber. The question is, that business motion S1M-196 be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.   Question, That the meeting be now adjourned until 2.30 pm , put and agreed to.—  [Mr McCabe.]  Meeting adjourned at 12:25.   On resuming—

We now move to the next item of business. I call Mr Tom McCabe to move business motion S1M-196.

Please wind up.

Please wind up.

Please sit down, Ms Elder.

We will check the Official Report to find out whether a ruling has to be made and we will get back to you.

Wind up, please.

Wind up, please.

I remind members who want to participate in the debate that they should press their request-to-speak buttons now. There will be a four-minute limit on speeches.

I thank members for their co-operation this evening and I now close the meeting.  Meeting closed at 17:50.

I am conscious that this is a debate that many more members than usual have stayed behind for. If I closed the meeting now, I would be excluding one member who wishes to participate. There is just about time—if you are able to be fairly brief, Richard.

As Christine's contribution was so brief, we can just about squeeze in one last speaker. I call Hugh Henry.

Thank you.

I have turned your microphone off. Mr Scott was not called. I indicated that I was about to call him. Then I realised that he was not here and did not call him. If we press on at the current rate, it should be possible to accommodate everyone who wishes to speak. I take your point, but for that reason we are moving on now.

Can you wind up, please.

You will have to wind up.

No, the member is winding up.

Can you wind up, please?

Please wind up, Mr Gallie.

Not quite, Mr Wilson. Mr Gallie will close in one sentence.

I had intended to call Murray Tosh next, but unfortunately he is not in the chamber. Instead, I call Phil Gallie.

It would help if you were to get to the point, Mr Raffan.

At the moment it is possible to allow members five minutes for speeches in the open debate. We will begin with that time limit, but if it becomes necessary we will drop down to four minutes. If members stick to their time limits, we might manage to include everyone.

I remind the chamber that the guidelines say that members must respect the needs of other members to participate in the Parliament and that loud, prolonged discussions that may distract others should be avoided. I ask all members to adhere to those guidelines.

No, Mr Jenkins is trying to wind up.

Could you wind up now, please.

I remind members that it is up to individual members to decide whether to accept an intervention. All  remarks should be addressed through the chair. This is not a debate from one side of the chamber to the other. Mr MacIntosh, would you wind up your speech, please.

Mr MacIntosh, please continue.

Both members who have been involved in the conversation that has been going on across the chamber have had ample opportunity to put their points across. I remind members that they should indicate if they wish to speak. Members should not speak until they have been asked to. Mr MacIntosh, would you quickly wind up, please.

No, the minister is now winding up.

I thank members for their participation and now close the meeting.  Meeting closed at 17:37.

I hope that it is a genuine point of order.

The Presiding Officer made a ruling on that last week in a previous members' debate. It was agreed that that would not be allowed in future. The extension of the debate on domestic violence was considered to be a one-off. I call Rhona Brankin to close what has been a very good debate. Can Ms Brankin have the lectern, please.

Unusually for a debate at this time, a large number of members wish to take part. It may not be possible for all to participate, but if  speakers will be aware that many members wish to make contributions, that will help. Looking round, I am minded to ask the Procedures Committee to come up with a policy on the wearing of colours in the chamber. However, that may just be my being sad—I am a Partick Thistle supporter.

Very briefly, please.

Please wind up.

Please close.

Miss Goldie, please begin to wind up.

We now move to the open part of the debate. As the Presiding Officer indicated, it is very unlikely that all members who wish to speak will be able to do so. However, I intend to indicate to members when they have only one minute left of their four-minute allocation.

Wind up now, please.

Will the member wind up now, please?

The member has finished, Mr Gallie. Please sit down.

We now move to the open part of the debate. Many members want to speak, so it would be helpful if members could restrict themselves to the time limit of four minutes for speeches. In an effort to be helpful, I will indicate when a member speaking has one minute left.

You did not accept it, Mr Quinan, so it was not.

Please begin to wind up.

The question is, that motion S1M-167, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.   Question, That the meeting be now adjourned until 2.30 pm today, put and agreed to.—[Mr McCabe.]  Meeting adjourned at 12:35.   On resuming—

The next item is the business motion, S1M-167.

Mr Sheridan, the member has already said that she does not wish to give way.

Mr Sheridan, please sit down.

I call on Angus MacKay to wind up the debate.

Mr Sheridan, I have already explained that there is no guarantee for any member to speak in a debate. We try to accommodate as many members as we can. I will move on so that we can bring the debate to a conclusion.

No, Mr Gallie. To accommodate everyone who wishes to speak, we would have to extend this part of the meeting almost into this afternoon's time. It is not possible, so we will move on to Mr Matheson, who had begun to speak.

I call Michael Matheson to wind up for the Scottish National party.

There is no guarantee that any member will be able to speak on a particular issue. I recognise that Mr Sheridan has had his button on for some time, but so have many other members who wish to speak. I apologise if he cannot raise his points, but I am sure that the minister will take them up for him in another way.

I am sure that we can refer that to the Procedures Committee.

Could you wind up, please?

I call Mr Raffan.

I do not think that Sir David said that they would not be called; he said that their absence would be taken into consideration. A number of members, who were not here for the minister's speech or for other parts of the debate, have spoken. We take that into consideration, but it does not rule someone out.

No, Sir David was making the point that members who wish to participate should be here for the debate. As I explained, he was not excluding members; he was bringing it to their attention that they should show the courtesy of being in the chamber to hear what was being said.

I call John Young and ask him to close on this point.

Comments should be made through the chair, please. Will you wind up now?

Mr Gallie, will you wind up, please, and refer your remarks through the chair?

Mr Gallie, will you please come to a close now?

Mr Gallie, will you come to a close now?

I will not take up much time as I realise that other members want in and Paul Martin has already covered much of the ground. Like him, I would like to stick to the terms of the motion. I would particularly like to address the aspects concerning the consultation. This is not the first suggestion that a secure unit should be sited at Stobhill. Unlike Paul, I do not live near the site, but I have done and I have relatives who do. I have been treated there and have worked there on occasion. I feel strongly about the hospital, which is the local hospital for most people in my constituency. Only a year ago, the community and mental health trust, which had responsibility for the proposal, announced that it was no longer considering Stobhill as a possible site because it could not accommodate both the ambulatory care unit and the secure care unit without undue design compromise. All of a sudden, within a few months, we find that the size of the ambulatory care unit has been reduced greatly and that it is now to be sited on land that is currently a car park. That rather conveniently leaves a greenfield site for the secure unit.  When the Glasgow MSPs were invited by the health board to attend a briefing on the matter, we were issued with a question and answer note that contained 27 questions and answers. Some of the questions on the note beggared belief, frankly. If the health board is able to have that number of questions and answers prepared to brief MSPs, why can it not meet the community to discuss the questions that they have raised or any other questions that the local residents might have? Doctors and other staff in the hospital have said that they do not think that Stobhill is the right place for the secure unit. Local residents have been saying the same thing for three or four years, but the health board has decided that the consultation should be conducted through the quasi-judicial framework of the planning application process where only matters relating to planning can be raised. I know who I would consult if I were the health board—the doctors and staff of the hospital and local residents. I would not make the decision on the basis that I had been able to reduce one unit to accommodate another.

Fergus Ewing.

I am sorry, John.

I call John Swinney to wind up on behalf of the Scottish National party.

Will you wind up, please?

In opening the debate, Sir David indicated that a large number of members wished to speak, but that because of the reduction in time, it would not be possible to accommodate everyone. I reiterate that point. Members will be allowed four minutes each to speak; in an effort to assist members to keep to time, I will indicate when you have one minute left and encourage you to wind up. In that way, we will accommodate as many members as possible.

Thank you. As the minister said, she will take questions from members. Members who want to speak should press their request to speak buttons. I remind members that questions should be in the form of a question and should be brief.

Excuse me, Mr Lochhead, but you do not have a supplementary question on a statement. I will move on to the next questioner.

Mr McNulty, will you come to your question please?

I remind members to ask questions and not to make statements. The more that people can observe that rule, the more questions they will be able to ask.

I am sorry; you do not have a supplementary question.

We move on to the debate on motion S1M-154, in the name of Ms Wendy Alexander, on homelessness. There is also an amendment to the motion. Members who wish to speak in this debate may now press their request to speak buttons.

There is no amendment to the motion, nor any indication that anyone wishes to speak on it. The question is, that motion S1M-152, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.   Question, That the meeting be now adjourned until 2.10 pm today, put and agreed to.—[Mr McCabe.]  Meeting adjourned at 12:26.   On resuming—

I am sure that the minister will take your point.

The next item of business is consideration of a business motion in the name of Tom McCabe, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a revised business programme.

Address your remarks through the chair, please, and wind up.

You have one minute.

Could you finish, please.

Please wind up now.

Thank you very  much for an interesting and well-informed debate. That brings this evening's meeting of the Parliament to a close. Thank you all.  Meeting closed at 17:30.

I remind members that they should press their buttons if they wish to speak.

Several members are indicating that they wish to speak. It is going to be impossible to accommodate everyone. I ask those who are called to keep their comments to a minimum so that we can squeeze in as many members as possible.

The question is, that motion S1M-132, in the name of Tom McCabe, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.    Question, That the meeting be now adjourned until 2.30 pm today, put and agreed to. — [Lord James Douglas-Hamilton.]  Meeting adjourned at 12:25.   On resuming—

The next item of business is consideration of a business motion from the Parliamentary Bureau setting out a revised business programme. I call Mr Tom McCabe to move the motion.

Wind up, please.

Thank you, Mr Monteith. Before I open up the debate, I advise members that the allocated time for each  contribution is four minutes. Several members want to speak, so they should stick to the time limit.

Before calling Mr Brian Monteith to open for the Scottish Conservative and Unionist party, I remind members that they should indicate that they wish to speak by pressing the appropriate button.

Please wind up, Mr Lyon.

Before taking members' contributions in this debate, I must indicate that there will be a three-minute time limit on speeches.

Please come to a close, Mrs Smith.

I remind members that the time allocated for speeches in this part of the debate is four minutes. Members should try to adhere to that as far as possible.

That is not a point of order. If Ms Boyack would like to take an intervention, please indicate that.

That is not a point of order. Carry on, Ms Boyack; and please bring your contribution to an end as quickly as you can.

That concludes today's business. I ask members to stand as the mace is removed from the chamber.   Meeting closed at 13:16.

Mr Adam, please wind up when you respond.

Please wind up, Mr Adam.

Please come to a close now, Mr Adam.

I indicated earlier that it might be necessary to put a time limit on speeches in the debate. Unfortunately, there will now have be a time limit of three minutes per speech.

Wind up please, Mr Gorrie.

A number of members have indicated that they wish to participate in the debate. The minister will now take questions on her statement.

I call Mr Hugh Henry.

Do you want to make a contribution, Mr Henry?

No. Do you want to ask a question?

Thank you. I call Mr Andy Kerr.

Thank you. The debate will run until noon. Members should make their speeches as brief as they can, so that we can allow as many members as possible to take part. Having said that, I now call Mr Kenny Gibson to reply for the Opposition.

Please do so briefly, Mr Wilson.

Mr MacAskill, you must wind up your speech.

Wind up,  please, Mr MacAskill.

Wind up, please.

Wind up, please.

Wind up, please.

Wind up, please.

I ask you to wind up, please.

Will you wind up now, please?

I ask you wind up now please, Mr Ingram.

A number of members have indicated that they wish to speak in the debate. To try to accommodate them all, I will impose a time limit of four minutes from now on. I ask members to adhere to that.

Will Mr Gibson continue with his speech and wind up as quickly as he can?

Some members have not placed their chip-cards in their consoles. It would help greatly with interventions if they could do so.

We now move on to two items of Parliamentary Bureau business, both of which will be taken without debate. The first is motion S1M-62, in the name of Tom McCabe.  The second motion is S1M-63, also in the name of Tom McCabe, on the days on which the office of the clerk will be open.

The next section of the debate will be on motion S1M-61, which covers the Financial Services and Markets Bill, the electronic communications bill and the limited liability partnerships bill. Members who want to speak in this debate should press their request buttons as soon as possible. I call Angus Mackay to speak to and to move motion S1M-61.

Could you begin to wind up, Mrs Ullrich.

I call Susan Deacon to wind up the debate.

The result of the division is as follows: For 3, Against 121, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The question is, that amendment S1M-53.2, in the name of Tommy Sheridan, be agreed to. Are we all agreed?

There will be a division. Members should vote yes to agree with the amendment, no to disagree with the amendment and abstain to record an abstention.

The result of the division is as follows: For 3, Against 121, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The question is, that amendment S1M-53.3, in the name of Dennis Canavan, be agreed to. Are we all agreed?

There will be a division. Members should vote yes to agree with the amendment, no to disagree with the amendment and abstain to record an abstention.

The result of the division is as follows: For 3, Against 121, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The question is, that amendment S1M-53.4, in the name of Dennis Canavan, be agreed to. Are we all agreed?

There will be a division. Members should vote yes to agree with the amendment, no to disagree with the amendment and abstain to record an abstention.

The result of the division is as follows: For 4, Against 120, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The question is, that amendment S1M-53.5, in the name of Robin Harper, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The question is that motion-

The motion is in order, Mr Canavan. The committees will have 13 members. There are vacancies at the moment.  The question is, that motion S1M-53, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, as amended, be agreed to. Are we all agreed?

There will be a division. This has been a test of our voting system, which has held up well. Members should vote yes to agree with the amendment, no to disagree with  the amendment and abstain to record an abstention.

The result of the vote is: For 119, Against 2, Abstentions 2.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  That the Parliament approves the membership and party from which the convener should be appointed for its committees set out as follows:-  European  Bruce Crawford, Winnie Ewing, Hugh Henry, Sylvia  Jackson, Cathy Jamieson, Margo MacDonald, Maureen Macmillan, David Mundell, Irene Oldfather, Tavish Scott, Ben Wallace and Allan Wilson be members of the European Committee, the Convener to be appointed from the Labour Party;  Equal Opportunities  Malcolm Chisholm, Johann Lamont, Marilyn Livingstone, Jamie McGrigor, Irene McGugan, Kate Maclean, Michael McMahon, Michael Matheson, John Munro, Nora Radcliffe, Shona Robison and Elaine Smith be members of the Equal Opportunities Committee, the Convener to be appointed from the Labour Party;  Finance  David Davidson, Rhoda Grant, Adam Ingram, George Lyon, Kenneth Macintosh, Keith Raffan, Richard Simpson, John Swinney, Elaine Thomson, Mike Watson and Andrew Wilson be members of the Finance Committee, the Convener to be appointed from the Labour Party;  Audit  Brian Adam, Scott Barrie, Cathie Craigie, Annabel Goldie, Margaret Jamieson, Nick Johnston, Lewis Macdonald, Paul Martin, Euan Robson, Andrew Welsh and Andrew Wilson be members of the Audit Committee, the Convener to be appointed from the Scottish National Party;  Procedures  Donald Gorrie, Janis Hughes, Gordon Jackson, Andy Kerr, Gil Paterson, Michael Russell and Murray Tosh be members of the Procedures Committee, the Convener to be appointed from the Conservative Party;  Standards  Patricia Ferguson, Karen Gillon, James Douglas-Hamilton, Adam Ingram, Des McNulty, Tricia Marwick and Mike Rumbles be members of the Standards Committee, the Convener to be appointed from the Liberal Democrat Party;  Public Petitions  Helen Eadie, Phil Gallie, Christine Grahame, John McAllion, Pauline McNeill, Margaret Smith and Sandra White be members of the Public Petitions Committee, the Convener to be appointed from the Labour Party;  Subordinate Legislation  Fergus Ewing, Trish Godman, Ian Jenkins, Kenny MacAskill, Bristow Muldoon, David Mundell and Ian Welsh be members of the Subordinate Legislation Committee, the Convener to be appointed from the Scottish National Party;  Justice and Home Affairs  Scott Barrie, Roseanna Cunningham, Phil Gallie, Christine Grahame, Gordon Jackson, Lyndsay McIntosh, Kate Maclean, Maureen Macmillan, Pauline McNeill, Tricia Marwick and Euan Robson be members of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, the Convener to be appointed from the Scottish National Party;  Education, Culture and Sport  Karen Gillon, Ian Jenkins, Kenneth Macintosh, Fiona McLeod, Brian Monteith, Mary Mulligan, Cathy Peattie, Michael Russell, Jamie Stone, Nicola Sturgeon and Ian Welsh be members of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee, the Convener to be appointed from the Labour Party;  Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector  Bill Aitken, Robert Brown, Cathie Craigie, Margaret Curran, Fiona Hyslop, John McAllion, Alex Neil, Lloyd Quinan, Keith Raffan, Mike Watson and Karen Whitefield be members of the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee, the Convener to be appointed from the Labour Party;  Enterprise and Lifelong Learning  Fergus Ewing, Annabel Goldie, Nick Johnston, Marilyn Livingstone, George Lyon, Margo MacDonald, Duncan McNeil, Elaine Murray, John Swinney, Elaine Thomson and Allan Wilson be members of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, the Convener to be appointed from the Scottish National Party;  Health and Community Care  Malcolm Chisholm, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Duncan Hamilton, Hugh Henry, Margaret Jamieson, Irene Oldfather, Mary Scanlon, Richard Simpson, Margaret Smith, Kay Ullrich and Ben Wallace be members of the Health and Community Care Committee, the Convener to be appointed from the Liberal Democrat Party;  Transport and the Environment  Helen Eadie, Linda Fabiani, Robin Harper, Janis Hughes, Cathy Jamieson, Andy Kerr, Kenny MacAskill, Des McNulty, Nora Radcliffe, Tavish Scott and Murray Tosh be members of the Transport and the Environment Committee, the Convener to be appointed from the Labour Party;  Rural Affairs  Alex Fergusson, Rhoda Grant, Alex Johnstone, Richard Lochhead, Lewis Macdonald, Irene McGugan, Alasdair Morgan, John Munro, Elaine Murray, Cathy Peattie and Mike Rumbles be members of the Rural Affairs Committee, the Convener to be appointed from the Conservative Party;  Local Government  Colin Campbell, Kenneth Gibson, Trish Godman, Donald Gorrie, Keith Harding, Sylvia Jackson, Johann Lamont, Michael McMahon, Bristow Muldoon, Gil Paterson and Jamie Stone be members of the Local Government Committee, the Convener to be appointed from the Labour Party.

That concludes decision time for today.   Meeting closed at 17:21.

Will you wind up now, please, Mr Mundell.

Mr Mundell, will you wind up, please.

I call Mr Duncan McNeil, who will be the last speaker unless he is brief.

This afternoon I indicated that a time limit would be imposed. Members are not keeping to it. I am being flexible and giving additional time to those who take interventions, but there is a limit to how far I can go. We have to come to decision time at 5 pm and there is other business, so we must adhere to the programme that was outlined earlier.

Could you begin to wind up, please.

I ask members to limit interventions to the bare minimum so that we can include as many speeches as possible.

To try to accommodate as many members as I can who have indicated that they wish to speak, I must reduce the time limit for speeches to three minutes.

Will you wind up now, Mr Welsh?

Wind up, please.

Members have been exceeding the four-minute speaking time quite considerably. I ask them to bear that in mind as they proceed. If members cannot keep to the  time limit, I will have to reduce it, which I am sure no one wants. Similarly, I ask members to make interventions as brief as possible.

Could you do so quickly, please?

I must ask you to wind up now.

This is not a debate across the chamber, Mr Monteith.

That is not a point of order, Mr Brown.

I will now open the debate to members. As a number of members have expressed a wish to speak, the time limit for speeches will be four minutes. That may be reviewed later, but I ask members to stick to their time.

I call John Swinney to speak on amendment S1M-2.4, and then to move it formally.

I am very sympathetic to Mr Gorrie's concerns about members' visibility when they are speaking in debates. Mr Gorrie may like to know that, during his speech, I counted at least eight people in the segment of the chamber that he inhabits who had to turn round in their chairs and crane their necks to see him. The problem of visibility is not unique to any future chamber; we might like to consider it today.

No Mr Ewing, I am not taking interventions; I have just started.  Given the fact that the SNP has decided that its members cannot have independence of thought today, I thought that it was a bit rich for Mr Ewing to lecture us this morning on independence. SNP members should consider that.  I am delighted that we are having this debate, because it gives us the opportunity to show our confidence in the success of this Parliament and in the new Scotland that we will help to shape. When we consider the proposed design, we must take into account the needs of MSPs and their staff and the needs of the Parliament staff.  The Parliament also needs to be open and accessible to all. At the moment, visitors have to walk up and down the High Street to find the seven buildings that make up the Parliament and, while adaptations have been made to those buildings to provide disabled access, the distance that has to be travelled between the buildings makes accessibility very difficult. I am sure that that problem is being addressed in the proposals for the new building.  I have been impressed by the efforts of the Parliament staff who have adapted the buildings that we are using to provide us with a temporary home, but by no yardstick or criterion can this arrangement be anything other than temporary. We may have just about enough committee rooms for all our new committees, but the committees will be open to the public-presumably if there is any space left. There is nowhere for members to meet their constituents; nor is there a crèche in our family-friendly Parliament.  The design for the new building is bold, innovative and modern; the building will be both functional and a symbol of all that we want the  Scottish Parliament to be. The historic site that has been chosen presents us with an historic opportunity to leave for future generations an inheritance of which they can be proud. The Parliament at Holyrood will reinvigorate the Canongate and give new life to Holyrood park.  Members have stated, rightly, our duty to ensure that funds from the public purse are used wisely. I am sure that our colleagues on the corporate body-the people whom we have made responsible for the new building-will carry out that task diligently. Remaining here on the Mound would be a folly that future generations would not understand. As a Glaswegian, I am very fond of the tenement-that peculiarly Scottish form of housing-but do we really want to go down in history as the new Parliament that decided to hold its meetings, for the rest of its life, up a close? I do not think so.

Can Dr Jackson's microphone be switched on.

Will Mr Raffan please move the debate on?

Will Mr Raffan please keep to the legislative programme.

That is not a point of order, Mr Gibson. I have switched off your microphone. Please sit down. [Interruption.] Mr Gibson, I switched off your microphone and I was standing. That should indicate to you-and to any other member in that situation-that you should be quiet and sit down. Mr McConnell did not break any convention of this chamber. Similarly, if Mr Neil does not wish to take an intervention-as he indicated in this instance-that is his choice. It is up to members to respect the choice of the speaker.

I can assure Mr Henry that the Deputy Presiding Officer does not wish that to happen.  Mr Gibson, Mr Henry is indicating that he would like to make a further intervention. Do you wish to accept it?

Could Mr Canavan have his microphone switched on please.

Can Dr Jackson's microphone be switched on.

The First Minister will take questions on the issues that were raised in his statement. I intend to allow a maximum of 20 minutes for questions, after which we will move on to the debate. Members should indicate a desire to speak by pressing their buttons.

I remind members that they should put questions to the First Minister. The time for debate will follow immediately after questions.

Before we proceed to the debate, I will ask the sound engineer to clear all the requests to ask questions.  Members should note that I do not propose to set a time limit for speeches now. This debate will continue during the afternoon, so there should be ample opportunity for all members who wish to speak to do so. As always, I will keep the situation under review. Anyone who wishes to take part in the debate should indicate that now.

Members do not have to press their buttons this morning unless they want to get into the debate this morning.

We will now move on to the debate on motion S1M-39, in the name of Henry McLeish, on the consultative steering group report. The debate should conclude at around 12:20 pm and, while I do not intend to impose time limits on members' speeches, I might review the position later on.

Good morning. Before we begin, members should check that their ID cards have been correctly placed in the microphone system. They can do so by looking at the red light immediately below the card and above the small arrow. If the card has been placed correctly, the light should be off.  The first item of business is a statement by the First Minister on legislation in the UK Parliament relating to devolved matters. The First Minister will take questions at the end of his statement and there should therefore be no interventions. The statement will be followed, no later than 11 am, by a debate on the consultative steering group report and the draft information strategy.

I will put the questions on the three motions and the amendments to those motions that we have discussed this afternoon.  The first question is, that motion S1M-28, in the name of Henry McLeish, be agreed to. Are we all agreed?

We will therefore have a division.

I presume that members read their business list and so are familiar with the business to be discussed. However, in the interests of the chamber, I will put the question again. This time, will members please indicate clearly whether they are minded to accept the motion?  The first question is, that motion S1M-28, in the name of Henry McLeish, be agreed to. Are we all agreed?  Motion agreed to.  That the draft Scotland Act 1998 (Cross-Border Public Authorities) (Adaptation of Functions etc.) Order 1999, which was laid before the Parliament on 26 May, be approved.

The next question is, that motion S1M-29, in the name of Henry McLeish, be agreed to. Are we all agreed?

There will be a division. Members will remember that they should vote yes to agree with the motion, no to disagree with the motion, and abstain to record an abstention. Members have 30 seconds in which to cast their votes.

The result of the division is as follows: For 122, Against 3.  Motion agreed to.  That the draft Scotland Act 1998 (Border Rivers) Order 1999, which was laid before the Parliament on 26 May, be approved.

The next question is, that amendment S1M-19.2, in the name of Mr Alex Salmond, be agreed to. Are we all agreed?

In that case we will move to a division.  Members should vote yes to agree to the  amendment and no to disagree to the amendment; abstentions should also be recorded. Members will have 30 seconds in which to vote.

The result of the division is as follows: For 55, Against 63, Abstentions 7.  Amendment disagreed to.

The question is, that amendment S1M-19.3, in the name of Euan Robson, be agreed to. Are we agreed?  Amendment agreed to.

The question is, that motion S1M-19, in the name of Ross Finnie, as amended, be agreed to. Are we all agreed?  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  That the Parliament notes that - the Scottish Adjacent Waters Boundaries Order (S.I.1999/1126) in no way alters or restricts the freedom of the Scottish fleet to fish consistently with the Common Fisheries Policy of the European Union; from 1 July the Parliament will be charged with the responsibility of regulating fishing in the newly created Scottish zone of British Fishery Limits and fishing by all Scottish vessels no matter where they fish; consultation will be required with relevant bodies in the preparation of legislation relating to fishing in the Scottish zone and the Scottish fishing organisations have considerable concerns about the said Order; and calls upon the relevant Minister to (a) meet representatives of the Scottish fishing industry to discuss their concern and in particular their desire to re-establish the custom and practice of former years in regard to the east coast boundary and (b) convey such concerns to the Secretary of State for Scotland.

As a rule, we do not publish the names of those who wanted to speak but did not. However, Mr Davidson has now spoken in the debate, so his name will be recorded.

That concludes the business for today.   Meeting closed at 17:06.

You have five minutes.

I am always grateful to members who support the position of the Presiding Officer and his deputies, but we can usually cope on our own.

Before we move to decision time, I ask Henry McLeish to move formally motion S1M-29.  Motion moved,  That the draft Scotland Act 1998 (Border Rivers) Order 1999, which was laid before the Parliament on 26 May, be approved.- [Henry McLeish.]

I call Mr John Home Robertson to sum up.

I call Mr Richard Lochhead to sum up in no more than three minutes.

Please wind up now, Mr Tosh.

Please wind up now, Mr Tosh.

Please finish, Mr Tosh.

We are  approaching the end of the debate. I ask members to stick to their three minutes. If they do not, I will have to switch off their microphones.

Before calling Mr Murray Tosh, I remind members that they should indicate if they wish to intervene during another member's speech-that is the courtesy that we are trying to observe in this chamber.

A number of members have indicated a desire to speak so, from now on, the time limit for speeches will be three minutes.

Mr Salmond, could I ask you to wind up please?

The debate is now open for discussion.

I call Mr Euan Robson to speak to amendment S1M-19.3 and to move it formally.

I now call Richard Lochhead to speak to amendment S1M-19.2 and then to move it formally.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S1M-30, again in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, requesting that five affirmative orders relating to the Scotland Act 1998 should be considered by the Parliament.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the following draft Orders-  The Scotland Act 1998 (Modifications of Schedules 4 and 5) Order 1999; The Scotland Act 1998 (Functions Exercisable in or as Regards Scotland) Order 1999; The Scotland Act 1998 (Transfer of Functions to the Scottish Ministers etc.) Order 1999; The Scotland Act 1998 (Cross-Border Public Authorities) (Adaptation of Functions etc.) Order 1999; and The Scotland Act 1998 (Border Rivers) Order 1999 be considered by the Parliament.- [Mr McCabe.]

The question is, that motion S1M-30, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, be agreed to. Is that agreed?  Motion agreed to.

No. Only three orders will be debated this afternoon, Mr Gallie, so that problem does not arise.

I can give you 24 hours as that order is not being debated until tomorrow.  The next item of business is a debate on the approval of draft orders as detailed in the following motions:  That the draft Scotland Act 1998 (Modifications of Schedules 4 and 5) Order 1999, which was laid before the Parliament on 26 May, be approved.  That the draft Scotland Act 1998 (Functions Exercisable in or as Regards Scotland) Order 1999, which was laid  before the Parliament on 26 May, be approved.  That the draft Scotland Act 1998 (Transfer of Functions to the Scottish Ministers etc.) Order 1999, which was laid before the Parliament on 26 May, be approved.  For the convenience of the Parliament, Mr McLeish will formally move only the first of those motions at this stage, but will speak on all three. I invite other members to speak on any individual motion, or on all three motions.  The debate is scheduled to end at 5 pm, and will be followed by decision time, when questions will be put on the three motions. I will ask Mr McLeish formally to move his other two motions before questions are put. I do not propose to set any time limits for members' contributions, although I may review that towards the end of the time that has been allocated for the debate if a large number of members are still waiting to speak.

That information will be included in the business list at a later date; it is not necessary for it to appear now.  It is time to put the question on the motion. The question is, that motion S1M-17, in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, be agreed to. Are we all agreed?

In that case, there will be a division. There will be a 30-second period in which members may vote; members should not cast their votes until the red light appears on the console. If members wish to agree, they should press the yes button. If they wish to disagree, they should press the no button, and if they wish to abstain, they should record that by pressing the appropriate button. The red light is now on, so members may vote.

The result of the division is as follows: For 66, Against 46. There were no abstentions.  Motion agreed to.

That matter has not yet been raised in the Parliamentary Bureau. If parties have concerns about it, I am sure that it will be raised in future.

Are members in agreement with Mr Reid's proposal?

Thank you very much.

Before we move to the first item of business, I would like to make it clear that a revised version of today's business bulletin has been published. It includes motion S1M-30 in the name of Mr Tom McCabe, which is in the programme for this afternoon.  The first item of business this afternoon is consideration of a business motion from the Parliamentary Bureau setting out a business programme. Consideration of that motion will take place in a moment; I intend to put the question on the motion no later than 10 minutes after it is moved. If the motion is approved, the business programme for the remainder of the afternoon will be as set out in today's revised business bulletin.  I call on Tom McCabe to move the motion.   Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following business programme:  Wednesday 2 June that the following draft Orders-  The Scotland Act 1998 (Modifications of Schedules 4 and 5) Order 1999; The Scotland Act 1998 (Functions Exercisable in or as Regards Scotland) Order 1999; The Scotland Act 1998 (Transfer of Functions to the Scottish Ministers etc.) Order 1999; The Scotland Act 1998 (Cross-Border Public Authorities) (Adaptation of Functions etc.) Order 1999; and The Scotland Act 1998 (Border Rivers) Order 1999 be considered by the Parliament.  followed by  Debate on the following motions-  S1M-25 Mr Henry McLeish:  That the draft Scotland Act 1998 (Modifications of Schedules 4 and 5) Order 1999, which was laid before the Parliament on 26 May, be approved.  S1M-26 Mr Henry McLeish: That the draft Scotland Act 1998 (Functions Exercisable in or as Regards Scotland) Order 1999, which was laid before the Parliament on 26 May, be approved.  S1M-27 Mr Henry McLeish:  That the draft Scotland Act 1998 (Transfer of Functions to the Scottish Ministers etc.) Order 1999, which was laid before the Parliament on 26 May, be approved.  5.00 pm Decision Time  Thursday 3 June 1999  2.30 pm Debate on the following motions-  S1M-28 Mr Henry McLeish: That the draft Scotland Act  1998 (Cross-Border Public Authorities) (Adaptation of Functions etc.) Order 1999, which was laid before the Parliament on 26 May, be approved.  S1M-29 Mr Henry McLeish: That the draft Scotland Act 1998 (Border Rivers) Order 1999, which was laid before the Parliament on 26 May, be approved.  No later than 4.00 pm  Debate on the following motion-  S1M-19 Ross Finnie:  That the Parliament notes that the Scottish Adjacent Waters Boundaries Order (S.I.1999/1126) in no way alters or restricts the freedom of the Scottish fleet to fish consistent with the Common Fisheries Policy of the European Union; notes that from 1 July the Parliament will be charged with the responsibility of regulating fishing in the newly created Scottish zone of British Fishery Limits and fishing by all Scottish vessels no matter where they fish; and will require consultation with relevant bodies in the preparation of legislation relating to fishing in the Scottish zone.  5.00 pm Decision Time  Tuesday 8 June 1999  2.30 pm Business Motion  No later than 3.00 pm  Motion(s) on the establishment of Committees  followed by  Motion on Members' Allowances  5.00 pm Decision Time  Wednesday 9 June 1999  10.30 am Business Motion  followed by  Debate(s) on the Consultative Steering Group report and draft Information Strategy.  followed by  Motion on the Parliamentary Recess (to be taken without debate).  12.30 pm Decision Time.- [Mr McCabe.]

Members should now take their seats.  Good afternoon. To begin the proceedings, I invite Mr George Reid to make a statement on the sad and untimely passing of Kenny Macintyre.

To begin proceedings for this afternoon-

Are you finished, Mr Gibson?

Mr Harper, please sit down. Mr Raffan is not going to give way.

It was an intervention as well.

Could you wind up please, Mr Raffan?

Could you sit down, please?

At the beginning of this afternoon's proceedings, Sir David said that, if members used all their time, not all those who wanted to speak would be able to. If people exceed their time, the difficulty becomes even worse.

It is taken out of your time-it is part of the allotted time for the individual's speech.

stood.