Moving these motions is often a formality, but I hope that you will bear with me for a second, Presiding Officer, as I say that it is with great pride that I move the motion setting out the timings for the Marriage and Civil Partnership (Scotland) Bill. Most importantly, l look forward to the debate and to saying a big “I do” to equal marriage at decision time. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that, during stage 3 of the Marriage and Civil Partnership (Scotland) Bill, debate on groups of amendments shall, subject to Rule 9.8.4A, be brought to a conclusion by the time limit indicated, that time limit being calculated from when the stage begins and excluding any periods when other business is under consideration or when a meeting of the Parliament is suspended (other than a suspension following the first division in the stage being called) or otherwise not in progress: Groups 1 and 2: 50 minutes Groups 3 and 4: 1 hour 15 minutes Groups 5 and 6: 1 hour 30 minutes—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

Will the member take an intervention?

I respect the right of everyone of a religion to hold their views, but does the member acknowledge that the current legislation—the law—discriminates against me and other LGBT people in Scotland?

Thank you very much. That makes 10 minutes that we could have spent continuing the debate that we just had. It was a fantastic debate and a great advert for this Parliament. [Interruption.]

The language that has been used by some Opposition members about next week’s business has been nothing short of ridiculous—although I could use other words—especially when we consider that, just last week, during the landmark passing of the Scottish Independence Referendum Bill at stage 3, they showed little interest in the referendum. Of the last nine speakers in last week’s debate, none came from the no parties. They could have pressed their buttons, but they all sat on their hands. [Interruption.]

The rank hypocrisy of the Opposition on this issue today is further exposed when we look at their behaviour in the chamber just four years ago.

Absolutely. I am addressing the motion and Mr Martin’s speech. The Government, which was then a minority, was delayed in holding a debate on a similar publication on Scotland’s future because the Opposition voted to block it. That hypocrisy is there on the record for all to see. To be clear, the Scottish Government is proposing that an inspired parliamentary question will be answered on Tuesday morning prior to the launch, which will be a press conference. The answer to the IPQ will include access for members to the full contents of the white paper and hard copies will be lodged in the Scottish Parliament information centre. The Deputy First Minister will then make a ministerial statement on Tuesday afternoon and on Wednesday there will be a full parliamentary debate, allowing the better together members to bring their combined wisdom to bear in the chamber. To any reasonable person, that would seem to be a comprehensive and balanced proposal. On the opening day of this Parliament in 1999, Donald Dewar said many things that are often quoted. I will quote just one: “A Scottish Parliament. Not an end: a means to greater ends.” Perhaps the feigned outrage of the MSPs from the no camp is because they know that next Tuesday marks a significant milestone in Scotland’s journey to those greater ends: an independent Parliament with the powers to build a better—[Interruption.]

—fairer and more prosperous Scotland.

Before I move the motion, I confirm for members that I will lodge another motion tomorrow that will remove business from Tuesday 19 November. Tonight’s business motion will allow next week’s business to take place while respecting members’ wishes to attend the funeral of our colleague Helen Eadie. I move, That the Parliament agrees (a) the following programme of business— Wednesday 20 November 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Motion of Condolence, Helen Eadie followed by Scottish Labour Party Business followed by Stage 1 Debate: Marriage and Civil Partnership (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 8.00 pm Decision Time Thursday 21 November 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Education and Lifelong Learning followed by Preliminary Stage Debate: Burrell Collection (Lending and Borrowing) (Scotland) Bill followed by Stage 1 Debate: Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill followed by Financial Resolution: Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Tuesday 26 November 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 27 November 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 28 November 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body Questions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time (b) that Rules 2.2.4, 2.2.5(b) and 2.2.5(c) of Standing Orders be suspended for the purpose of allowing the Parliament to meet until 8.00 pm, and Rule 5.6.1(c) of Standing Orders be suspended for the purpose of Members’ Business, on Wednesday 20 November 2013. Motion agreed to.

I am frustrated that the Labour Party feels it necessary to bring this to the chamber and to oppose business. The Scottish Government has been up front about the costs and savings of the cancellation of the Glasgow airport rail link since September 2009. The information is already in the public domain. The Labour Party is more than aware of the many procedures that allow it to hold the Government to account and I would urge it to use those procedures. In addition, it is entirely within Labour’s gift to use its debating time to debate whatever takes its fancy. Perhaps the Labour Party might like to consider spending some of its debating time defending its plans for a bridge to Ireland, as outlined by Anne McTaggart. More seriously, it might like to spend some of its time defending its position on tolls on the Forth bridge and the new Queensferry crossing, which Arthur Midwinter suggested is under consideration by Labour’s cuts commission. The Labour Party really needs to get a grip.

The motion would allow the Justice Sub-Committee on Policing to hold meetings at 1 o’clock on a Thursday, even if members’ business has not concluded. On a number of occasions, members’ business on a Thursday has been so interesting and well-subscribed that it has overrun well past the usual time of 1 o’clock. That causes difficulty for the Justice Sub-Committee on Policing, which is scheduled to meet at 1 o’clock and has to wait until members’ business has concluded before being allowed to start its meeting. In looking at this request from the sub-committee, the bureau was clear that we respect the time in this Parliament for plenary sessions. That includes members’ business. Therefore, while we have accepted the sub-committee’s request, we have put a time limit on the change of 20 December 2013. I move, That the Parliament agrees that, under Rule 12.3.3B of Standing Orders, the Justice Sub-Committee on Policing can meet, if necessary, at 1.00pm on a Thursday until 20 December 2013 for the purpose of conducting a meeting of the sub-committee and that any meeting held under this rule is concluded before the commencement of a meeting of the Parliament that afternoon.

The Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body discussed issues around this debate at its meeting on Thursday and requested that a motion be lodged. The Parliamentary Bureau unanimously agreed that we should take this forward and have the motion on the agenda today, and it is therefore proposed to change today’s business to allow the debate to take place.

Will the member take an intervention?

So was I.

The historic Edinburgh agreement that was signed on 15 October 2012 paved the way for the referendum that will be held on 18 September next year. Central to that agreement was the commitment to ensure that the Parliament will deliver a referendum that meets the highest standards of fairness, transparency and propriety. That is reflected in schedule 4 to the referendum bill, which proposes restrictions on what the Government, public bodies and the Parliament can do during the 28 days prior to the referendum. [Interruption.]

That 28-day period is exactly the same as was used for the most recent Scottish Parliament elections. To comply with the spirit of both the Edinburgh agreement and schedule 4 to the referendum bill, it is clear that the Parliament cannot operate as normal during the 28-day period. What could be debated and scrutinised would be heavily restricted. Therefore, the bureau is proposing alterations to the normal nine-week summer recess period. [Interruption.]

In coming to a decision, there are three principles that we should adhere to. First, I believe that there should be no extension to the normal period of recess, whereas the proposal that has been put forward by the Conservative Party and supported by the Labour Party and the Liberals would add one week to the recess. [Interruption.]

Secondly, we should be mindful of school holidays in Scotland. Thirdly, we should protect the 28-day period. [Interruption.]

Contrary to the wild suggestions of some, that will ensure that we maintain the time for the Parliament to conduct business without restrictions. While others wish to waste parliamentary time, we wish to protect it. The cat is well and truly out of the bag and now we know the real reason for the feigned outrage of the unholy Labour-Tory-Liberal alliance. Far from being concerned about parliamentary procedures, those parties have been found out for simply seeking to grant themselves an extra week’s holiday. They should all be ashamed of themselves. These proposals achieve all of the three principles and simply move three weeks of the usual nine-week recess from August to September. It is a sensible and pragmatic approach for this period, which is of huge significance to our nation’s history.

When the Minister for Environment and Climate Change made a statement on 27 March on crofting, he said that it was his intention to propose a timetable for the bill that would enable Parliament to consider carefully the proposed changes while ensuring that the matter is resolved quickly. The motion allows for suspension of a number of standing orders for the purpose of parliamentary consideration of the expedited process of the Crofting (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees, for the purposes of its consideration of the Crofting (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill— (a) in Rule 9.6.3A of the Standing Orders, that the word “fourth” be substituted for “fifth” where it first occurs; (b) under Rule 9.6.3A of the Standing Orders, that the Parliament shall consider the general principles of the Crofting (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill on the fourth sitting day after publication of the lead committee report; (c) that Rules 9.5.3A and 9.5.3B of Standing Orders be suspended; and (d) in Rule 9.10.2 of the Standing Orders, that the words “except on a final lodging-day, when amendments may be lodged only until 12:00” be suspended.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

Might the Labour Party have considered using the time that it had the week before it asked for that statement to discuss the issue?

This amendment to business was agreed at the Parliamentary Bureau this morning. It allows for the taking of the oath or making of an affirmation by Christian Allard, who will join this Parliament as a member for North East Scotland. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the following revision to the programme of business for Wednesday 15 May 2013— delete 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Culture and External Affairs; Infrastructure, Investment and Cities followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Aquaculture and Fisheries (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business – S4M-05891 Aileen McLeod: History is Made at the Mull of Galloway and insert 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Member’s Oath/Affirmation – Christian Allard followed by Portfolio Questions Culture and External Affairs Infrastructure, Investment and Cities followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Aquaculture and Fisheries (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.15 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business – S4M-05891 Aileen McLeod: History is Made at the Mull of Galloway Motion agreed to.

The revision is to our business for this week, which was originally agreed on Tuesday 26 March by the Parliamentary Bureau. However, following further discussions at the bureau this morning, it was agreed to move the Green Party and Independent group debate from Wednesday to Thursday and the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee debate from Thursday to Wednesday. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees to the following revision to the programme of business for Wednesday 17 April and Thursday 18 April 2013— Wednesday 17 April delete followed by Scottish Green Party and Independent Group Debate: There is Still Such a Thing as Society and insert followed by Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee Debate: Public Procurement Reform Thursday 18 April delete 2.30 pm Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee Debate: Public Procurement Reform and insert 2.30 pm Scottish Green Party and Independent Group Debate: There is Still Such a Thing as Society.—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

This revision will allow for a statement this afternoon on decrofting by owner-occupier crofters. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 28 March 2013— delete 2.30 pm Stage 3 Proceedings: High Hedges (Scotland) Bill and insert 2.30 pm Ministerial Statement: De-crofting by Owner Occupier Crofters followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: High Hedges (Scotland) Bill Motion agreed to.

Will the member give way?

In moving the motion, Presiding Officer, I confirm that this revision allows for a historic statement on Scotland’s independence referendum tomorrow. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 21 March 2013— delete 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Debate: Scotland’s Financial Strength and insert 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Ministerial Statement: Scotland’s Independence Referendum 2014 followed by Scottish Government Debate: Scotland’s Financial Strength Motion agreed to.

I am disappointed, although not surprised, that the Labour Party opposes the business programme for next week. Paul Martin talked about unanswered questions. The big unanswered question is why Tony Blair misled the people of this country in order to send our soldiers to an illegal war in Iraq. It is exactly 10 years to the day since the Scottish Parliament debated the Iraq war, and next week marks 10 years since the invasion began. This is an opportune time to look back and to learn from the appalling mistakes and distortions that led the United Kingdom into an illegal conflict that came at a very high cost—a cost that many veterans are paying to this day. The Government takes the view that, as long as our brave young men and women are sent to conflicts around the world, this Parliament should—[Interruption.]

This Parliament should have the opportunity to discuss the reasons why, and to recognise the service that those veterans have given. Ten years on, Ed Miliband has recognised that the Iraq war was wrong. The debate will provide all members with a chance to reflect—it will perhaps give Johann Lamont the opportunity to admit that she was wrong when she supported the illegal war in Iraq. I am not surprised that Labour opposes a debate on Trident, on a day when an opinion poll shows that 80 per cent of Scots are against having its replacement on our shores—and only a day after the UK Labour defence spokesperson joined the Conservatives in confirming that his party was in favour of its renewal. I am not surprised that Labour opposes a debate on Scotland’s financial strength, in a week when it was shown that this country, if we were independent, would be relatively better off than the UK to the tune of £4.4 billion, which is £824 for every man, woman and child in Scotland. I believe that the people who elected us to represent them expect no less than for the Parliament to debate such issues—issues that affect the lives of those who live here. The Government will continue to do that. Opposition to such debates represents just three of the many reasons that prove that the Labour Party is scarcely fit for opposition, let alone government. I urge the Parliament to support the business motion.

I confirm that the revision to business will allow for a ministerial statement on horsemeat substitution in Europe. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the following revision to the programme of business for Tuesday 19 February 2013— after followed by Topical Questions (if selected) insert followed by Ministerial Statement: Horsemeat Substitution in Europe Motion agreed to.

I would like to be helpful to the chamber. On the point that Willie Rennie made just now and Alison McInnes made this morning, I can confirm that the Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee was notified of the document and given the document this morning prior to its release. It is absolutely correct that the Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee should look at the document, give it proper parliamentary scrutiny and decide what action Parliament should take.

I am pleased to confirm to the Parliament that the statement next Tuesday will meet both the section 35 and the section 36 requirements of the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009. I am grateful to Patrick Harvie for giving us notice of his point of order.

I confirm that the revision allows for a statement on Remploy on Tuesday. I move, That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Tuesday 18 December 2012— after followed by Topical Questions (if selected) insert followed by Ministerial Statement: Remploy.—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

Before I move the motion, I notify members that it is the Government’s intention to have a ministerial statement on Remploy next Tuesday. I will seek Parliament’s agreement to that tomorrow. I move, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Tuesday 18 December 2012 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Debate: Commonwealth Games 2014 followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Growth and Infrastructure Bill – UK Legislation followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 19 December 2012 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Health and Wellbeing followed by Stage 1 Debate: Water Resources (Scotland) Bill followed by Financial Resolution: Water Resources (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 20 December 2012 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Finance Committee Debate: Draft Budget 2012-13 followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Tuesday 8 January 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 9 January 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Infrastructure, Investment and Cities Culture and External Affairs followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 10 January 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

We were alerted to the point of order through the press. I confirm that a number of FOI requests were received by the Government on 8 October from various sources. The PQs from Lewis Macdonald were received one day later, on 9 October. The FOI requests were answered on Friday 7 December; the PQs were answered one working day later, on Monday 10 December.

The change of decision time to 6pm tonight will allow for a fuller debate on the Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee’s report on the Scotland Act 1998 (Modification of Schedule 5) Order 2013 [Draft]. I move, That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Wednesday 5 December 2012— delete 5.30 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business and insert 6.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Motion agreed to.

I highlight the alterations to Tuesday’s business. We will now have a ministerial statement on the annual European Union fisheries negotiations followed by a debate without motion on the Leveson report—the way forward for Scotland. I move, That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Tuesday 4 December, Wednesday 5 December and Thursday 6 December— delete Tuesday 4 December 2012 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Debate: Annual EU Fisheries Negotiations followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 5 December 2012 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth followed by Scottish Labour Party Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 6 December 2012 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Debate: The Modernisation of Scotland’s Career Services followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time and insert Tuesday 4 December 2012 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Ministerial Statement: Annual EU Fisheries Negotiations followed by Scottish Government Debate: The Leveson Report – The Way Forward for Scotland followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.15 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 5 December 2012 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth followed by Scottish Labour Party Debate: Policing in Scotland followed by Scottish Labour Party Debate: Scotland’s Health Service followed by Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee Debate: 1st Report 2012: The Scotland Act 1998 (Modification of Schedule 5) Order 2013 [draft] followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.30 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 6 December 2012 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Ministerial Statement: Rail followed by Scottish Government Debate: The Modernisation of Scotland’s Career Services followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Motion agreed to.

I bring members’ attention to a change of business tomorrow to allow a ministerial statement on the United Kingdom Public Service Pensions Bill legislative consent motion. I move, That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Wednesday 28 November 2012— after 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Education and Lifelong Learning insert followed by Ministerial Statement: UK Public Service Pensions Bill - Legislative Consent Motion delete 5.00 pm Decision Time and insert 5.30 pm Decision Time Motion agreed to.

Before I move the motion, I point out that the change is to allow for a debate on further education, as requested by the Liberal Democrats. I move, That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 22 November 2012— delete 2.30 pm Scottish Government Debate: The Modernisation of Scotland’s Career Services and insert 2.30 pm Scottish Government Debate: Further Education Motion agreed to.

We understand that there appears to be a difference between the figures from the Scottish Parliament information centre and Government figures. We are looking into that and we will update the Parliament as soon as possible.

Does the member think that the £350 million that has been prioritised for a new Trident system could be better spent?

I first of all apologise for not being here earlier, Deputy Presiding Officer. I move, That the Parliament agrees that, during stage 3 of the Local Government Finance (Unoccupied Properties etc.) (Scotland) Bill, debate on groups of amendments shall, subject to Rule 9.8.4A, be brought to a conclusion by the time limit indicated, that time limit being calculated from when the stage begins and excluding any periods when other business is under consideration or when a meeting of the Parliament is suspended (other than a suspension following the first division in the stage being called) or otherwise not in progress: Groups 1 and 2: 30 minutes Groups 3 and 4: 1 hour 5 minutes Groups 5 and 6: 1 hour 30 minutes Groups 7 and 8: 1 hour 50 minutes. Motion agreed to.

The motion will put in place a committee to examine the section 30 order that resulted from the Edinburgh agreement—which was discussed earlier in the chamber—the referendum bill, and its implementation and any associated legislation. Although members may have different views on, and desires for, the outcome of the referendum, I am sure that all members on the committee and across Parliament will work hard to ensure that the committee is diligent in its duties on behalf of the people of Scotland. I move, That the Parliament shall establish a committee of the Parliament as follows: Name of Committee: Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee. Remit: To consider matters relating to The Scotland Act 1998 (Modification of Schedule 5) Order 2013, the Referendum (Scotland) Bill, its implementation and any associated legislation. Duration: Until 31 December 2014. Number of members: 11. Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish Labour Party. Membership: Bruce Crawford, Annabelle Ewing, Linda Fabiani, Stewart Maxwell, Stuart McMillan, Rob Gibson, James Kelly, Patricia Ferguson, Annabel Goldie, Tavish Scott, Patrick Harvie.

In moving the motion, I bring to the chamber’s attention the fact that the revision to the business programme for tomorrow will allow for a ministerial statement on the west coast main line. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 4 October 2012— delete 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Debate: Employability and insert 2.15 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.15 pm Ministerial Statement: West Coast Main Line followed by Scottish Government Debate: Employability followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Defamation Bill – UK Legislation—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

The motion provides for changes in committee membership following ministerial appointments. I move, That the Parliament agrees that— James Dornan be appointed to replace Humza Yousaf as a member of the Public Audit Committee; Brian Adam be appointed to replace Margaret Burgess as a member of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee; John Mason be appointed to replace Paul Wheelhouse as a member of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee; Bruce Crawford be appointed to replace Paul Wheelhouse as a member of the Finance Committee; Jean Urquhart be appointed to replace Mark McDonald as a member of the Finance Committee; Willie Coffey be appointed to replace Bill Kidd as a member of the European and External Relations Committee; Roderick Campbell be appointed to replace Aileen McLeod as a member of the European and External Relations Committee; Marco Biagi be appointed to replace Stuart McMillan as a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee; Richard Lyle be appointed to replace Mark McDonald as a member of the Public Petitions Committee; Chic Brodie be appointed to replace Sandra White as a member of the Public Petitions Committee; Stewart Stevenson be appointed to replace James Dornan as a member of the Subordinate Legislation Committee; Stuart McMillan be appointed to replace Chic Brodie as a member of the Subordinate Legislation Committee; Marco Biagi be appointed to replace Stuart McMillan as a member of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee; David Torrance be appointed to replace Angus MacDonald as a member of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee; Dennis Robertson be appointed to replace John Wilson as a member of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee; George Adam be appointed to replace Marco Biagi as a member of the Education and Culture Committee; Colin Beattie be appointed to replace Jean Urquhart as a member of the Education and Culture Committee; Mark McDonald be appointed to replace George Adam as a member of the Health and Sport Committee; Aileen McLeod be appointed to replace Jim Eadie as a member of the Health and Sport Committee; David Torrance be appointed to replace Richard Lyle as a member of the Health and Sport Committee; Sandra White be appointed to replace Humza Yousaf as a member of the Justice Committee; John Wilson be appointed to replace Joe FitzPatrick as a member of the Local Government and Regeneration Committee; Stewart Stevenson be appointed to replace David Torrance as a member of the Local Government and Regeneration Committee; Stuart McMillan be appointed to replace James Dornan as a member of the Local Government and Regeneration Committee; Angus MacDonald be appointed to replace Dennis Robertson as a member of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee; Jim Eadie be appointed to replace Aileen McLeod as a member of the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee; and Linda Fabiani be appointed to replace Margaret Burgess as a member of the Welfare Reform Committee.

The changes to committee membership will strengthen the SNP’s representation across committees. I congratulate all the members and look forward to their input on committees. I know that members who are moving to new positions look forward to working closely with Opposition members across the Parliament in helping to take forward the Government’s programme for government.

In moving the motion, I bring it to Parliament’s attention that, as agreed at the Parliamentary Bureau meeting yesterday, we have changed Thursday’s business with the insertion of a ministerial statement on the renewables obligation Scotland review announcement. I move, That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 13 September 2012— delete 2.30 pm Scottish Government Debate: Electricity Market Reform and insert 2.30 pm Ministerial Statement: Renewables Obligation (Scotland) Review Announcement followed by Scottish Government Debate: Electricity Market Reform—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

3. To ask the First Minister what impact the Scottish Government considers further reductions in the UK welfare budget will have on poverty in Scotland. (S4F-00804)

Those figures are extremely worrying. The Scottish Parliament can rightly be proud of the progress that we have made on a range of social issues. For example, the latest figures show that levels of homelessness have dropped by about a fifth in the past year and that local authorities are set to meet their 2012 commitment. However, that progress is threatened by the UK Prime Minister’s attempts to portray thousands of low-paid workers and out-of-work youngsters as scroungers who do not deserve the safety net of housing benefit. What can we do to protect Scots from these ill thought out and damaging proposals, which I am sure my colleagues on the Labour benches agree would never have been, and never would be, proposed by any past, present or future Scottish Government?

I think that all members in the chamber agree about the importance of tourism and treating our tourist guests with respect. Does Hanzala Malik believe that it would be better if the Scottish Parliament made the decisions in that regard, rather than another place?

It is a privilege to take part in the debate, and it has been great to hear examples of Scotland’s offer for tourists. The figures released by VisitScotland continue to provide encouragement for the Scottish economy. VisitScotland, the Scottish Tourism Alliance and all the other organisations that are involved in the tourist industry should be highly commended for their work in maintaining such a vibrant sector during really difficult times, in making the most of people who go on staycations, and in encouraging people from the rest of these isles, and further afield, to make Scotland their destination when money is tight. They have done very well. It is great to hear about other parts of Scotland, but members will not be surprised to hear that I will spend some time talking about my constituency in Dundee. Dundee is a city in transformation; it is changing from jute, jam and journalism to a vibrant city that hopes to attract tourists to our culture and innovative industries, and to the offer in our neighbourhood. The key to the city’s transformation is very much the people of Dundee and their aspirations. That is encapsulated in the new V&amp;A at Dundee, which will be one of the biggest tourist draws in Scotland and probably across Europe. However, when I talk about Dundee, and when Hanzala Malik talks about Glasgow, it is important that our various tourist offers should not be considered as individual attractions—they are much stronger if they are offered as a whole. My colleague Graeme Dey talked about bringing tourists to see Glamis castle in his constituency on the back of the Disney Pixar film “Brave”. I hope that Dundee, too, will benefit, with those tourists spending some time in my constituency. As I look around the chamber, I see colleagues from other areas in which there are tourist attractions that Dundee can benefit from. Rod Campbell’s constituency contains some of the finest golf courses in Scotland; his constituents will benefit from the V&amp;A, because people who come to get a bit of culture will also bring their golf clubs and head to St Andrews. Equally, when the V&amp;A is established I hope that people who come to play golf at Scotland’s oldest golf courses will decide to come to Dundee too to see our taste of tourism and what we have to offer. In order for that to happen, of course, we must have connections—between our cities, and between our cities and our urban areas. Our vision for Dundee, in terms of the waterfront redevelopment, is to ensure that when people come to our city—whether they come specifically as tourists to Dundee or are passing through—they get the best possible offer. However, it is crucial that we have links not only with St Andrews, Carnoustie and the other areas around Dundee, but with Edinburgh, Aberdeen and Glasgow. Whenever more tourists come to Dundee, I genuinely believe that the rest of Scotland will benefit, too. The Ryder cup and the Commonwealth games will be of particular advantage to the area in which the event takes place, but if we can get the connections right and ensure that the offer we provide is a holistic one for the whole of Scotland, we can encourage tourists to spend much more time in Scotland, and we will all be winners. Dundee’s transformation to ensure that it has an offer to compete with Edinburgh and Glasgow has been very much a partnership between Scottish National Party-led Dundee City Council, the Scottish Government and a host of local businesses that have worked to revitalise and revolutionise the heart of Dundee city centre. The important parts of that are not just the Victoria and Albert, but the transformation of the train station and so on. All that is very important. It is a genuine shame that the same is not happening in Aberdeen, where the current Labour-Conservative coalition appears to be turning its back on a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to transform that city. I hope that those councillors change their minds. Although I represent Dundee and it might seem that the proposals for Aberdeen would be very much to the advantage of Aberdeen city, a strong Aberdeen city is good for Dundee.

I think that Dundee City Council would stand up and make it absolutely clear that Dundee is open for business. I hope that the Labour-Conservative council in Aberdeen changes its mind, because Scotland’s tourism offer will be stronger if it is connected Scotland-wide. I congratulate VisitScotland on its efforts to ensure that Scotland’s offer is advertised as widely as possible, particularly as part of the Disney Pixar film “Brave”. It should be commended.

Will the member take an intervention?

Which of those 10,000 people should not get the opportunity of a modern apprenticeship?

6. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s response is to the figures from the National Records of Scotland showing that the population is at its highest-ever level. (S4F-00742)

Scotland has a proud history of welcoming people from around the globe, and they have undoubtedly enriched Scottish society. However, in Dundee our life sciences and games sectors often have problems in recruiting specialist staff due to restrictive United Kingdom immigration laws. What steps can the First Minister take to get the message across to the UK Government that “immigration” is not a dirty word, and to ensure that we can recruit the talent that is needed to drive forward Scotland’s economy?

I, too, welcome the statement and the progressive nature of the proposals, which many of our colleagues in the trade union movement would support. What discussions does the cabinet secretary plan to have with the Public and Commercial Services Union on the proposals to set up revenue Scotland?

I want to follow on from Mark Griffin’s question about district heating schemes. There are a number of good district heating schemes in Dundee and elsewhere in Scotland. Last week, I and other members of the Local Government and Regeneration Committee visited Shetland—

In Shetland, the committee saw the district heating scheme in Lerwick, which is powered by renewable heat, which would otherwise be lost to the sea or the atmosphere.

What efforts does the cabinet secretary suggest be made to encourage more such renewable energy schemes for heat?

4. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to ensure that there is adequate transport infrastructure in place for visitors to the V&amp;A at Dundee. (S4O-01042)

I assure the minister that the people of Dundee are grateful for the Scottish Government’s contribution towards improving our train station. The V&amp;A has the potential to be one of the biggest attractions in Europe, let alone Scotland. Given that we are expecting up to 500,000 additional visitors to Dundee as a result, will the Scottish Government carry out an impact study for Dundee on how rail, bus, road and air services can be improved to accommodate the increased volume of visitors?

How many civilian staff have lost their jobs through compulsory redundancy as a result of the Liberal Democrat-Conservative Government at Westminster?

Will the member take an intervention?

I point out that it was Labour’s decision not to concentrate on one subject this morning but to try to give everyone on its portfolio list a wee shottie in a debate. This is Labour’s debate.

I will take an intervention from Ms Baillie in a second, to give her a second chance to apologise to all the workers in NHS Tayside whom she besmirched in her press statement of 3 May. The item is still on her website and is still besmirching the hard-working staff at NHS Tayside, who have done a fantastic job to reduce waiting lists over the years. I will give Ms Baillie the opportunity to apologise to them and to make clear that she will remove the press statement from her website.

I am disappointed but not surprised that Ms Baillie did not apologise. I take it that she will remove the offending press statement, which attacks hard-working staff, from her website. The motion represents an attempt to attack the SNP Government on waiting times, but the simple, irrefutable fact is that waiting times have come down under the SNP Government. The days are gone when tens of thousands languished on waiting lists without any guarantee of treatment and thousands more were on hidden waiting lists, which the Labour Party—sorry, Scottish Labour—designed specifically to fudge the figures. Politicians’ surgeries the length and breadth of the country were full of constituents protesting about long, worry-filled waits for treatment. Right now, we have a Government that has achieved record waiting time reductions. We have the best-performing NHS in the United Kingdom. We should be proud of what our NHS has achieved. No one is suggesting that there is nothing to consider. The cabinet secretary made it clear that she takes seriously the concerns from Lothian, and the local member, Jim Eadie, made a passionate speech about his concern for his constituents. No one is trying to paper over the cracks where things are not right. However, let us put on record that our NHS is doing a fantastic job throughout the country. In Tayside, the most recent figures show that 100 per cent of in-patients and day cases are waiting for less than nine weeks, 100 per cent of new out-patients are waiting 12 weeks or less, 97.1 per cent of patients are going from referral to treatment in under 18 weeks and 96.6 per cent of people in whom cancer is suspected are starting treatment within 62 days. Those are fantastic results and a fantastic record, which is why NHS Tayside took the unusual step of copying all the regional and constituency members who represent Tayside into their response to Jackie Baillie, to make sure that her disingenuous press statement was put straight. It is disappointing that she has still failed to put the record straight today. Another disappointing issue is that, when we talk about health, the Labour Party is always prepared to use health for political posturing, rather than bringing forward concrete ideas that could support our NHS workers across the country.

4. To ask the First Minister what steps the Scottish Government is taking to address the findings of the recent World Health Organization survey, “Social determinants of health and well-being of young people: Health Behaviour in School-aged Children Study”. (S4F-00653)

It is clear from the report that there is room for improvement, but it is also clear that Scotland is moving towards being a healthier society. With the support of the Scottish National Party Government, the minority Dundee City Council administration took steps to improve the health of all Dundee’s residents. Work started on a £30 million swimming pool, £300,000 has been provided to upgrade the city’s velodrome, 20 primary school teachers have been funded to undertake postgraduate training in physical education and £170,000 has been earmarked to improve the city’s infrastructure to encourage people to walk and cycle more often.

Does the First Minister agree that those may be some of the reasons why the people of Dundee elected a majority SNP administration last week?

Will the member give way?

Oops. [Interruption.]

Does the member think that Alistair Darling’s judgment was correct when he made proposals to cut the capital budget that are now being implemented by the Conservatives at Westminster.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what training is available for 16 to 19-year-olds in Dundee as part of the opportunities for all programme. (S4O-00919)

I welcome the steps that the Scottish Government is taking to tackle youth unemployment. Those steps contrast starkly with the policies of the United Kingdom coalition Government, which are at the root of the problem. Will the minister confirm that training opportunities in the opportunities for all scheme are in areas in which candidates can move on to real jobs in potential growth sectors, rather than being training for training’s sake? The charge that was often laid against similar schemes that previous Administrations introduced was that they involved training for training’s sake.

Has the minister heard anecdotally about the impact that the private finance initiative contracts that the previous Administration signed are having on access to sporting facilities in schools across Scotland?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Will Gordon MacDonald give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

We are on the same page here. I, too, recognise the hard work and dedication of the Dundee factory. The workers in Dundee are highly skilled and make fantastic products. However, one of the problems that they face is that, even when they have the skills to meet a public sector contract, Remploy at a senior level decides not to tender for it. They have the skills to compete against the best in the world because they are the best manufacturers in the world, but Remploy will not tender for the contracts.

Will the member give way?

I am very pleased that crime is at a 35-year low and that the streets of Dundee are the safest that they have been in decades. Mr Kelly referred to strings being attached to pockets of money. My recollection is that for most of the previous parliamentary session, the Labour Party continually argued against the SNP’s proposals and determination to remove ring fencing—not just strings attached, but piles of bureaucracy and paperwork that prevented money from being used for the front-line services to which it was supposed to apply.

Will the member give way?

The settlement is good news for Scotland’s local authorities. It completes the funding for the delivery of vital services that the people of Scotland deserve and depend on. Before I talk about some of the good things in the settlement, I will talk briefly about buses. James Kelly’s comments were disingenuous, particularly given that anyone in Dundee will know that the Labour Party, as part of its budget proposals for this year, wanted to remove every single uncommitted penny in Dundee City Council’s fund to support the development of new bus routes in the city. It is very cynical on the one hand to say, “We’re not getting enough,” and on the other to want to remove every penny for future development and support of new bus routes in my city. We need to look at the budget in the context of the cuts that have come to the Scottish Government from the Conservative-Lib Dem Government in Westminster. Alistair Darling confirmed that the cuts would be “deeper and tougher” than those of Margaret Thatcher, and Mr Kelly almost used those words. The cuts were planned and proposed by the Labour Party.

No, I do not accept that—Mr Kelly is wrong. Just about every member of the Parliament agrees that health spending should be protected, although there is debate on that. If health and the Barnett consequentials from health should be protected for health and so we remove health spending from the budget, we find that the share of the remaining budget that goes to local government has been more than protected. Even in overall terms, we have protected local government’s share. For the past three years, that share has gone up when, under the previous Labour-Liberal Executive, it went down year on year.

Kevin Stewart makes an important point. Ever since the Parliament started, there have been complaints about how the formula applied to Aberdeen. All parties were prepared to comment on that, but this Government has been the first to tackle the issue. John Swinney and Derek Mackay should be praised for tackling the problem that Aberdeen faced in such difficult times. I turn to some of the good news in the settlement. Local government will receive £45 million to help it to deliver 30,000 affordable homes across Scotland. The protection of police numbers is crucial. I heard someone in the Labour Party suggest that we do not need to protect police numbers because crime is at an all-time low, but it is the other way round—it is because we have 1,000 extra police officers that crime is at an all-time low. Most important is the funding that local government is receiving for the council tax freeze, which will save the average householder in Dundee £192 this year. Across Scotland it will save—

I welcome the cabinet secretary’s long-standing and continuing commitment to the V&amp;A at Dundee. The cultural and economic benefits of the V&amp;A to not just Dundee, but Scotland as a whole, are clear. Can she talk about some of the benefits of the construction and development phase of the V&amp;A at Dundee, particularly given the 36 per cent cut that Scotland has received from Westminster?

I start by thanking the committee clerks for their diligent work during the inquiry, which resulted in the important report—“Report on the Living Wage in Scotland”—that we are discussing today. I also recognise the input of Kezia Dugdale and Mark Griffin, who are no longer members of the committee but were involved in the early stages of the inquiry. Our short-term inquiry into the living wage was held in December and January and we published our report on 3 February. We worked hard as a committee to achieve consensus, and I hope that our report helps to move the agenda forward in an informed way. Usually, we would wait until we had received the Government’s response before we brought a debate on a committee report to the chamber, but we hope that today’s debate will feed into the Government’s response, as part of the Presiding Officer’s programme for change. Although we look forward to hearing what the minister has to say, we understand that that will not be the Government’s final response. The aim of our inquiry was to consider the benefits of a living wage for individuals, families and communities. We looked at the introduction of the living wage by local authorities and explored the extent to which procurement can include criteria that are linked to payment of the living wage. The living wage is intended to address in-work poverty by providing an income level that enables households to adequately provide for themselves. It is set at £7.20 per hour, which is £1.12 above the United Kingdom’s national minimum wage of £6.08 per hour for adults. The figure of £7.20 per hour, which equates to about £14,000 a year, is not an arbitrary figure that was plucked out of thin air. The committee received evidence from Donald Hirsch of the centre for research in social policy at Loughborough University, who explained that the living wage is based on a calculation of the minimum income standard for the United Kingdom. The minimum income standard is an estimate of the minimum income that households need in order to have a minimum acceptable standard of living as defined by members of the public. It is based on regular research on what the public think, and it is supported by expert knowledge. It is important to note that the standard covers needs and not wants. It is largely made up of necessities such as food and shelter, and not luxuries. However, it is also about people having what they need in order to have the opportunities and choices that are necessary to participate in society. Good examples are swimming lessons and birthday presents for children. Technically, they are not essential, but they are included in the calculation as the public consider them necessary for the normal upbringing of a child, and it could be argued that their absence is detrimental to a child’s development. Some 550,000 adult employees in Scotland are paid less than the living wage. That is a lot of people who would benefit if the living wage was adopted. Although our inquiry focused on local government, it revealed that a higher percentage of employees in the private sector earn less than £7.20 per hour—the figure is 28.1 per cent—compared with employees in the public sector, where the figure is 3.9 per cent. We also identified a disparity between men and women, with 22.6 per cent of women earning less than £7.20 per hour compared with 14.6 per cent of men. The committee heard that those 550,000 Scots largely work in sales and customer service positions or as labourers, cleaners or catering assistants. The Scottish Government has been at the forefront of implementing the living wage, and all Government staff, agency staff and national health service staff already receive it. About 15,000 private sector workers have already benefited from the adoption of the living wage, but that leaves about 18,000 directly employed staff in local government who earn less than £7.20 per hour. We heard that a number of local authorities are actively considering joining, or have recently made the decision to join, the seven councils that are already paying a living wage. I was pleased to learn that Dundee’s Scottish National Party administration has asked officers to examine its implementation in Dundee City Council. As part of our inquiry, the committee also took evidence from the private sector, which, as I have said, employs the majority of those who are paid less than the living wage. It is fair to say that the witnesses were largely apprehensive about the living wage and raised concerns over its impact on jobs and over businesses becoming less competitive. The Confederation of British Industry Scotland went considerably further, claiming that the living wage would have a longer-term impact on local labour markets and on the affordability of service provision, and that it would have a disproportionately negative effect on young people. The committee was keen to hear the evidence base for that, but CBI Scotland did not accept the invitation to appear before the committee to answer questions on its written submission.

That is exactly the point that I was going to make. At the time of the introduction of the minimum wage, the CBI stated that “even a low minimum wage would reduce job opportunities and create major problems for wage structures in a wide range of companies”. It went on to warn of price rises, business closures and unemployment as workers were “priced out of jobs” when we were suggesting a minimum wage of £3 an hour. However, in 1999, six months after the minimum wage was introduced at £3.60, the CBI admitted to the Low Pay Commission that there was little evidence of an adverse impact on jobs or prices.

I cannot remember that far back. I defer to the member. In fact, in the five years following the introduction of the minimum wage, the unemployment level in the UK fell from 6.3 per cent to 4.7 per cent. We all know that correlation is not causation, but the committee received no firm evidence that increasing wages has an adverse impact on jobs. One of the reasons for that is that greater disposable income for workers leads to increased growth, which is something that the committee looked at in considering the impact of the living wage on local economies. People at the lower end of the income scale tend to spend more of their disposable income than those at the higher end. In submissions that were received by the committee, it was generally argued that the benefits of the living wage would feed into local economies and benefit local businesses, as recipients would generally spend the extra income locally. The committee received some positive comments on the living wage from the business sector. Perhaps tellingly, they came from London, where the living wage has been implemented successfully, with Greater London Authority staff receiving the living wage along with some 3,000 employees from the private sector, including employees at Unilever, JP Morgan and Barclays. People might think that, of course, people who work for Barclays would be paid more than the living wage, as bankers get paid huge amounts of money. However, I am not talking just about the folk at the top of those companies; I am talking about cleaners and catering staff in London receiving a minimum wage that is set at a higher level than in the rest of the UK. That has come about as a direct result of evidence from London that the introduction of the living wage makes business sense. The committee heard evidence from Transport for London that the living wage has had a positive impact on recruitment, retention, absenteeism and staff morale. After looking at the impacts on businesses and communities, we turned back to the impact on the most important group: the individuals on low wages. Evidence that we gathered showed that a living wage would increase low-paid workers’ disposable income, with a corresponding effect on their standard of living and morale. Questions were raised over the effectiveness of the living wage because of the possible loss of other benefits, including passported benefits such as free school meals. However, we were unable to find any evidence to suggest that the majority of recipients would not experience a positive outcome from receiving the living wage. In fact, if we look at the correlation with the minimum wage, the same potential is there, but there is always the opportunity for continual assessment of passported benefits and so on to ensure that people benefit from the minimum wage. I think that we could do the same to ensure that people benefit from the living wage. Another important facet of our inquiry was procurement. The committee heard that guidance on whether local authorities can specify payment of the living wage as a condition of the award of contracts under the European Union procurement directive is insufficiently clear. As a result, no local authorities that implement the living wage have managed to extend it and to impose such conditions in contracts. They have preferred to enter into voluntary arrangements, which are only partially successful. That is why the committee welcomes the fact that the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment has written to the European Commission seeking clarification of the issue. It would be good to hear from the minister whether there has been any progress on securing a response, although I think that I know what the answer might be. The report concludes that the living wage is a potential driver of preventative spending, which is at the heart of the Scottish Government’s public service reform. However, the committee accepts that it is not for the Scottish Government to determine wages in the private and voluntary sectors. As far as local government is concerned, the committee accepts that local authorities are accountable to their electorates and not to the Parliament or the Scottish Government, and it is therefore for individual councils to decide whether to introduce the living wage.

We questioned local authorities that have introduced the living wage, the most notable of which is Glasgow, about that issue. We received confirmation from the arm’s-length body that came to speak to us that it is possible for arm’s-length bodies to implement the living wage and that some do so. The committee accepts that councils face different economic circumstances. However, we received evidence from a number of councils that have introduced a living wage as part of an overall package of efficiencies that it has been possible, working with staff and trade unions, to deliver the living wage while making net savings overall. It is clear that there is a moral case for the implementation of the living wage to give our lowest-paid workers an improved standard of living. As I said, I think that we can deal with the concerns about the loss of benefits. It is becoming increasingly clear that there is also a business case for the living wage and that private companies in London are already seeing the benefits of implementing it. The majority of Boris Johnson quotes are used for comic effect but on this occasion the Mayor of London hit the nail on the head when he said: “Paying the London Living Wage is not only morally right ... but also it makes good business sense. What may appear to a company to be an unaffordable cost is more appropriately viewed as a sound investment decision reducing staff turnover and producing a more motivated and productive workforce.” What we have seen in London is the public sector leading the private sector, and the committee is hopeful that we will follow suit in Scotland. I commend the report to the chamber.

Will the member give way?

Mr Brown spoke about the need for funding. If he reads the committee’s report, he will see that a number of councils have introduced a living wage as part of a package, negotiated with trade unions and staff, that has delivered a saving.

Does the member regret voting against the SNP budget that introduced 25,000 modern apprenticeships?

That is the most positive speech that I have heard from Willie Rennie. The intervention was also constructive. [Laughter.] Maybe the other parties should take heed. If the cabinet secretary goes some way towards meeting Willie Rennie’s demands, perhaps he should change his speech slightly. However, I totally disagree with Willie Rennie on the mutualisation of Scottish Water. As John Mason said, now is not the time to be selling our assets. The budget demonstrates that our Scottish Government is working to protect households and businesses from the overzealous cuts agenda that is being imposed on Scotland by the Westminster coalition. However, we are limited in what we can do by the restrictions of devolution. Now is a good time to reflect on the Parliament’s existing powers. There was a strong campaign in 1997 against allowing us to sit in this Parliament and make the budget decisions that we are making today. I believe that, at the time, Iain McMillan assured us that devolution would lead to the collapse of business in Scotland and that a certain bra tycoon threatened to leave the country, so not a lot has changed. What has changed, however, is that as a result of having some—albeit limited—control over our finances, we have been able to ensure a fairer deal for businesses and families across Scotland. Without the Scottish Parliament and Government, people would be having to think twice before picking up their prescriptions, free education would have been consigned to the history books and Scottish students would be saddled with tens of thousands of pounds of debts. In Dundee, 1,424 small businesses, and tens of thousands across Scotland would not have had their rates removed completely. My constituents in Dundee would be paying an extra £192 this year on their council tax bills. Our NHS would be under threat of privatisation, free personal care would not exist and there would be no educational maintenance allowance. Those are all things that continue to be supported in this budget by this Government. Our Parliament has served the people of Scotland well, and today not even the Tory party—I hope—would dream of lodging a motion calling for the Scottish budget to be decided by George Osborne rather than John Swinney. Just as this Parliament’s authority to set a devolved budget is no longer challenged, except perhaps by some members of the unelected House of Lords, so it will be the case—when we achieve the full economic powers of independence—that no one will seriously argue for a return to decisions for Scotland being made in London by Westminster politicians. No one, not even the arch-unionist Jackson Carlaw, will come to the chamber and say “Hang on a minute, wouldn’t it be better if we just set a budget based on what would be best for middle England rather than what’s best for businesses and households across Scotland?”

I am not sure whether Jackson Carlaw agrees with my point or whether he is saying that in an independent Scotland he would come to the chamber and argue that we should set a budget based on what is best for middle England rather than on what is best for households and businesses in Scotland. It is clear that devolution is not enough and that it cannot protect families from the welfare reform cuts coming from Westminster, and nor can it protect business from lack of investment by the Tory-Lib Dem Government. Our Scottish Government is working hard to counter that lack of investment.

I believe that under independence this Parliament would be allowed to sit here and have a real discussion about all issues, and to decide what is best for the people of Scotland and not be told and dictated to by a Parliament in London that is, largely, unelected by the people of Scotland. The cabinet secretary has outlined what steps are being taken to keep the Scottish economy moving. I think that all sides in the chamber agree that the construction industry is central to that recovery, so I think that we should all welcome the Government’s moves to find new and innovative ways to fund house building. Today’s announcement of an extra £42 million for shared equity schemes and additional money for local authorities to help deliver another 30,000 affordable homes by 2016 will play a major part and is to be welcomed.

I think that what is not helping the construction industry is the cut in Scotland’s capital budget that is being imposed on Scotland from Westminster, which was planned by the previous Labour Administration and which Alistair Darling said would be “deeper” and harsher than cuts that were made by Margaret Thatcher. The budget goes as far as we can, but only the powers of full independence would ensure that Scottish jobs are never again threatened because of Westminster’s economic incompetence. The people of Scotland are the people who are best placed to make decisions on how the country is run. I look forward to future budget debates in which we can make decisions with the full range of powers that are vital to supporting communities and providing sustainable economic growth for all Scotland.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Does the member acknowledge that the cities growth fund was rolled into the local government allocation that the cities received?

Members will not be surprised to hear that my speech will focus on my home city, Dundee. The opening statement by the cabinet secretary, the additional £2 million and the fact that there is a member of the Cabinet with a responsibility for cities demonstrate our SNP Government’s commitment to our cities. The strategy, which will be implemented in collaboration with our cities, is to be welcomed across the chamber. It is important to recognise the good work that has been carried out by previous Administrations under the auspices of the cities growth fund which, although welcome, was restrictive in terms of what it could be used for. By rolling the cities growth fund into cities’ allocations, John Swinney removed the strings on how that money could be used that had been applied by previous Administrations. The cities growth fund did not show the results that might have been expected across Scotland, but Dundee was an exception in that regard. The use of the fund to pay for our central waterfront was an excellent example of how money can be used to benefit not only the city but the city region. That was the result of a cross-party approach that should be welcomed. Statistics such as the fact that 67 per cent of Scotland’s gross value added is generated in the six city regions demonstrate the importance of our cities in driving forward the economy and, given the current difficult economic situation, it is more important than ever that we support our cities and optimise economic growth and job creation. The cabinet secretary talked about Scotland’s six cities working together and building on their combined strengths to provide sustainable economic growth and attract large-scale private sector investment. I look forward to the number of our cities increasing to seven, and I fully support the fair city, Perth, in its bid to be awarded city status as part of the diamond jubilee celebrations. Perth is just 22 miles from Dundee and we share many economic, social and cultural links, which I hope will be strengthened over the coming years, regardless of the decision on Perth’s city status. I certainly support Perth in its campaign. A prime example of how a city can help to invigorate a region is the Victoria and Albert museum project in Dundee and our central waterfront redevelopment. The central waterfront project is expected to create at least 1,000 jobs over 10 years, to generate more than £500 million of GVA for Scotland’s economy and to bring in an additional £270 million of private sector investment. Members will be pleased to hear that the project is moving forward. As we speak, preparatory work is under way on the Tay river bed for the foundations of the V&amp;A, which will be the centrepiece of our new waterfront. Yesterday, the old walkways to Tayside house came down as part of the redevelopment of the area around the museum site, and we look forward to Tayside house being demolished in the near future. We heard yesterday that the non-Government-funded aspect of the V&amp;A project has received a boost—the funding campaign has announced that £5 million of private funding is expected to be in place by the end of the year. It is estimated that the V&amp;A at Dundee will attract 500,000 people in its first year and 300,000 people a year thereafter, which it is clear will have a hugely positive impact on the city of Dundee, on Tayside and probably on Scotland as a whole. Dundee currently has a strong economic base in the creative industries, such as the computer games industry, and it is a world leader in life sciences, but it has huge potential in another area that could result in a radical increase in the city’s economic output and skilled jobs base. This week, we had the announcement that one of the four enterprise zones that are to be created will be the low carbon/renewables east enterprise area, which will be formed by Dundee port in conjunction with the port of Leith. Dundee port is already a key renewables site, and there is strong interest from manufacturing companies. The recent memorandum of understanding that was signed with Scottish and Southern Energy will ensure that Dundee is a key strategic location for the development of its technology. The creation of the enterprise zone will enable Dundee to offer incentives to attract private investors and to secure a great many good-quality engineering jobs and, of course, apprenticeships. People in Dundee are very proud of the way in which the city has moved forward with life sciences and video games, but there has been a feeling that its manufacturing base had been eroded over decades, so there is great excitement about the potential that the new renewables industry offers our city. By working together, Dundee and Edinburgh can ensure that not just one city gets the benefit that enterprise zone status brings and that a hub is created that will be worth far more than would have been the case had the two areas worked separately.

Dundee City Council is engaging with the cabinet secretary to ensure that, by working together, Dundee and Edinburgh get the best impact for us. It is important that any support not only is appropriate but is the best support for bringing industry here and is not just about providing financial grants, although many grants are available to encourage industry into Scotland. At First Minister’s questions today, the First Minister set out just how well Scotland is doing in encouraging international investment in Scotland compared with other parts of the United Kingdom, as is shown on the Channel 4 FactCheck site. It is not just our cities that will benefit from investment in Dundee and Leith, because the potential for the surrounding areas is also huge, with new employment opportunities created, private investment stimulated and economic growth boosted across the Tayside and Lothian regions.

The development of Dundee as a base for renewables and the site of the V&amp;A would not have come about were it not for the support of Dundee City Council, which is why the cabinet secretary’s comments about the importance of the leaders of city local authorities for the agenda for cities are particularly welcome. It is clear that the Scottish cities alliance, supported by the cities investment fund, has a vital and challenging role in creating jobs and increasing sustainable economic growth. I hope that it will have cross-party backing, and I look forward to us all working in a collaborative way across Scotland.

For clarification, the memorandum of understanding is not between the Government and the private company; it is between the private company and Port of Dundee Ltd.

Does the member not accept that the decision of John Swinney and the SNP Government to remove the strings that were attached to the cities growth fund was exactly what cities across Scotland were asking for?

Does the member think that people’s ethnic origin should be taken into account when deciding the franchise?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

3. To ask the First Minister whether it remains the Scottish Government’s position to hold a referendum on independence in the second half of the current parliamentary session. (S4F-00387)

I thank the First Minister for his answer. I am glad that he is following the wishes of the Scottish people rather than the demands of a group of old Etonians in London. Today’s papers report that David Cameron and Ed Miliband are in 100 per cent agreement on the issue of stopping equality for Scotland. This Tory-Labour alliance has been busy conspiring in Westminster to gerrymander the vote, with Lord Foulkes seeming to suggest that supporting a Scottish football team is a good enough reason to be allowed to vote in the referendum. Does the First Minister agree with the words of the late Bashir Ahmad, that “it isn’t important where you come from, what matters is where we are going together as a nation”? Does the First Minister agree that the attitude of the Labour-Tory alliance in London is a perfect example of why Scotland needs the full powers of an independent nation, so that decisions about the future of our country can be taken by those—the people of Scotland—who care most about our country?

It was the same place that Margaret McDougall got her figures from.

Will the member take an intervention?

9. To ask the Scottish Government what percentage of those accused of murder in Tayside in 2010-11 was under the influence of alcohol at the time of the offence. (S4O-00537)

Can the cabinet secretary give us an indication of the timescale for introducing a bill to set a minimum price for alcohol?

12. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to boost economic growth through capital spending. (S4O-00500)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that the recently announced capital investment programme, which includes a £32 million investment for Harris academy in Dundee, a £20 million investment in an unlicensed medicines unit in Dundee and a £9.2 million investment in a child and adolescent mental health facility, also in Dundee, will not only provide maximum value for taxpayers’ money but deliver world-class education and health facilities that are fit for the 21st century? Does he share my hope that many of the jobs in constructing the facilities will create and sustain employment in the local economy?

3. To ask the First Minister what the impact would be of Gamesa locating its manufacturing base for offshore wind turbines outside Scotland. (S4F-00325)

My colleague Shona Robison and I would like as many renewables jobs in Dundee as possible, although we must acknowledge that Dundee port will never be able to accommodate all the companies that have shown an interest in locating there. Can the Deputy First Minister offer an assurance that the Government is still committed to ensuring that Dundee is a key location for the development of renewables and that the Government is taking action to attract renewables companies and jobs to our city?

12. To ask the Scottish Government what the average fees will be for non-domestic students attending a university in Scotland in 2012-13. (S4O-00470)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that answer. I am sure that students in Dundee and across Scotland will be delighted that the predictions of some members on Labour’s front bench have proved to be unfounded, and that our SNP Government has kept access to higher education based on the ability to learn rather than on the ability to pay. Will the cabinet secretary tell us what the cost would be for Scottish students if they and RUK students paid the same? What impact would that have on the number of places available to Scottish students?

I, too, welcome the statement. In particular, I welcome the commitment to continue to fund the council tax freeze, which has been very important to my constituents and to citizens throughout Scotland. Reports are coming from some councils in England that they are planning to reject the UK Government’s attempt to copy the Scottish Government’s hugely successful policy of a council tax freeze. Is the cabinet secretary confident that Scottish local authorities will continue to work with the Scottish Government and implement the freeze for a fifth year in a row?

A few MSPs have stayed away today but, as Margaret Burgess said, they will not be missed. The wishes of the Scottish electorate in May’s election mean that this chamber is full of SNP MSPs, representing all of Scotland’s communities. When important issues come up, we turn up and do our job. That is what our constituents elected us to do, and we will not let them down by staying silent in this Parliament in the face of a naked cash grab on the pensions of 300,000 Scots. Even the unions expect elected members to attend Parliament on strike days. In reference to today’s strike, as Chic Brodie mentioned, a GMB spokesperson stated: “The GMB are not asking MPs not to cross the picket line. Our position is we want them inside Parliament … doing their normal job, representing the people.” I agree. It is clearly the job of the Scottish Government and all Scotland’s parliamentarians to stand up to Westminster and to speak with one strong voice for Scotland’s public sector workers. I am here today to stand up for health workers, social workers, civil servants, clerks, teachers and other public sector workers in Dundee and to send a clear message that we are opposed to the coalition Government’s pension changes.

Bob Doris makes a good point and puts on record a number of facts that are important to the debate. I stand with teachers in Glasgow, just as I stand with teachers in Dundee. This morning, I visited some of the picket lines in Dundee. Along with the Dundee East MP Stewart Hosie, I spent time talking to Public and Commercial Services Union members at the Department of Work and Pensions. They talked about their absolute disgust at the chancellor’s comments in yesterday’s autumn budget statement, which, rather than trying to defuse the situation and encourage further negotiation, rubbed salt into the wounds of workers who had already been at the knife edge of the UK Government’s austerity measures. The UK Government’s much-lauded respect agenda was finally revealed as a farce when John Swinney received the ultimatum from Danny Alexander—which Willie Rennie keeps forgetting was ever written—to implement its pension changes or face further cuts in the Scottish block grant. There is no respect for the Scottish Parliament or the Scottish people. In its short time in Government, the coalition has failed to support families and businesses in Scotland. It has increased VAT and national insurance contributions and has allowed energy bills to soar, pushing thousands more into fuel poverty. By stark contrast, the SNP Government is determined to support hard-working families in these tough economic times. Working with trade unions, it has been able—under the leadership of John Swinney in his position as Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth—to offer a guarantee of no compulsory redundancies, thereby protecting some 10,000 jobs. Had the Scottish Government taken the same bully-boy approach that the UK Government has taken in bulldozing change through, those jobs would have been lost. We have gone further than that. We have frozen the council tax since 2007. By 2016, that will have saved the average band D council tax payer £1,200. We have abolished prescription charges. We have also kept Scottish Water in public hands, which has allowed us to freeze water bills for the next two years. If we had not done that, who knows what the charges would have been this year? Perhaps they would have spiralled as energy charges have done. Our Government has taken action to protect the lowest-paid workers from increases, which the Conservative and Liberal parties have failed to do. The increases in contributions are theirs and theirs alone. Not one of the 250,000 public sector workers who are on strike today believes that those increases are anything other than a naked cash grab by the UK coalition. It is not too late. I call on the Tories and Lib Dems to listen to the message that the public sector workers throughout the UK are sending, listen to the clear message that the Parliament is sending, back down and reverse their damaging plans. I tell the Labour members who are listening on their laptops and smartphones that voting time is 5 pm. There are no pickets at the entrances to the Parliament so, although those members have missed the opportunity to have their voices heard, there is still time for them to ensure that their votes are recorded to support public sector workers and send the strongest possible message to Westminster.

The debate has raised a number of significant points that highlight the crucial role that architecture and place making have to play in Scotland’s economy and the Scottish people’s wellbeing. I echo the support of colleagues in the SNP group and the Labour group for a VAT cut for renovations and repairs. It is disappointing that that has not been replicated across the chamber. For Mr McGrigor’s benefit, I will quote Brian Binley, who is the Conservative MP for Northampton South. He said: “The Federation of Master Builders has long campaigned for a reduction in the rate of VAT on home repair, maintenance and improvement work, estimating that a five per cent cut could lead to a loss of revenue to the Government of between £102 million and £508 million, but deliver a ... stimulus to the economy of around £1.4 billion in the first year alone. Their estimates also suggest that around 34,500 new jobs in the sector (and 81,500 jobs in the wider economy) would be created by such a measure by 2019. Hardly Plan B but it could be a nudge in the right direction.” I encourage the Conservatives in Scotland to think again about their policy. Ruth Davidson has supported a different policy on computer games tax and has lobbied for what is best for Scotland. I encourage the Conservatives in Scotland to follow the rest of the Parliament and to support what is best for the Scottish economy, which is to reduce VAT on renovation and repairs. It is vital that the architecture of a modern Scotland be visionary, bold and dynamic. I have listened to the speeches from around the chamber on how that is materialising in communities up and down Scotland. I am sure that it will come as no surprise to members that I consider Dundee to be at the forefront of improving Scotland’s architecture. The waterfront development that is progressing there is one of the most exciting projects to be under way in Scotland. The waterfront is a leading example of how projects can be sustained in the long term, be of social and economic benefit to the community in which they are built and—the important bit—be environmentally friendly from the initial construction period through to the years of use. Construction creates a carbon footprint, which must be addressed as part of any debate on construction. To mitigate that in Dundee, the jewel in the crown of our waterfront—the Victoria and Albert at Dundee—will be constructed as sustainably as possible. The building’s cladding will be made from eco-friendly compound stone, which is made from waste materials that are collected from quarries and from recycled industrial waste, such as ceramic, silica and glass fragments. That will add to the building’s sustainability. It has been acknowledged that the architecture of individual buildings alone is only part of sustainable place making, but another aspect of the V&amp;A at Dundee project that has captured Dundee’s imagination and aspirations is the potential to create a cultural centre in our city. Kengo Kuma’s design for the V&amp;A is set to become our city’s focal point. In the architectural brief, the emphasis was on creating a building that adheres to 21st century environmental and sustainability regulations, and I believe that the design has achieved that. Kengo Kuma’s design will give us not only a visually stunning building that will define the Dundee waterfront for years ahead, but a highly flexible building that is adaptable to many functions. Once the project is complete, we will have a sustainable and environmentally friendly building that creates a focal point for visitors and residents alike. The terraced and decked areas that will surround the building and their pedestrian-friendly links to other areas of the city will make for an excellent point of social interaction for Dundee and Dundonians. The central waterfront project as a whole is expected to create at least 1,000 jobs over 10 years, to generate more than £500 million for Scotland’s economy and to contribute an additional £270 million of private sector investment in the project. It has been estimated that the V&amp;A alone will attract some 500,000 visitors in its first year and that 300,000 will visit thereafter. That demonstrates the enormous economic potential for the city. The project has been possible only because of Government support. I thank the cabinet secretary again for her personal support to ensure that the project proceeded, despite the difficult times. The University of Dundee, the University of Abertay Dundee, Dundee City Council and Scottish Enterprise have all worked together to create a functional and practical community in the heart of Dundee’s waterfront, which has historically been separated from the rest of the city. We have already had more than 15,000 people visiting and engaging in the initial exhibition of the plans for the V&amp;A at Dundee and thousands more have taken part in the consultation online, making the V&amp;A at Dundee the recognisable face of the waterfront redevelopment. That enthusiastic response to the consultation shows how engaged with the plans people are and it underlines just how important it is that place making and architecture are responsive to the needs of the population. Somebody said that architecture and planning should be done with communities, rather than to them. That is absolutely right and it is what we have managed in Dundee—the projects are moving forward with the people of Dundee. I will finish by picking up on some of the points raised by Living Streets, to which Jamie McGrigor referred, which sent out an excellent briefing to members prior to the debate. One of the points that it raised was that we must invest in the walking environment and ensure that when we are place making, we create spaces that enable and encourage all pedestrians to get around. I will shortly launch a consultation to take forward proposals for a member’s bill that will build on the bill that Ross Finnie sponsored in the previous session and seek to prohibit obstructive parking, which can prevent pedestrians from accessing our public spaces. The debate has highlighted the importance of public spaces and I hope that my bill will help to ensure that all members of our society can access them freely.

Will the member take an intervention?

4. To ask the First Minister what steps the Scottish Government is taking to support Scotland’s computer games industry. (S4F-00202)

I thank the First Minister for his response. Earlier this week, the video games industry body, TIGA, and trade group the Association for UK Interactive Entertainment—UKIE—recognised the positive difference that independence could make to the industry and criticised the UK Government for failing to invest in the Scottish games sector. Will the First Minister join me in urging the UK Government to offer specifically targeted tax relief to help this vital industry thrive in Dundee and across Scotland? Will he also continue the support that the Scottish Government is giving to the industry by considering the case for a creative content fund and have the relevant minister meet me and games industry representatives to explore that proposal?

I was recently contacted by a constituent who has stage 4 melanoma that is unresponsive to traditional cancer therapies. There is, however a new immunotherapy drug called Yervoy, which could radically transform my constituent’s prospects. Yervoy has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration and the European Medicines Agency, and was licensed for use in the United Kingdom this August. Is the First Minister aware that the manufacturer has not yet submitted an application to the Scottish Medicines Consortium for use of the drug in the national health service in Scotland, despite having applied to the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence for its use in England and Wales? What steps can the Scottish Government take to encourage pharmaceutical companies to submit applications to the SMC and NICE simultaneously?

8. To ask the Scottish Government what progress has been made in treating familial hypercholesterolaemia since the publication of the “Better Heart Disease and Stroke Care Action Plan” in 2009. (S4O-00255)

The minister will be aware that there are potentially huge savings to the NHS as a result of early detection of FH. Given the Scottish Government’s moves towards preventative spending, does he agree that detection of FH should be considered as part of our preventative spending proposals? Is he willing to meet me and representatives in the field of FH to discuss how progress can be made in detecting and treating the condition?

A large part of the problem faced by people up and down the country is high energy prices. That was recently highlighted by the Office of the Gas and Electricity Markets, which accused the big six of price fixing. Was that discussed at the cabinet secretary’s recent meeting with the UK Government? What steps can we take to ensure that unfair energy pricing does not place more households in fuel poverty?

I thank the minister and the Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs for their foresight in supporting the V&amp;A at Dundee project. The minister has talked about the number of visitors and the economic benefits to Dundee. Will he talk about how the economic benefits might wave out to a wider area than only Dundee?

Will the member take an intervention?

Today’s debate shows just how far the Parliament has come towards making Scotland a low-carbon economy. The fact that we can seriously discuss achieving renewables capacity equivalent to 100 per cent of our electricity consumption is testament to what this Parliament has achieved in a few short years. I associate myself with Mark Griffin’s comments about heat and, in particular, heat being wasted and the potential for renewable heat. We need to focus on that issue. That said, I will focus on electricity generation. In Scotland, our renewables capacity is currently some 33 per cent of electricity consumption, rising to 58 per cent if we take into account capacity that has been consented or is being built. Although we have much further to go to achieve our targets, we must not underestimate what we have achieved. In comparison, England has managed to achieve only 5 per cent of consumption from renewables. We should recognise that this Parliament has made considerable progress. The Scottish Government’s economic strategy has rightly placed green technology at the heart of economic recovery and aims to create 130,000 jobs in the renewables industry by 2020. Dundee has a huge role to play in Scotland becoming a world leader in low-carbon technology. It is ideally placed to support the development and manufacturing of wind turbines for offshore wind farms, as it has a deep port and a skilled engineering base, and a number of key firms are already established in the city or plan to set up in it in the near future. Dundee already has a reputation for engineering success and research and has been identified by a number of key stakeholders in the renewables industry as an ideal location for them to establish their base in Scotland. Steve Remp, of pioneering offshore wind firm SeaEnergy, recently expressed his desire to see Dundee become a master base for the renewables sector. He called the energy-rich waters around Dundee “Scotland’s shop window to the world.” Basque wind turbine manufacturer Gamesa recently reaffirmed its desire to set up a base in Dundee, with the promise of a £127 million investment across the country and more than 200 jobs in Dundee alone. We have heard positive noises from Mitsubishi, which has also identified Dundee as a preferred location. The Korean manufacturer Doosan is looking at Dundee as a potential site for a major plant, with plans to invest £170 million in Scotland over the next 10 years in partnership with Scottish Enterprise. A number of smaller projects are also in the works around Dundee. For example, Dutch manufacturer Tocardo is considering siting 20 bi-directional tidal turbines in the Tay estuary. We have heard from a number of members about other projects across Scotland. Such projects are ambitious. They have the potential to make significant changes to Scotland’s energy mix. SeaEnergy’s Inch Cape offshore wind farm project in the outer Firth of Tay could lead to the construction of 180 turbines, which would have an installed capacity of around 1,000MW—that is enough electricity to power 700,000 homes and exceeds the current output of Hunterston B. A number of views have been expressed during the debate, but I think that most members would think that 180 turbines, with the associated opportunities for green jobs and for the economy, are a much better option for Scotland than a nuclear plant that would take billions of pounds of subsidy, with decades being required for decommissioning and centuries for monitoring the hazardous waste. Alex Johnstone suggested that nuclear power is somehow carbon free. If a working nuclear power station appeared out of thin air, its fuel materialised at the site and it simply vanished at the end of its life, it could be argued that nuclear power was low carbon. However, we all know that that is not the case. Nuclear is by no means carbon free.

No. There is obviously some carbon cost to wind turbines, but it pales into insignificance compared with what nuclear power stations produce. A report by Storm van Leeuwen and Philip Smith, both former nuclear engineers, contains a joule-by-joule analysis of CO2 production throughout the nuclear cycle, with three pages of references to back up their research. It shows that, if we ignore dismantling, with present ore grades 80g of CO2 is produced per kilowatt hour of electricity. If we include dismantling, the figure rises to 140g per kilowatt hour. The amount of energy needed to secure uranium fuel will depend on the ore grade. Although relatively high ore grade uranium is available, uranium mining is picking the richest seams across the world. That will become more difficult and carbon intensive in future, and the carbon footprint of nuclear will increase as a result. The problem is not just with CO2. There is a whole basket of other greenhouses gases, including chlorine, fluorine, organic compounds and many others. One example would be—

The one example that I would like to give is the production of Freon. An American study shows that enrichment plants in the United States produced 405 tonnes of Freon 114, which has a global warming potential nearly 10,000 times greater than CO2. If we factor in the Freon output from nuclear power production, the carbon impact almost doubles. We have come a huge distance, and it is very important that we do not allow new nuclear to distract us from our renewables future. Scotland has the potential to be the renewables powerhouse for Europe, so let us not be distracted by new nuclear.

Will Richard Baker take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Philosophers and historians through the ages have often concluded that a society can best be measured by the respect and care that it gives to its most vulnerable citizens. The case of Mrs V in 2008, which a Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland report recently highlighted, is therefore a sad reflection on us all. It must be made perfectly clear that the circumstances of that appalling case should never have occurred. Systems should have been in place to identify the failings of care that led to the death of Mrs V, but a catalogue of errors led to treatment of her that was described as lacking in both dignity and respect. Such errors must never be allowed to happen again. The national dementia strategy, which was published last year and driven forward by my Dundee City East colleague, Shona Robison, has addressed many of the issues that the case raised. Standards of dementia care in Tayside are being driven up; new procedures are now in place to identify failings in the wards. The news that all registered nurses in elderly medical wards will be required to attend nutritional care training, along with the introduction of dementia champions, is to be welcomed. Last week, I met the chief executive and board chairman of NHS Tayside to find out what action had been taken in light of the Mental Welfare Commission report and to seek assurances that lessons had been learned and that the failings in the care that was received by Mrs V would not happen again. The Mental Welfare Commission recommended specific staff training and education on treating dementia patients and addressing nutrition. I was pleased to hear that such training is taking place and that an advanced care planning training course, which is being piloted in Tayside, will be rolled out. Today’s debate is about identifying areas where we can improve. Although this will be cold comfort to the family of Mrs V, lessons have been learned and standards of dementia care throughout Scotland, and in Tayside in particular, have improved since that terrible time in 2008, so all patients and relatives can be assured that high priority is being given to treating patients with dignity and respect. I turn to the cabinet secretary’s new area of responsibility—cities. Not surprisingly, I want to talk about the city of Dundee in particular. The old image of Dundee has been left behind and the city is now well established as a global leader in life sciences and computer games. Those strengths are soon to be complemented by a strong manufacturing and development hub for renewable energy, as the Spanish company Gamesa has identified Dundee as the location for a manufacturing, logistics and maintenance base for the development of offshore wind farms. In tandem with that manufacturing development comes the cultural development that is being spearheaded by the Victoria and Albert Museum at Dundee. The importance of that project should not be underestimated. The world’s greatest museum of art and design, the V&amp;A, will establish a permanent presence outside London for the first time ever—and it will be in Dundee. Funding for that project from the Scottish Government is in place. I thank Fiona Hyslop, the Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs, for her input and support for the project and for making sure that we could secure Government funding even in times of difficult financial pressures. That funding was crucial in enabling the V&amp;A to go to the next stage and to have the confidence to encourage private backers across the world to support the project and ensure that it could go ahead. We have seen the next step of that with the announcement that the Japanese architect Kengo Kuma has been appointed to head up the V&amp;A’s design team to build an iconic building, which is set to become a national landmark and which will draw in tens of thousands of visitors to Dundee and Scotland. The V&amp;A is playing a big part in revitalising Dundee, which is already witnessing the generation of inward investment because of that project. The capital contribution from the Government has played a big part in getting the project off the ground. That is why I was surprised to hear Labour members making bizarre comments last week about the Government’s commitment to the project. The only threat that ever existed to the V&amp;A project came from the Labour Party, when it refused to back the budget that contained the vital funding for it. That fact was not overlooked by the people of Dundee in the recent election. I am pleased that members have now united on the issue behind the V&amp;A and that we can look forward to the culture of Dundee blossoming. The SNP Government has made impressive progress on health and wellbeing in the past four years. Waiting times are at a record low, more nurses have been employed, and prescription charges have been abolished. Unfortunately, however, we have been unable to tackle one of the biggest threats to health and wellbeing in Scotland: alcohol. Minimum pricing will save lives and improve the quality of life for communities throughout Scotland. That is why I am pleased that the Government will once more introduce legislation to tackle Scotland’s alcohol problem. I know that some Opposition members have changed their minds on minimum pricing, and I welcome the Liberal Democrats’ conversion. Their votes might not be as important as they would have been in the previous session, but what has happened is encouraging. It is important for us to try to build consensus in the chamber, and I hope that the Liberal Democrats’ support and their preparedness to put aside party politics will be replicated across it. The issue is too important to play party politics with. I hope that we can unite and do what is best for Scotland.

I am pleased to be making my first contribution of this session on an issue that is extremely important and significant to constituents in Dundee. The tone that was used by the front-bench speakers from both the main Opposition parties is a sign of positive things to come. I might not agree with them on everything, but both front-bench spokespeople made a positive contribution. I hope that the session continues in that way. Jobs and the economy were important issues in the recent election. The Scottish National Party stood on our record in government and on our vision for the future. The verdict of the Scottish people is plain for all to see in the make-up of the chamber. The SNP has taken Scotland forward over the past four years. In Scotland, under an SNP Government, the recession was shorter and shallower than in the rest of the UK. That was made possible because of the Scottish Government’s priority of investing in infrastructure, skills and support for business. From 2008 to 2010, the SNP Government accelerated £350 million of capital spending to boost the economy—something that was often questioned by Opposition members in the previous session. In 2010-11, we are spending £3.3 billion on capital projects, which will support some 50,000 jobs throughout Scotland. We have supported business. The small business bonus scheme has removed 1,424 businesses in Dundee from rates altogether. Hundreds more have seen their rates bills reduced. The Scottish Investment Bank, which the cabinet secretary mentioned earlier, is supporting SMEs throughout the country. We have invested in skills. Last year, the Scottish Government delivered a record 20,000 modern apprenticeships. This year, we are going further by providing funding for some 25,000 modern apprenticeships. It should always be remembered that, in Scotland, modern apprenticeships are real apprenticeships attached to real jobs. However, this is not the time for complacency. As the cabinet secretary has outlined, this re-elected SNP Government, with the largest mandate in the history of the Parliament, will do more in the years ahead to take Scotland forward and grow our economy. It will introduce a small business jobs plan to remove the barriers to employment. It will introduce a sustainable procurement bill that will clearly define the legal position for public procurement in Scotland and ensure that it is geared towards social and environmental benefits. The Government will deliver an improved export support package, with the aim of continuing the boost that our export industry has experienced recently and bringing about a 50 per cent increase in exports over the next six years. As we are all too aware, ultimately much of our economic fate at present lies in the hands of Westminster. As we have seen historically with the demise of our heavy industries, that does not always result in what is best for the Scottish economy. It is still the case that Scotland is poorly served by a London-based economic strategy. An example that I have used previously in the Parliament, which I use again for the benefit of new members, is that of the computer games industry. Ten per cent of the UK’s computer games industry is based in Dundee. As a result, that industry is disproportionately more important to the Scottish economy than it is to the rest of the UK. The benefits of tax breaks for games development have long been established as a viable way of protecting and growing jobs in that sector. However, concessions have not been forthcoming from the UK Government, despite calls from this Parliament that cross party boundaries. There is a clear majority understanding in this Parliament that tax breaks are important for the computer games industry.

The member makes a good point, but it emphasises the importance of our having the full range of tax powers. The difference in the UK Government being able to give a tax break to the computer games industry is that it would benefit from the tax break. The evidence from TIGA—the Independent Game Developers Association—is that a tax break would increase the take to the UK Exchequer while protecting and sustaining more jobs in Scotland. The member makes a great point for full fiscal autonomy if not independence. In an independent Scotland, the concerns and issues facing our industries would be addressed first and foremost in Scotland, for Scotland and by a Government elected by the people of Scotland. The SNP wants to give the people the choice of who will be in charge of their finances. We will argue that John Swinney is the best person to take forward Scotland’s finances. Others, on the Labour, Tory and Liberal benches, may very well argue that that person is George Osborne. I think that the people of Scotland should have that choice. We will never agree on everything, but there are various manifesto commitments from all the parties on which we can work together. I thought that one manifesto commitment on which there was agreement between those on these benches and those on the Labour benches was on the council tax freeze, but Richard Baker perhaps suggests that there has been another flip-flop on that. One area in which I am sure there is common ground is the need to work to improve youth employment. Young people must surely be at the heart of sustainable economic growth, and we must ensure that we create and support opportunities for them. The cabinet secretary mentioned the 100,000 training opportunities for young people, and we must ensure that we can carry them forward throughout the session. Schemes such as the green academies, to be set up in partnership with Scottish Gas, are other ways to take the issue forward. Despite the hardship that will be caused by the cuts from Westminster, I hope that people will be reassured by the approach that the cabinet secretary outlined, and I hope that we can work together. We can do things differently in Scotland, such as working to ensure that there are no compulsory redundancies in the public sector, but we could do so much more if we had the full powers of a normal independent state.

Does Murdo Fraser think that now is the time to apologise for the Conservative Party’s decision to force the Government’s hand on spending £500 million on trams that not even the people of Edinburgh wanted?

I am curious and slightly stuck for words. Can the member tell me whether or not the Labour Party supports the council tax freeze? The proposals that have been made are important, as they will deliver the council tax freeze. Does the Labour Party support that freeze?

The orders will put in place the last piece of council funding for 2011-12, which will ensure that council tax is frozen across Scotland for a fourth consecutive year. When fuel and food prices are rising at well above the inflation rate, it is a source of comfort for families across the country that council tax will not rise by even one penny.

I had intended to congratulate the Labour Party on doing one of the most fantastic U-turns to support the council tax freeze, but I am sorry—Labour members cannot support the council tax freeze while continuing to oppose it. The argument in relation to people who live in lower-band properties is clear. The Finance Committee’s adviser made it clear that, although the saving from the council tax freeze is smaller for people in lower bands, it means much more to people who are on low incomes. Saving on average £300 in council tax might not matter to Michael McMahon, but it matters to my constituents. I will raise another point that the Labour Party has failed to recognise. The SNP Government has continued the work to improve housing across Scotland. Often, that involves taking people out of lower-band houses and putting them in higher-band houses. People in Ardler in my constituency have been affected by that. The community of Ardler village resided originally in multistorey flats, which were all band A. In the main, those people now live in band C housing association houses. Their incomes did not change when they moved house, but their council tax shot up. Some of those folk feel that it is unfair that they must pay much more just because they have decent houses. That is why it is crucial that, ultimately, we get rid of the council tax. However, until we get rid of it, it is crucial that we freeze it at least, to take the pain out of the sting. I have argued for the council tax freeze in the Finance Committee and in the chamber for the past four years. I was slightly upset that I had failed to persuade our Labour colleagues in that time. All of a sudden, however, Iain Gray has made a statement, but it is clear that he has not persuaded other Labour members. It is clear that the U-turn was about fear of punishment at the ballot box. Anyone who speaks to their constituents knows just how important the extra little bit of help from the SNP Government—in the form of the council tax freeze—has been. In my constituency, I have found on the doorsteps huge support for the freeze—from people in large and small houses. For the past four years, the Labour Party has missed the point that the council tax freeze is about ensuring that people—in these challenging economic times when bills are increasing—do not have their challenges compounded by spiralling council tax bills. Members should remember that under the previous Administration double-digit increases were the norm. Bills were rocketing. In Dundee, Labour put up the council tax by 15 per cent in one year. Fifteen per cent! I say to Michael McMahon that people’s incomes did not rise by 15 per cent that year. The Labour Party did not care about those households—in band A, band B, band C, band D and band E—that had to find the extra money. For the past four years, the SNP has stood by the people of Scotland by freezing the council tax in these trying times. The average household in my constituency would have had to pay an extra £150 this year if Labour had got away with stopping the council tax freeze in 2007. Year on year, such savings add up to more than £300, where—

I associate myself with the words of tribute for our convener, Andrew Welsh. As Malcolm Chisholm said, Andrew has always convened the finance committee in an entirely non-partisan manner. As a new MSP, I sometimes found that quite frustrating, but Andrew Welsh’s years of experience show that that is the correct way for a convener of a parliamentary committee to conduct his business. It has allowed us to make far more progress than we would have done if we put party before the Parliament at all times. I therefore associate myself with the words of members who have already spoken. I am pleased to be able to take part in the debate, which follows one of the most important inquiries that the Finance Committee has conducted in my four years as a member. At the start of the inquiry, we were unanimous in thinking that the subject was important, and the inquiry has only made that clearer. It has also made it clear that not only will the current financial pressures make it more challenging for us to achieve a shift of funding into preventative projects, but it is becoming increasingly important that we face up to that challenge and overcome the barriers that Andrew Welsh mentioned in his opening remarks. Preventative spending is not new. We recognise that a lot of progress has been made by the Scottish Government, building on the progress that was made by previous Administrations. Nevertheless, we must step up a gear in the next session. Although we heard of some proposals that could produce rapid results in as little as a year, most preventative spending will not see readily measurable outcomes for many years, often spanning several parliamentary sessions, as Derek Brownlee said. That is why it is vital that we approach the issue in as consensual a manner as possible, ensuring that all parties and civic Scotland as a whole buy into what we are doing to make that long-term progress. We achieved consensus on the committee and took the correct approach. We are now entering the heat of an election campaign, but I hope that we can quickly resume that consensual approach in the next session. I will spend some time in outlining examples of preventative spending projects in Dundee, the first of which is the family-nurse partnership, which Mr Whitton mentioned. Earlier this year, Dundee and its surrounding towns and villages were chosen as the second pilot site for that specialist programme, which gives first-time teenage mums extra support. The project was piloted previously in NHS Lothian, where it supported 145 young families. It is based on a model that we have seen in progress for a number of years in America. The NHS Tayside pilot was launched in January by Nicola Sturgeon, the Deputy First Minister and Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing, at the St Andrew’s family support project in Dundee, where she met young mums with their babies and some of the staff who were leading the local pilot. Evidence from programmes that are already up and running in America and the Lothians show that the initiative is improving prenatal health, increasing employment among young mums, cutting the number of unintended pregnancies and helping to reduce child neglect. Family nurses visit first-time mothers under the age of 19 every one to two weeks during their pregnancy and throughout the first two years of their baby’s life. The nurses offer guidance on child development, preventative health measures, parenting skills, breastfeeding and better diet as well as advice for mothers on education and employment. The project is a fantastic example of how dedicated support in the earliest stages not only supports parents, but helps to improve children’s health and long-term opportunities. It will make a real difference to the lives of almost 300 families throughout Tayside. Another example of preventative spending is the keep well programme, which has been operating for a number of years, including in Dundee, and provides health checks in areas in which there is a high level of deprivation. The success of the keep well programme has been recognised and its funding has been extended by £11 million to enable it to cover all of Scotland’s poorest communities by 2012, tackling some of the deprivation issues that Jeremy Purvis mentioned. The keep well programme has already helped thousands of people, and the additional funding will enable it to help a further 30,000 Scots a year to get the assistance and treatment that they need. The recently announced life begins at 40 package of services, backed by nearly £15 million, will help people approaching that landmark birthday—which I passed some years ago—to consider their lifestyle and take the opportunity to access health checks. Further, at the start of the year, the Scottish Government announced a four-year pilot project to explore the feasibility of introducing universal face-to-face heart MOTs for those who are aged over 40. That pilot should help 20,000 people, who will receive a check-up. Those are only some of the most recent interventions. As I said, they build on the work of the present Scottish Government and its partners and on the work of the previous Scottish Executive. However, we must do much more in health, early years, social services and elsewhere. It will not be easy, but the tone of this debate gives us hope that, as a Parliament, we will be successful.

Will the member give way?

9. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to increase economic activity. (S3O-13160)

I am sure that members of all parties will acknowledge the Government’s hard work in the face of the largest-ever cut to the Scottish block grant. Scottish Government funding to kick start the Victoria and Albert museum project in Dundee has resulted in new confidence in our city. In recent weeks, Outplay Entertainment has created new jobs in the computer games sector in Dundee, and there is the prospect of hundreds more jobs at Michelin Tyre and with Gamesa, in offshore wind turbine manufacture. Announcements on those jobs materialised after the Scottish Government and its partners provided substantial support. I know that the cabinet secretary has taken a personal interest in many issues. I acknowledge that challenges remain, but does the cabinet secretary share my enthusiasm for and confidence in Dundee’s renaissance?

Will the member tell us how much he would want the council tax to go up by? How much would it have to be raised in his local authority area to reverse the cuts that are coming from Westminster? We should remember that two thirds of those cuts were planned by the previous Labour Government.

This is not the order that we would all want to pass today. It represents a £450 million reduction; however, the budget that was passed yesterday included a £1.3 billion reduction due to the worst settlement from Westminster in the history of devolution. The cabinet secretary has proved that the Scottish Government is doing its best within the limited powers of the Parliament. Despite the cut to the Scottish block grant and the strains that it has placed on spending, local government’s share of the Scottish budget is being maintained. I hope that the whole chamber will welcome that.

We continue to hear the Labour Party trying to talk down the Scottish banks. When the banks were doing well, the Labour Party was quick to tell us that their revenue could not be assigned to an independent Scotland because they were cross-border organisations. As soon as they are doing badly, they are entirely Scottish organisations. It is bizarre for the Labour Party to constantly talk down Scottish institutions. We have seen how the cuts have impacted south of the border. Massive cuts averaging 7 per cent have been foisted on councils. Scottish councils face difficult decisions, and I do not relish the work that finance conveners up and down the country are having to do to make their books balance just as John Swinney had to make the books balance in the Parliament. However, Scottish councils are now getting a higher share of the Scottish block grant than they did when the Government came to power. Today is the day on which councils up and down the country are setting their budgets. Mr Johnstone mentioned the situation in Dundee City Council, which is setting its budget. He may also be aware that the council tax in Dundee has only ever been reduced once, through an SNP budget. What councils throughout the country need today is certainty. They need the order to be passed so that they have the certainty to plan. The last thing that council workers up and down the country want is the order to fall and there to be a lack of certainty in how councils will be funded. Michael McMahon and, I think, Mr Purvis talked about the order not giving local government full flexibility. That point was pushed particularly by Michael McMahon. In Parliament, we constantly hear the Labour Party arguing for the Government to take direct action and intervene in areas such as education and other devolved matters. In local government, however, Labour councils are crying out for more devolution to themselves and an end to ring fencing. So, on one hand, Labour in the Parliament is asking for more ring fencing while, on the other hand, Labour in local government is asking for less ring fencing. That is another example of the sheer hypocrisy of the Labour Party. Michael McMahon went on to talk about the council tax freeze. I often ask him to tell me by just how much the Labour Party would increase the council tax if it could. Michael McMahon rose—

When Labour was in power in Dundee, it wanted to increase the council tax by up to 15 per cent in one year. Pensioners up and down the country cannot afford to have their council tax increased by 15 per cent. It is people who are on the edge—pensioners in particular—who would be affected most by the great hikes in council tax that the Labour Party has imposed in the past and would impose again.

If Mr Whitton is arguing that we should be giving local government more money—which I think would be great if we could do it—could he tell us what he would cut to provide that extra funding?

Today, we find ourselves in a similar position to that of previous years: last-minute alterations are the norm as this minority Government tries to get its budget passed. The cabinet secretary has worked to build consensus across the chamber. Reaching consensus has been particularly difficult for him this year, given a budget that has, for the first time, been reduced in cash terms. Let us remember that two thirds of those cuts were planned prior to the Liberal and Tory parties coming into power at Westminster—they are cuts that Alistair Darling said would be deeper and harsher than those under Margaret Thatcher. The proximity of the election in May has done nothing to make the process of negotiations any easier. However, despite the biggest ever cut to the Scottish block grant, this budget will deliver for the people of Scotland. We have the continuation of the council tax freeze and the small business bonus, funding to retain the extra 1,000 police officers and an end to the tax on ill health with the introduction of free prescriptions. All that is contained in the budget that is before the Parliament. The cabinet secretary attempted to take on board the contributions of Opposition parties, and the different ways in which they responded to his offers were plain to see in the opening speeches. In spite of the negativity coming from the Labour benches, I hope that, at decision time, Labour will do what is best for the people of Scotland by supporting the budget. In past debates, Mr Gray and Mr Kerr professed great concern about a favourite couple of theirs: the fireman and the nurse. That couple and millions more across Scotland will be given support by this budget through the council tax freeze, yet Labour suggests that it may not support the budget. How times have changed. Will Labour really oppose its favourite couple getting free prescriptions that are part of the free health care that is one of many traditional Labour policies? Will it really propose a continuation of that tax on ill health? Is Labour really saying that it will oppose the Government’s protection of the health budget? It is clear that the fireman and the nurse have been dumped by Labour. Last week, Labour had a new couple: the playboy and the chief executive officer. It told the chamber that the largest businesses, such as Tesco and Sainsbury’s, could not possibly have an increase in their business rates, yet it seems that it is just fine and dandy for Labour that couples across the country—pensioners, firemen and nurses—pay extra in council tax.

I have spoken to a number of workers who are USDAW members and who were surprised at the union’s stance. It would be particularly interesting to find out what consultation Mr Kerr and his colleagues in the Parliament had with Labour Party members across Scotland, many of whom are appalled by the Labour Party’s stance in supporting Tesco. In Dundee, the average saving this year will be £150. Of course, that has to be added to the savings that council tax payers had last year, the year before and the year before that. That might not be a lot of money for Andy Kerr, Iain Gray or David Whitton, but it is a lot of money to my constituents who are suffering because of the economic mess in which Mr Kerr’s Government in Westminster left this country. It is for those on the Labour benches to explain why they opposed the retailer tax and why they will not support the council tax freeze—a measure that supports hard-working households across Scotland. The reality is this: Labour has no answers. Its finance spokesperson spoke for, I think, 10 minutes. He talked of a vision, but we heard nothing—not one single idea. At the core of this budget is a commitment to support Scotland’s economic recovery by increasing employment, strengthening education and promoting new business growth. A sign of the efforts to which the cabinet secretary went is that he listened to contributions from all parts of the chamber, including the Labour Party, and strengthened the budget on the areas that they raised in spite of the difficult economic pressures that we face. As a Dundee MSP, one important commitment in the budget for me is the commitment to funding for the Victoria and Albert museum project at Dundee. That project will, in itself, help to achieve the aims of economic growth and increased employment. Let us be perfectly clear: the future of the V and A at Dundee project would be less certain without the commitment that the Scottish Government has made in the budget. Voting against that commitment would make the project less certain. The project will provide a major boost economically as well as culturally to Dundee. Inward investment is already being generated for the city because of it, with a positive uplift for the local economy that will continue to grow as we move towards the planned opening in 2014. We have heard from the cabinet secretary that the budget will create 25,000 new-start apprenticeships—more than have ever been created before. I have mentioned the funding for the game-changing V and A at Dundee and the continuation of the council tax freeze, but there is also the new fund to protect jobs and services in the voluntary sector. Are we really to believe that the Labour Party is against all those initiatives? This is the right budget for Scotland. It will protect jobs and front-line services and support economic recovery. The Government is taking the steps that it can, within the Parliament’s limited powers, to protect jobs and to offer new opportunities in the coming years. I urge all members to support the budget this evening.

I welcome the guests in the public gallery who have joined us from Scotland’s science centres: Our Dynamic Earth, which is just across the road, the Glasgow Science Centre, Satrosphere in Aberdeen and Sensation, in my home town of Dundee. Our guests represent the boards and staff of the centres, who are committed to providing learning opportunities for our communities. I hope that they will find the debate interesting. In Scotland we are lucky to have four permanent hubs, which are dedicated to furthering engagement with and enthusiasm for science among people of all ages and in all sectors. Our science centres play an increasingly important role in Scotland. They are no longer just a day out; they are part of the curriculum for excellence, they are inspected by Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Education and they provide support for teachers, trainee teachers, pupils and professional scientists. In the limited time that I have, I will concentrate on the work of the Sensation science centre in Dundee. I am sure that members who have better local knowledge of the other three centres will update us on the good work that is going on there. Sensation has been open since 2000 and its interactive exhibitions—which focus on the life sciences and, in particular, the senses—attracted 60,000 visitors last year. Dundee is a global hub for life science research and collaborations with the college of life sciences at the University of Dundee ensure that exhibits pique the interest of tomorrow’s researchers. Getting young people excited about and interested in science is one of Sensation’s key roles. As part of that ambition, the centre will hold a meet-the-scientists event on 25 and 26 February. It will involve scientists from the University of Abertay Dundee and the University of Dundee explaining research processes and their latest discoveries to school-age children. Topics will range from breeding potatoes and how to make the perfect chip, to dentistry and psychology. The event will focus on the exciting aspects of scientific discovery. The science centres aim to educate not only children; there is something for all ages. Tonight, Sensation holds a free speed-dating event as part of its reclaim series. Those who attend will chat over the glow of the Bunsen burner and perform scientific experiments while meeting new friends. That is one example of how our science centres are constantly evolving and are committed to engaging the whole community with science. However, Dundee is taking that even further with the science learning institute run by Sensation, which is the first of its kind in Scotland. The Dundee Science Centre science learning institute was launched in September last year as a collaborative approach to providing support and development for the many professionals who engage with learners throughout the community. The aim of the programme is to create a culture of curiosity, confidence and engagement with scientists within and across communities. In collaboration with the University of Dundee school of education, social work and community education and with Dundee College, the institute provides high-quality and interprofessional training for practising teachers and those in further and higher education, as well as research scientists, museum educators and community educators. So far, some 200 adults have taken part in the various programmes that are on offer. Two teachers in residence have completed six-month placements and, working with science centre staff and university scientists, developed loan boxes and support materials to take back to the classroom, thereby ensuring that Tayside pupils have access to cutting-edge curriculum for excellence resources. The aim is that, by June, more than 300 adults will have taken part in the programmes. I thank the Scottish Government for its support for Dundee Science Centre and all Scotland’s science centres. Its support and encouragement are vital to our centres’ continued success. I am pleased that Angela Constance will respond to the debate, but I put on record my thanks to Mike Russell, in particular, who has been a staunch supporter of all four science centres.

What is the Scottish Government’s position on the report by the Scottish digital network panel that a new television network for Scotland should be created and funded from the licence fee?

At 2 per cent of the licence fee, the proposals for a Scottish digital channel should be taken seriously by the BBC. Members on all sides of the chamber have been highlighting the need for a dedicated “Scottish Six” news bulletin without success for a number of years. Does the First Minister agree that a new dedicated digital television channel for Scotland could bring a “Scottish Six”—a Scottish news bulletin—one step closer?

4. To ask the Scottish Government what representations ministers have made to the United Kingdom Government regarding fuel prices. (S3O-12729)

I know that the cabinet secretary is aware of The Courier’s fight for fairer fuel campaign, because he has signed the accompanying petition. I, too, have signed the petition, along with my colleagues Shona Robison and Tricia Marwick and many others, and I have been told that the completion of the form that I am holding up brings the tally of signatures to more than 3,000. Given the campaign’s popularity with readers throughout Scotland and constituents’ concerns about high fuel prices, is the cabinet secretary surprised that Iain Gray, the leader of the Labour group in the Parliament, has failed to support The Courier’s campaign?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Today’s debate highlights that our SNP Government is doing its best, within the limited powers of the Parliament, to protect jobs, public services and household incomes in the face of huge cuts from Westminster. I call it a “debate”, but I find it incredible that two Labour candidates for the position of cabinet secretary have refused to take any interventions from back-bench SNP members. Perhaps I should not be surprised about that because we are now one and three quarter hours into the debate and we have not heard a single constructive idea from the Labour Party.

This is the stage 1 debate on the budget, and what we have to do today is to provide a balanced budget. It is easy to come up with lots of ideas about how to spend money but if we want to be credible we need to say what we would cut in its place. That is what the Labour Party has failed to do today. Perhaps that is no surprise. As Kenny Gibson pointed out earlier, two thirds of the cuts that we are having to grapple with in the budget were planned by the previous Labour Government—cuts that Alistair Darling said would be deeper and tougher than those imposed by Margaret Thatcher. In spite of the challenges of such an unprecedented cut to funding, there is still some good news. I hope that the whole Parliament will join me in welcoming the commitment to funding for the Victoria and Albert museum at Dundee, which is a major step towards completion of the project and is crucial to securing the remaining investment and allowing the project to move forward at full speed. I hope that members have the opportunity to visit the exhibition, which is still in the Parliament’s main hall. Inward investment is already being stimulated in Dundee, where there is a positive uplift to our local economy on the back of the V and A project. The budget also aims to continue the council tax freeze that has been so important in helping households through these challenging times. For the fourth year running, there will not be an increase of a single penny in households’ council tax bills. In the first four years of the SNP Government, bills have been frozen, whereas in the last four years of the Lib-Lab Administration, bills in Dundee increased by 11 per cent. A band D household in Dundee would be paying an extra £150 this year if there was no freeze. We must remember that that saving has to be added to the money that was saved in previous years—money that the Labour Party would have us remove from the pockets of pensioners and other hard-pressed householders. The assumption in those figures is that, without the council tax freeze, the increase would be roughly in line with inflation. We heard earlier about the 60 per cent rise throughout Scotland, but if we look back, we can see that once that can of worms is opened, the sky’s the limit when it comes to Labour’s determination to squeeze council tax payers. Between 1997 and 2007, the council tax in Dundee went up by a staggering 51 per cent. The worst year in that period was 1997-98, when the Labour council slammed the council tax up by 14.9 per cent in one year. It is no wonder that Labour lost two thirds of its councillors in the 1999 council elections as the SNP trebled our representation. There is one group to which a few pounds does not make a great deal of difference: the large supermarkets. As we have heard, provisional figures indicate that Tesco would be the largest contributor through the Government’s proposed increase in business rates, paying some £8.5 million annually. That needs to be considered in the context of the £3.4 billion pre-tax profits declared by the company last year; it does not seem unreasonable that Tesco should contribute a little bit more.

Grant schemes are laid out and all companies can apply, but that does not prevent the largest companies, when they are making huge profits, from taking on a little bit more of the burden to ensure that we protect public services as much as possible. It is incredible that Labour members of the Finance Committee voted against the council tax freeze, which would save ordinary households money, while calling for big business, such as Asda and Tesco, to be exempt from paying higher business rates.

Those who benefit most are constituents from throughout the country who were often in tears when the bills came through their door. In 1997, the bill was hiked by 15 per cent but pensioners’ pensions did not go up at anywhere near that rate. Those are the people whom David Whitton is attacking. He should be ashamed of the way in which he is siding with big business. We should not be surprised, however, because Labour has a track record of putting big business before the interests of ordinary folk. We saw that with PFI and we recently witnessed it with the Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill, when Labour came out to bat for the big drinks companies, to the detriment of the health of the people of Scotland. The rumour is that in that case the modern equivalent of 30 pieces of silver is 24 bottles of Peroni. The SNP Government is standing up for communities by maintaining the 1,000 extra police officers; standing up for households, with council tax to be frozen for another year; and investing in our future with funding for the V and A museum at Dundee. As a member of the Finance Committee, I call on all members to put party politics aside and support the budget. As the MSP for Dundee West, I plead with members not to place any doubt on the funding for the V and A at Dundee.

It would have been useful if the Liberal Democrats had produced some costed alternative spending proposals that could have been examined during the committee process. That is what is supposed to happen at stage 1.

Will Jeremy Purvis take an intervention?

What are his figures?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention on the point that he is making?

I add my congratulations to Bob Doris on securing today's members' business debate. We have heard from a number of MSPs who share a similar heritage—although we often do not share the same political views. As people will guess from my surname, I am of Irish descent. Irish immigration to the east coast is not as well known about as that to the west coast, but it was just as significant in the development of our shared culture. My great-great-grandfather, Thomas FitzPatrick, was an Irish immigrant who came to Scotland with his mother as a boy some time between the early 1860s and the early 1870s. My great-great-grandmother, Mary-Anne McKelvie, arrived in Dundee with both her parents from County Cavan. She met Thomas, and they were married in the city's St Andrew's Roman Catholic chapel in 1879. Many families in Dundee share a similar story, as can be seen in the way that parts of the Lochee area of the city are affectionately known as Little Tipperary. My ancestors did not move to Lochee, however. After getting married, Thomas and Mary-Anne are reported in the 1881 census as living in West Henderson's Wynd, which is the location of Dundee's Verdant Works, the last working jute mill in Scotland. Jute mills such as the Verdant Works drew large numbers of Irish families to Dundee. Irish immigrants started arriving in Dundee around 1825, with workers skilled in textiles arriving from Donegal, Monaghan, Sligo and Tyrone. By 1855, before my ancestors had arrived, there were already 14,000 Irish people residing in Dundee. About 71 per cent of Dundee's  Irish-born workforce was female, and it was those skilled textile workers who helped to establish Dundee as an industrial powerhouse. Close examination of the census data for 1881 and 1891 shows that that was the case with my ancestors, with Mary-Anne described first as a jute preparer and then as a jute spinner, and Thomas described as a stone-breaker. Many men in Dundee would have been described as stone-breakers; the affectionate term that a lot of women had for them was "kettle bilers"—in Dundee, it was the women who made the money for families, in the main. Irish immigrants in Dundee, like in Glasgow, made a significant contribution to our city and to our country over the years. William McGonagall, Scotland's second-best-known poet, was the son of Irish parents who worked in the jute mills of Dundee. James Connolly, that great proponent of self-determination, lived in the city during 1898, and became involved in the local political scene. The city's sports have been heavily influenced by the Irish population, Dundee United having played originally as Dundee Hibernian until 1923. My ancestors followed a different team with an Irish past, however. The local paper of Saturday 21 May 1938 records that my great-great-grandfather died aged 80, perhaps overexcited at seeing his team, the Lochee Harp, take the lead in the Telegraph cup semi-final. The number of new Irish immigrants to Dundee has perhaps declined over the years, but Dundee is experiencing a new wave of Irish visitors, as many students from all parts of Ireland choose our city to study in. Many of them decide to stay in our city after their studies are complete. Like many cities in Scotland, Dundee enjoys a richer culture as a result of the contribution of Irish immigrants. We are rightly proud of our heritage, and I thank Bob Doris for giving us the opportunity to put that on record tonight.

To ask the Scottish Government what progress is being made towards making Scotland a zero waste society. (S3O-12299)

I welcome the progress that the Government is making. If we are to meet the target of sending a maximum of 5 per cent of all waste to landfill by 2025, how we deal with food waste will be crucial. Food waste is a valuable commodity. If all the food waste that is currently produced in Scotland was captured and treated separately, it could generate enough energy to power the city of Dundee. What actions are being taken to reduce and recycle food waste?

I thank Bill Kidd for securing today’s debate. This is a topic of huge importance and relevance at this time. As we have heard, support from around the world is growing for ridding ourselves of nuclear weapons, and local authorities and communities in Scotland can make a real difference by declaring themselves nuclear weapons-free zones. Let us take a minute to think about why we aspire to be a nuclear weapons-free zone. Nuclear weapons are designed with one purpose, which is to kill large civilian populations. We cannot hide from the fact that a nuclear weapon is a bomb, not a deterrent. They are weapons of mass destruction.  Governments have rightly argued that weapons such as landmines are immoral and should be banned under international law because of their detrimental effect on civilian populations. The international community finds unacceptable the image of a young child in Cambodia who has lost a limb as a result of a landmine, but it is apparently acceptable that the girl and her baby brother, parents and grandparents, and everyone whom the family has ever met, should be obliterated in a nuclear explosion. As we heard from Bill Kidd, that might be the UK Government’s view, but it is certainly not the Scottish people’s view. Two-thirds of Scots oppose the renewal of Trident. The average Scot is concerned that, at a time when we face the largest cuts in public spending since the 1920s, spending £100 billion on weapons of mass destruction is not just immoral, but is economically unjustifiable. Nuclear weapons have only one purpose: to kill large numbers of civilians. They have been no use to our troops in Iraq and Afghanistan, and it could be argued that by diverting money that could have been used to support the military on the front line they potentially cause the deaths of UK soldiers. Nuclear weapons are no use as a deterrent, as Commander Robert Green pointed out in his book, “Security Without Nuclear Deterrence”, in which he drew on his knowledge as an operator of British nuclear weapons to make the case that such weapons would not deter a nuclear first strike. The rationale of deterrence enthusiasts is that we would be safer if every state had nuclear weapons, because there would be a balance and every nation would be afraid to use its bombs, for fear of retaliation. If nuclear weapons would make the world safer, it seems odd that NATO’s nuclear powers are so concerned about the nuclear ambitions of Iran and North Korea. The deterrence argument is nonsense; fewer weapons, not more weapons, will make the world safer. I wonder whether any member thinks that New Zealand’s decision to declare the country a nuclear weapons-free zone has made it more likely to suffer a nuclear or other attack than it would have been if it had invested in a nuclear weapons programme. The majority of Scots are against nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction. A move to register Scotland with the UN as a single-state nuclear weapons-free zone would be an important expression of Scots’ views and would send a clear signal to the Westminster Government that it should not spend £100 billion of our money on new nuclear weapons.

I echo others in the chamber in congratulating Patricia Ferguson on the bill, which touches on a subject that is of great concern to many of our constituents. Some 36 per cent of the population live in tenement flats—many in Glasgow and Dundee—maisonettes and apartments, and around 50 per cent of those people live in privately owned flats that have a property manager. Some 30 per cent of those have a private sector manager and 20 per cent have a registered social landlord as a manager.  Although the majority of people are happy with their factors, a large proportion—30 per cent—are dissatisfied, and the problems that they face are highlighted by the fact that in 2009 as many as two thirds were unhappy with the way in which their complaint was handled. The Scottish Government has been acting on the recommendations of the recent OFT report that suggested self-regulation of the industry and has been working with stakeholders towards a voluntary accreditation scheme for property managers and land maintenance companies. However, the support today for Patricia Ferguson's bill demonstrates the Government's commitment to taking the matter further to ensure the best protection for residents. As Bob Doris said, the work that has gone into putting together the voluntary accreditation scheme will not be wasted. I hope that it will feed into Patricia Ferguson's bill at stage 2 and, perhaps, beyond. The bill aims to improve the position of those who are dissatisfied with their factor and Patricia Ferguson must be congratulated on introducing it. I will use an example from Dundee to demonstrate why we need to establish a system of statutory registration for all property factors and an alternative means of resolving factoring disputes. I am sure that the situation will be all too familiar to members from experiences in their constituencies. Panmurefield village in Dundee is in the constituency of my colleague Shona Robison. It is a new-build estate of 71 properties that has its open spaces managed by a property manager. Residents were charged £80 or £120 a year by the factor for the upkeep of the common spaces, and it was not long before problems started to emerge, such as the lack of maintenance work or sub-standard work being done. Members will be aware that the Local Government and Communities Committee has been presented with a raft of similar complaints from across Scotland. After repeated attempts to rectify the situation with the factor, the residents formed an association and householders united to force the property factor to give up its role of manager of the common ground. One would have thought that that would have been the end of the situation but, despite losing the contract, the property factor continued to issue bills to residents and threatened to send sheriff's officers to enforce payment. That caused great distress, particularly among elderly members of the community, and it took a civil court ruling before the demands for payment stopped. The residents have now awarded the management contract to Dundee contract services, which has highlighted just how much they were being overcharged by the previous  factor. As most people probably know, Dundee contract services is a contracting arm of Dundee City Council. It maintains the city's open spaces and competes with the private sector to provide building services such as common ground maintenance. As a result of changing their property factor, residents in Panmurefield village have seen their annual bill fall from an average of £110 to less than £20 a household. The residents of Panmurefield village were lucky that the size of their community made it less difficult to change their factor than it would have been if the common ground had been owned and maintained by a land management company such as the infamous Greenbelt Group. The committee and other members have highlighted a number of issues that warrant further consideration at stage 2 and beyond. I hope that the consensus that has been expressed in the chamber today will continue so that the bill will be supported not only tonight, but at stage 2 and stage 3, so that it can become law. It addresses some important issues.

The cabinet secretary will be aware that, at the Treasury Committee on 4 November, George Osborne stated: "We are looking at whether this whole framework of DEL-AME needs to be revisited, particularly the AME part of it, because this is a very large budget—I think virtually half of Government spending ... So we are looking at a new framework and I hope to say more about that in the Budget on March 23." What implications does the cabinet secretary believe that that could have for Scotland's future spending plans?

Although I understand that when the cabinet secretary made his decision he had to take into account all the relevant factors, including the parliamentary vote on 23 September, he should be aware that some staff in the SPSA will be concerned that he has not chosen the most cost-effective option. Can the cabinet secretary give the staff some reassurance about the finances available to the SPSA in the draft budget?

To ask the Scottish Government whether it plans to make changes to the education maintenance allowance. (S3O-12220)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that response, which will be welcome news to young people across Scotland. What maintenance support will be available for those 16 to 19-year-olds who attend courses at education centres such as Dundee College in my constituency?

I welcome today's debate and the opportunity that it gives the chamber to focus on Scotland's economy. Although many of the powers that affect it are held at Westminster, Scotland's economy is  dealt with merely as a fringe issue in that chamber—[ Interruption .]

I do not think that it is my phone that is causing it, Presiding Officer.

I will put it away. The Liberal Democrats have put forward some genuinely interesting proposals in their motion, but they need to be considered as part of a much wider look at public services. I hope that Mr Purvis will submit his paper to the Christie commission for detailed examination. That would enable the document to be considered in the wider look into the public services that Campbell Christie is taking forward. Although the Liberal Democrat paper contains a few interesting ideas, the party misses the point when it comes to the Scottish Futures Trust. With a budget of £3.2 million, the SFT delivered benefits for the public sector of £114 million in the 2009-10 financial year. That is a 35-fold return on investment for the Scottish public. That value for the Scottish purse is set to continue in the years ahead, with the SFT's corporate plan for 2009 to 2014 setting a minimum target of a £7 benefit for every £1 spent over that period.

I think that there is no limit to the width of issues that Campbell Christie can look at. We need to take a wide look at where we are going. Scrapping the Scottish Futures Trust and replacing it with the Liberals' favoured option of finance Scotland makes no sense other than as a piece of politicking. Doing that would put at risk projects such as the £1.25 billion schools for the future programme that is delivering 55 schools across Scotland, including the rebuild of Harris academy in my constituency. The education establishment in Dundee was absolutely delighted to have the intervention of the Scottish Futures Trust, which ensured that the proposals for Harris academy are now far more ambitious than had been thought possible originally. The SFT has added real value to a project that is very important to that long-standing school in my constituency. In coming to a decision on the Scottish Futures Trust, I urge my Liberal colleagues to listen to the facts, not the grumblings from the Labour benches. As we have heard, Scotland's economy is still in a delicate state, but we are making progress. By  using the limited powers at his disposal, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth is endeavouring to make the most of our shrinking block grant. However, until we have the same fiscal responsibilities that every other normal nation has, it is inevitable that we will remain hamstrung in our efforts to grow the Scottish economy. I have raised the comparison that I am about to make in the chamber before, so it will not surprise members that I do so again. The computer games industry is a prime example of why we in Scotland are missing out as a consequence of economic policy that must benefit the UK as a whole rather than Scotland. The industry has been highly successful in Scotland over the past two decades and is disproportionately important to the Scottish economy, with 10 per cent of the total UK industry based in Dundee. Evidence strongly suggests that, without tax relief on games development, we are in danger of losing our market share to countries such as France and Canada, which offer tax breaks.

The computer games industry has asked for clearly targeted support for the development of computer games. The argument has been put forward by the whole industry, which is asking for UK-based taxes to be used to support it. The evidence suggests that a tax break would increase the Exchequer's take. Without it, there is a serious danger that we will lose both money and jobs, which is a particular shame. Tax breaks for the computer games industry would be self-funding, protecting existing jobs and generating new graduate jobs and extra investment for our economy. However, despite the sector's importance to the economy, not £1 of tax relief has ever been paid out, in spite of the good words that we heard from the previous Labour Government towards the end of its term. The computer games industry in Dundee is supported by the Scottish Government in those areas where it has a remit. In particular, the Scottish Government has ensured that the industry has the best graduates in the world. Graduates from the University of Abertay Dundee are so good and well trained that companies from across the globe, especially Canada, come to Dundee to cherry pick some of the best people in the business. We need to ensure that that talent remains in Scotland and Dundee. Members may not be surprised to hear that I also have a particular interest in the life sciences sector, which is important to Dundee and to  Scotland. The news that the UK Government is to go ahead with plans for a patent box is welcome. Scotland is truly a global leader in life sciences. I hope that the sector-specific tax break for pharmaceuticals and the biotechnology industry will have a positive effect on investment in Scotland. It is important that, when people get it right, we acknowledge that. However, the current constitutional set-up means that sometimes people get it right and sometimes they get it wrong. We need a constitutional set-up that ensures that we make the decisions and that those decisions are always made in the interests of Scotland. The solution is straightforward: the best basis on which to make decisions for the Scottish economy is for those decisions to be made in Scotland, with Scottish interests at the forefront, rather than as an afterthought. Full fiscal powers for the Scottish Parliament would ensure that we developed Scottish solutions to Scottish problems. We look forward to the day when the Parliament has all the powers that are necessary successfully to manage and support Scotland's economy. Dundee used to be known as the city of the three Js: jute, jam and journalism. It is now becoming known as the city of the three Gs. I have already mentioned two of those: genes and games. The third potential G for Dundee is green jobs. We desperately need the UK Government to release our fossil fuel levy money so that it can be invested in Scotland right now.

Will the member tell us when the Labour Party will bring forward its amendments to the draft budget bill?

rose—

Mr Whitton is talking about detail. Could he at least give us the figure for how much he wants to raise the council tax by?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will Andy Kerr give way?

Will Andy Kerr give way?

Andy Kerr asserts that the previous Labour-Lib Dem Government mothballed  the power. When was that decision taken and why was it not brought to the Parliament? Was he aware of the state of unreadiness of that mothballed system?

rose—

rose—

Will the member give way?

I congratulate the cabinet secretary on bringing forward a budget that protects jobs and front-line services in spite of the massive cuts to Scotland's grant. In particular, I welcome the support that will allow the V & A project in Dundee to continue. The cabinet secretary confirmed that he will seek a council tax freeze for another year. That is in stark contrast to the views of the Labour Party. Will he set out the value of the council tax to individuals and councils and the impact that there being no freeze would have on household incomes and council budgets?

The minister will no doubt be aware that the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural  Organization centre for water law, policy and science at the University of Dundee, which is in my constituency, is at the forefront of the science of water management, and that we need to continue to move forward in this area if we are to catch up with the Netherlands and Sweden. They are the global leaders in this commercial area. Does the minister agree that it is important that we get the balance right between selling water and selling our expertise in its management, engineering, science and financing?

Will the member take an intervention?

Today's motion sums up the Labour Party's approach to politics in Scotland for the past few years: rather than put forward constructive alternatives for dealing with the cuts—most of which were planned by Labour, members should remember—it has a list of spending commitments that grows by the day. The Labour Party's alternative reality absolves it of all responsibility for the mess that it left. Labour members seem to think that, if they keep blaming others, people will be conned into believing them.  As a wise man once said and as has perhaps been overquoted, "You can fool some of the people all of the time, and all of the people some of the time". However, no matter how often Labour recites its negative messages or how loud Labour members rant, the vast majority of Scots will not be taken in. We see confirmation of that in a recent Ipsos MORI poll, which showed that 81 per cent of Scots put the blame for the current financial problems where it belongs: at the door of the Labour Party first and of the coalition second. Despite appearances, there are some intelligent minds among Opposition members. That makes it all the worse that they allow their hatred of the SNP to cloud their judgment. Labour has never really accepted that it lost the election. Admittedly, the result was close, but the Labour Party lost the confidence of the Scottish people and its current approach to the budget will make the choice for the electorate in six months' time very straightforward. This time round, Labour might find that it is not so close. Let us move on from the fantasy of the Labour motion and examine the facts. Jobs are being put at risk by the UK Government and the current constitutional set-up that lets it govern. That is the set-up that our colleagues on the Labour benches are so keen to support. I ask Labour members to put their hands up if they would prefer sovereignty to be returned to the people of Scotland in this Parliament rather than our continuing to be ruled by the Tories from London. I am not surprised that none has their hand up. There we have it: the Labour Party prefers the Tories to the people of Scotland governing themselves. It is absolutely clear and we now have it on the record. [ Interruption .]

At the election in May, Labour members throughout the country will call for a Tory-Liberal coalition to take all the important decisions on the future of Scotland at the same time as they argue against those decisions. They talk about the dark days of Margaret Thatcher, but they opened the door to the Tories regaining power by refusing even to consider discussions for a rainbow coalition. [ Interruption .] Labour members might want to try to blame the Liberals for the coalition, but they would not even open the door and give the Liberal Democrats the opportunity to enter a rainbow coalition to prevent the Tories from getting in. The Liberals are the Tories' little helpers, but so is the Labour Party because it opened the door.

To go back to the history lesson, once again the Labour Party preferred the Tories to be in power to giving sovereignty to the people of Scotland. Let us come back to the more recent past and remember that a Labour chancellor promised spending cuts that would be "deeper and tougher" than Thatcher's and that a Labour Prime Minster invited the iron lady round for a cup of tea and some advice. Despite the limited powers available to our Scottish Government, we have been able to make a real difference to families and businesses throughout Scotland. Due to the SNP Government's economic recovery plan, the recession has been shallower and shorter in Scotland than in the rest of the UK. The total fall from peak to trough in Scotland as a result of the downturn was 5.8 per cent—lower than the comparable drop in the UK of 6.4 per cent. The most recent figures available for the economy, from the second quarter of this year, show that the SNP's economic recovery plan is continuing to work. GDP in Scotland grew by 1.3 per cent compared with growth of 1.2 per cent in the UK. The Scottish construction sector also grew by a massive 10.4 per cent over the quarter, and there was an increase of 2.5 per cent in the production sector. Both outperformed the UK as a whole. I am not saying that everything is rosy—it is not and these are difficult times—but our Government's decisions are clearly the correct ones and make best use of our limited powers. In recent times, the Labour Party has been more concerned with scoring cheap political points than doing what is best for the people of Scotland. Voting the budget down is an example of that, but the latest politicking comes in the form of demanding that a budget be published within hours of the UK spending review announcement. Originally, Labour demanded that a budget be produced even before the Scottish Government had the figures, but that was quickly changed to a demand that John Swinney should produce a budget the way that Iain Gray does, with a raft of uncosted commitments that bear no relation to reality. That is good for headlines but not for the families and businesses of Scotland. Labour might be willing to do a budget on the back of a fag packet but, thankfully, John Swinney is more meticulous. The SNP Government has made clear some of the measures for which it will seek support: a council tax freeze; maintaining free personal care  and concessionary travel; keeping Scottish Water under public ownership; applying Barnett consequentials from health to the health service; and abolishing prescription charges. I am hopeful that Labour will start to make amends for years of wasteful spending on trams, Trident and the private finance initiative but, if today's debate is anything to go by, we can expect it to continue peddling its negative message of doom spun together with uncosted commitments while we in the SNP continue working with the Scottish people to get through the hard times. Working together, we can make Scotland better.

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

Iain Gray said on television that Labour would cap council tax at 2 per cent. How will the cap be enforced?

To ask the Scottish Government what steps are being taken to tackle poverty. (S3O-11528)

The recent Joseph Rowntree Foundation report highlights the fact that, for all the positive action taken by the Scottish Government and previous Administrations, our efforts to tackle poverty are hampered by the Scottish Parliament's limited powers. As a direct result of the one-size-fits-all approach taken to economic and social policy by successive Westminster Governments, Scotland has been left with the three most deprived constituencies in the UK. Does the minister agree that, to tackle poverty in Scotland effectively, we must have powers over areas such as tax, the benefits system and employment practices?

The Labour Party has decided to support option two before it has even seen what the SPSA has to say. Why is it so anti-Dundee?

First of all, I apologise for missing the opening of the debate. I also declare an interest as my partner works for the SPSA in the DNA database in Dundee, and I point out that DNA services for the whole of Scotland have been carried out in Dundee for some time. In today's debate we have heard a number of arguments in favour of the options to reform forensic services in Scotland. I favour option three,  because I believe that using the two laboratories in Glasgow and Dundee would offer a real opportunity for more effective utilisation of resources and greater standardisation and consistency of service. Option three would provide the highest level of efficiency for the lowest cost and would therefore be in the best interests of providing the best possible crime detection service to Scotland's police forces and the wider public at optimum cost.

Perhaps later. Option three would also secure public service jobs in Dundee, which receives cross-party support in Dundee. Clearly, if we are looking to relocate jobs to Dundee, they will have to come from somewhere else, just as they did when the previous Administration relocated jobs from Edinburgh to Inverness. There will always be issues for the staff who are involved in relocations, so there will need to be proper consultation.

I am absolutely clear that a national service would mean a better service for the whole of Scotland: the two-lab model would provide a better forensic service across Scotland. Although I disagree with Brian Adam's choice of option, I understand his position. It is right and proper that constituency members should protect the interests of those whom they represent. Brian Adam is a great advocate for the city of Aberdeen, and if the decision is made to take on my preferred option and to close or scale down the Aberdeen forensics labs, it will not be because of lack of action on the part of Brian Adam on behalf of his constituents. However, the Government and Opposition spokespeople should consider the issues in the round and seek to deliver what is best for Scotland as a whole.

A report is being produced by the SPSA that will go to the cabinet secretary soon: he will consider it before making his final decision. It would have been responsible for the Opposition spokespeople who call themselves shadow cabinet secretaries to have considered  the report, and to have read, before making their choice, the facts from the people who are doing the work on the ground. However—and not unusually—that has not happened. The facilities at the new police forensic laboratory at Rushton Court in Dundee could be the key to winning the battle against crime over the next decades. The centre is at the cutting edge of technology; every square inch of the new facility is carefully designed to optimise the analysis of evidence. The new laboratories are lit with natural light, which is the best environment for forensic examination, and include a range of high-spec measures that are designed to protect the chain of evidence, such as controlled air pressure, control of environmental conditions to support temperature, sensitive equipment and specialist anterooms adjacent to each main laboratory to limit and control access. For the first time, forensic experts have laboratory space that has been specifically designed for carrying out blood-pattern reconstructions.

There is a wet examination room, which will use new techniques for recovery of fingerprints on plastics, while general search labs will be used for body-fluid examinations and DNA analysis.

When members think of Dundee in a culinary debate, they can be forgiven for thinking of pies—or pehs, as eh wid ca them. There are some very good pies that come out of Dundee, but the city might not be your first thought when looking at what Scotland has to offer in terms of food and drink. That is not the case for the cabinet secretary, who was one of 26,000 visitors who flocked to Dundee's flower and food festival at Camperdown park earlier this month. I hope that he will excuse me for giving a quick plug for next year's festival, which will be held from 2 to 4 September. He will of course be very welcome, along with any other members who want to come to Dundee. I cannot guarantee that the weather will be quite as good as it was this year, but Dundee is the sunniest city in Scotland, so the odds are better. This year, festival attendees were treated to cookery demonstrations from celebrity chefs such as the hairy bikers, and had the chance to sample some excellent produce from Tayside and beyond. The flower and food festival provides an ideal opportunity to showcase the quality and range of produce that is produced on our doorstep, and to encourage people to embrace Scottish produce. Exhibitors such as Yorkes of Dundee, which sources meat from a local herd of Angus and Highland cattle, and Westpark Nursery, which produces fruit and vegetables on the outskirts of Dundee, were on hand to provide tasters to tempt the public and get them to eat more Scottish produce. Judging by the feedback that we have had from this year's festival, there has been some fantastic success in that regard. In this year of food and drink, Dundee had the honour of being chosen as the location of the 50th National Vegetable Society competition, which the Deputy Presiding Officer, who has just left the chamber, would no doubt have enjoyed. Entrants from as far afield as Jersey and Northern Ireland came to the competition at the flower and food festival, and visitors had the opportunity to learn about the techniques and benefits of growing your own vegetables. In the past, allotment owners kept many of the techniques that they used secret, but I am told that, nowadays, they want to pass on their  techniques and encourage as many new people as possible to join their pastime and produce their own food. Education is a big part of Scottish food and drink fortnight. We must ensure that the public, and especially children, learn about food from plough to plate. The Scottish Government's national food and drink policy, which was launched in June 2009, also highlights the importance of food education. I was particularly pleased to be able to join the Minister for Public Health and Sport and member for Dundee East at the formal launch of the Food Standard Agency Scotland's schools resources on the first day of this year's Dundee flower and food festival. Getting children to engage with food is vital if we are to change habits. With that in mind, each year in Dundee, a partnership involving NHS Tayside, Dundee College and the Dundee flower and food festival invites schools throughout Tayside to submit entries to the Desperate Dan-wich healthy eating competition.

I was pleased to be able to sit with some of the kids from one of the schools in my constituency, St Andrew's primary school, while they were interacting with the games that have been produced. The initiative looks at the whole range of the food industry. The focus is on ensuring that kids understand where their food comes from, the health benefits of different foods and how food should be stored, but as part of the process the kids were engaging in the possibility of being part of that growing industry. Going back to the "Desperate Dan-wich" sandwich competition, it was obviously felt that Desperate Dan's cow pies were not very balanced, and the competition gives children an opportunity to learn more about healthy food choices. This year, some 435 recipes for healthy sandwiches were submitted from throughout Tayside, and 12 finalists were invited to the food festival to make their own sandwiches. Nine-year-old Lewis Walker from Pitlochry primary school took the coveted title with his creation, the Chicken Licken pitta. I am sure that we are all waiting for next year's Turkey Lurkey sequel. As we heard from the cabinet secretary, we are on the way to growing Scotland's food and drink sector to £12.5 billion per annum by 2017, and Dundee is playing its part in that. I hope that everybody in the chamber agrees that we should  all unite behind that target and ensure that we reach it. All of Scotland has to be a part of that. Members might not be aware of Dundee Cold Stores Ltd, which supplies locally grown vegetables to all the major brands throughout the UK and is Scotland's only large-scale frozen fruit and vegetable plant. The service that it provides, which ensures that products go from the field to the freezer within 150 minutes, is particularly important for beans and peas, and it has led to one in six of all peas that are consumed in the UK being produced in Dundee. That is thanks to a grant of more than £500,000 from the Scottish Government's food processing, marketing and co-operation grants scheme. The company is continuing to expand and it is making big inroads into frozen food markets throughout the UK. It is also taking steps to become more energy efficient and plans to reduce its carbon footprint and increase its market competitiveness by erecting an 850KW commercial-scale wind turbine at the factory. The turbine could generate 20 per cent of the company's annual energy needs. It sets a great example to food producers in the area and it will make the company's peas greener without the need to add E numbers. It would be remiss of me to talk about food without touching on the Scottish Crop Research Institute, which, although not in my constituency, is close to it and employs a number of my constituents. The SCRI is one of the leaders of research into producing new varieties of crops and the bulk of what comes out of its research is done using non-genetic techniques to make sure that we continue with Scotland's proud record of being a GM-free food producer. The food and drink sector plays a vital role in our economy and Scottish food and drink fortnight provides an ideal opportunity to showcase and promote the world-class produce that we have. It will help to ensure that we grow the sector and head towards the target of £12.5 billion per annum by 2017.

To ask the First Minister what evidence the Scottish Government considered before deciding on a 45 pence per unit minimum price for alcohol. (S3F-2552)

The First Minister might be interested in the initial analysis that the Scottish Parliament information centre carried out into the submissions that were received by Labour's commission on alcohol. Of the 80 respondents, 45 were in favour of minimum pricing, 23 did not express a preference and 12—mostly drinks manufacturers—were against the proposal. Only one of the 80 respondents—a drinks company—put forward Labour's preferred proposal of restricting alcohol sales below the total cost of production, duty and VAT. Given that Labour's own alcohol commission failed to find support for its proposal, does the First Minister agree that it is time that Labour stopped playing politics with the health of the nation, accepted the overwhelming evidence in favour of minimum pricing and got behind the Scottish Government's plan?

Today's debate, as others have said, is immensely  important for the people of Scotland. Given the looming reduction in the Scottish block grant, we have a bitter pill to swallow and, whether we like it or not, the union dividend will deliver a cut of £3.7 billion in our budget over the next spending review period. The cut in the block grant is equivalent to a cut of £4,300 per year for every household in Scotland. The IBR has speculated that it could be 2025 before the Scottish budget returns to 2009-10 levels of funding.

I think that I will make some progress. Those figures are sobering, but through that sobriety we should remember that, although the Lib Dem-Tory coalition has made things worse, two thirds of the cuts were planned by the Labour Party. We in the SNP are clear in our view that the cuts go too far, too fast. The Scottish Government's approach has been measured and sensible. This is not the time to rush into making rash decisions. Andy Kerr might think that it is okay to produce a budget on the back of one of Mr Gray's fag packets, but I think that John Swinney is right to wait until the actual numbers are revealed on 20 October.

I will, of course, come on to deal with that 1 per cent error—

Yes. To produce a budget of the kind that Labour has suggested would be irresponsible. Yesterday, the First Minster explained to Parliament—perhaps Ms Alexander was not listening—why such crystal-ball budgeting does not work. He explained that the possible variance in the budget was huge, and far greater than the figure of £200 million that some people have come up with. However, even if we could predict the budget to the nearest £200 million, that would be the difference between continuing the extremely popular council tax freeze and increasing council tax by a whopping 10 per cent. In my constituency, that would result in an increase of £120 a year in the council tax bills of band D households. That is money that my constituents cannot afford. I would have thought that even a party that was responsible for frequent double-digit increases in council tax would understand that that is not  acceptable in these economically challenging times. I am not surprised by Labour's position because, thus far, it has failed to produce any suggestions on how to tackle the challenges that face us. It is more than a case of keeping your cards close to your chest—Andy Kerr's are still in the packet. If Labour is playing a game of "I'll show you mine if you show me yours", Andy Kerr and Labour should recognise that John Swinney has placed a number of cards on the table and that it is their turn to tell us what they think. The SNP has said what it will do with any Barnett consequentials from health. In an answer on "Newsnight", Iain Gray made it absolutely clear that under Labour there would be no protection for health. Today, we have heard a change in that tune—Andy Kerr suggested that he now supports the SNP position.

We need to know who speaks for Labour on health—is it Iain Gray or Andy Kerr? That is a big question. If Labour members cannot bring forward any constructive ideas of their own, at least they could give us their views on those areas on which the cabinet secretary has produced proposals. An area that I think is particularly important and on which I disagree with the IBR is concessionary travel. I fully agree with the cabinet secretary's stated intention of protecting concessionary travel. It has been some time since he made clear our party's position on the matter, but we have still not heard whether the Labour leadership agrees with us. The retention of the concessionary travel scheme is vital to our elderly and disabled citizens. I know from speaking to my constituents in Dundee that it can make a real difference to their quality of life. The universal nature of the current provision is an important aspect of the scheme. Another area in which the SNP Government has made its position clear is on keeping Scottish Water in public ownership. As the First Minister laid out yesterday, the forthcoming water bill will keep Scottish Water in public hands. It has the potential to raise hundreds of millions of pounds of revenue from new economic activity, such as utilising existing land for renewables development. When we face such serious challenges in public finances, it is not the time to be selling off valuable assets that could provide a good income stream for the public finances. In conjunction with Scottish Water, the Scottish Government has come up with some truly innovative proposals that I believe will  secure the future of a vital service. The debate is one for the whole chamber to be involved in, and I know that some members will have other ideas, such as mutualisation or even privatisation. However, we have still not heard a clear answer from Labour on its position. In the weeks ahead, we have an opportunity to discuss what we think are the most important services. What are our priorities? Labour members cannot continue to bury their heads in the sand as their list of spending pledges gets longer, as Linda Fabiani set out. Right here, right now, the people of Scotland want to know: will Labour keep concessionary travel? Will Labour commit to keeping Scottish Water in public hands? By how much would Labour put up the council tax? Do Labour members agree with George Foulkes that the Scottish variable rate should be used to increase tax on Scottish households? Who speaks for Labour on health? Is it—

Is it Iain Gray or Andy Kerr? The people of Scotland want to know whether the Labour position is that of Andy Kerr, who is correct in supporting the SNP position, or that of Iain Gray, who intends to slash health service funding. There are many more questions that will need to be answered—

By how much does the member think the council tax should have gone up in each of the past three years, and by how much more does he think it should go up this year? The people of Scotland have a right to know just how expensive a Labour Executive would have been.

I only need a number

Will the member take an intervention?

Does the member understand the difference between comment and information and a budget bill being produced?

The Labour Party's suggestion that a budget bill should  be produced before we have the results of the comprehensive spending review takes political posturing to new levels. Deciding how much money will be spent before knowing how much there is would be foolish at a household-budget level, but setting a budget for a nation on such a whim would be irresponsible to the point that it could be contemplated only by a party that was responsible for the worst Government economic mismanagement in living memory.

No. I want to make some progress. The UK budget has given estimated DEL figures for the coming years, but they are not broken down by department, and a small change at Westminster could have big ramifications for the Scottish budget. As the cabinet secretary and other members have stated, the UK chancellor has confirmed that the comprehensive spending review will be published on 20 October. The Scottish Government will present spending plans for the budget shortly after that. It would be irresponsible to bring forward a budget bill prior to receiving the actual numbers, although we know that those numbers will result in an unprecedented squeeze on the Parliament's spending power. It is crucial that we prepare for the challenges ahead, which is exactly what the Scottish Government is doing. Setting up the independent budget review in February to take matters forward was part of the process. That panel is due to report in the coming weeks. It has engaged civic Scotland, business organisations, representative groups and other stakeholders in a constructive debate on the budgetary challenges that we face. The Finance Committee took taken evidence from it as part of our inquiry. That is the correct approach to take. I hope that all the parties will recognise the independence of the report and will add to the debate in a constructive fashion in the best interests of the people of Scotland. However, there are cuts that we should be hearing about right here, right now. Andy Kerr stated that he wanted to cut £320 million from Scotland's budgets this year. He has the figures, but Labour members have been silent about where the Labour axe would have fallen if we had been unfortunate enough to have a Labour Government in Scotland today. Councils throughout Scotland will be echoing the words of the Glasgow councillor and shouting out, "God bless the SNP," and thanking their lucky stars that they do not have to make those Kerr cuts right now to budgets that were already squeezed by Alistair Darling's £500 million cut last year.  Labour is keen to keep letting us know where it would like to spend extra money. It promises another spending commitment every other day. However, that will not wash with the people of Scotland. Every Labour spending announcement implies deeper and more savage cuts somewhere else. The party that presided over the economic meltdown and saddled Scots with billions of pounds of debts under the buy-one-pay-for-eight-later private finance initiative scandal has a brass neck in criticising the Scottish Government's approach to budgets. Labour's approach reminds me of a spoiled child in the supermarket, stamping their feet and crying because they cannot get any more sweeties. It is time for the Labour Party to put up or shut up. I advise its members to take on board the cabinet secretary's comments and use the recess to reflect on their approach to the challenges that Scotland faces. The people deserve better from their elected officials.

From its introduction, the council tax increased by 100 per cent under the Conservative and Labour parties. Throughout that period, double-digit increases were not uncommon. I put aside those particularly high increases, but how much more would the average family in Dundee have been expected to pay if council tax had increased by a comparatively modest 3 per cent each year since 2007?

Today's debate is an opportunity to set the record straight. From reading the motion, one would be forgiven for thinking that the tourism sector in Scotland was in disarray. Of course, that is far from the truth. In the midst of a recession, our tourism industry has just had an extremely successful year. In a year in which tourism was down by 4 per cent, Scotland was the only country in the United Kingdom to show growth in international trips, with a 25 per cent increase in visits from North America and a 43 per cent increase in visitors from outwith North America and Europe over the summer months. The year of homecoming generated more than £50 million of additional revenue and attracted almost 100,000 additional visitors to Scotland—by anyone's standards, that is a success of which the whole Parliament can be proud. David Smythe, chairman of the Association of Scotland's Self-Caterers, perhaps best summed up the situation for the tourism industry when he stated: "In an economically tricky year we were very fortunate to have Homecoming. The Programme of events and the marketing of the celebrations helped promote Scotland as a must visit destination in 2009." The Scottish Government is committed to growing the tourism sector in Scotland, and the announcement of the second year of homecoming was welcomed by businesses throughout Scotland. Homecoming 2014 will take place in the year that Scotland hosts the Commonwealth games and the Ryder cup and marks the 700th anniversary of the battle of Bannockburn. The second year of homecoming is also the target year for the opening of the Victoria and Albert museum Dundee on the waterfront in my constituency, which will put Dundee at the heart of the celebrations. It is hoped that we can replicate some of the success that Bilbao has enjoyed with the Guggenheim museum. The Scottish Government's enthusiastic support has been key to driving the project forward to ensure that we create a truly iconic building on—or perhaps in—the Tay. In order to do that, a global competition to design the museum was launched and a shortlist of six companies has been drawn up. Global interest has been stirred by the design competition and six of the world's leading architectural practices, which have designed some of the most iconic modern buildings around the world, are  bidding to take on the work. Although those companies are from across the world, they have managed to tap into the huge talent that exists in Scotland. Every single one of them is using a lot of their manpower to bring forward their designs in Scotland and across the UK, which is to be welcomed at this time of recession.

We need to have a strategy that drives tourism forward. It is bizarre that the Liberal Democrats are saying, on the one hand, that everything is terrible so we need change and, on the other hand, that we do not need change. At the end of the day, what we have from the Liberal Democrats is a motion that talks down our industry and Scotland. We hear far too much of that. I will return to the benefits that tourism has for Scotland and for my city in particular. The V and A in Dundee will grow and support tourism in the area. It is estimated that it will bring 130,000 visitors to Dundee every year, which will be a huge boost to the Scottish economy as well as to Dundee's economy. It will tie into the other cultural centres of Aberdeen, Edinburgh and Glasgow and will really make Scotland a global cultural place to visit. I hope that everybody in the chamber will support that. I certainly have not heard any voices speak against it, which is a good thing. I understand why some businesses have taken issue with the business rates revaluation, because nobody wants to pay more tax, but the revaluation is carried out by an independent assessor. To fail to implement its recommendations or to introduce transitional relief would mean that many businesses would be forced to pay more than they should. Transitional relief would work both ways: it would mean that businesses that have been assessed as paying too much would continue to pay too much, which cannot be right. We would force businesses to pay more than the independent assessor has stated they should pay. No member should be in any doubt that, by ensuring that the overall package of rates relief to businesses in the tourism sector is more generous than in any other part of the UK and by investing in projects such as the V and A in Dundee and homecoming 2009 and 2014, the Scottish Government is committed to and delivering for the tourism sector in Scotland.

After years of lobbying, the previous Westminster Government finally conceded the need for tax incentives for video games development. However, the cabinet secretary will be aware that, in his final budget, the previous Labour chancellor made no financial provision for such incentives. Does the cabinet secretary agree that that made it easier for the Conservative-Liberal coalition to renege on the cross-party pre-election promises that were made to the industry, thereby placing Scottish jobs, especially in my constituency, at risk? What representations does the Scottish Government intend to make to ensure that one of  Scotland's exciting new industries is allowed to compete fairly on the international stage?

I wish to declare an interest, in that my brother works for D C Thomson and has been informed that his job is at risk, and my dad is in receipt of a works pension. The First Minister is aware of the potential 350 job losses at D C Thomson in Dundee. Like mine, nearly every family in Dundee has a connection to D C Thomson, which employs about 2,000 people from the city. It has a loyal workforce, many of whom would want to continue to work for the company. I am pleased to have heard a commitment from the management to minimise the number of compulsory redundancies. I know that the Government's partnership action for continuing employment team will work with any staff who are made redundant to identify re-employment opportunities and training needs. I ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government can direct the PACE team to consider the possibility of working with D C Thomson to support retraining of staff to allow redeployment within the D C Thomson organisation.

To ask the Scottish Government what progress is being made to ensure swift justice following a conviction. (S3O-10796)

People south of the border will be pleased that the UK Government is now focusing on reducing reoffending, as the Scottish Government has done for some time. What is the Scottish Government doing to ensure that a robust community service system contributes to meeting that aim?

I welcome the progress that we are making towards the new Forth crossing. This debate should make it clear that we will have a new bridge in place by 2016. That bridge is key to ensuring that business and the general public have the transport infrastructure that is required for the 21st century. The compiling of the stage 1 report on the Forth Crossing Bill was an enlightening experience. I, too, thank all the witnesses, the minister and our clerks, who have done a fantastic job. I was sometimes taken back to my days as a Dundee City Council councillor serving on the development quality committee. I assure everybody who has been involved in the process that all members of the Forth Crossing Bill Committee took the same quasi-judicial approach in our deliberations. We put aside party politics and constituency interests. The committee may have been small, but I hope that we addressed all the issues of concern about the building of a new Forth crossing. As the convener of the Forth Crossing Bill Committee has stated, the evidence that we received led us to conclude that an additional Forth crossing is needed, and we supported the bill in principle. The current Forth road bridge is operating at six times its original capacity and at double its design capacity. That, coupled with cable erosion, has led to a shortening of its expected lifespan of 100 years. In the evidence sessions, we heard that the load factor of the bridge is currently 2.1, which is, of course, within the safety margins of 2.0. However, with the traffic load increasing and uncertainty remaining about the degree of deterioration in the cables, the committee heard that it may be necessary to remove heavy goods vehicles from the bridge by 2016. It was clear from that and other evidence that we received that doing nothing was not an option. Doing nothing would seriously jeopardise commerce on both sides of the Forth and throughout Scotland. That said, we had to ensure that a balance was struck between the importance of constructing a new bridge and the disruption that doing so would cause to local residents. The committee undertook the important role of considering objections to the proposed bridge and the accompanying road infrastructure, which provided an opportunity for the public to become involved in the bill process. I thank those who made representations to the committee either orally or in writing. Given the personal nature of some of the objections, I hope  that the committee gave them the consideration that they deserve. Many of the objections that the committee received from members of the public and local authorities concerned the code of construction practice. I am pleased that many of the committee's recommendations and concerns about that were addressed by the minister in his response to the stage 1 report. If the bill continues to the next stage, we will continue to consider the objections, and will again impartially consider evidence from objectors and the Government. On being appointed to the committee, we learned that there would be an excursion to a construction site. Would that perhaps be to Stonecutters bridge in Hong Kong or to the Øresund bridge between Sweden and Denmark?

Thank you for that. The excursion was to be a little closer to home: our clerks organised a trip to South Queensferry. Although that trip was not as exotic as it might have been, it helped to put into perspective the scale of the project. We were shown all the areas of concern to the objectors. It is much easier to understand where people are coming from if the site in question has been seen first hand. As well as seeing the site of the proposed crossing, we were shown the proposed changes to the road network, which will include new linking dual carriageways on the southern side and enhancements to the junction of the M9 and the M90. We heard how an intelligent transport system will be put in place to control the flow of traffic and ease congestion. The total cost of the project—the bridge and the road works to the north and south of it—will come to more than £2 million. However, as we have already heard, the estimated cost of the bridge itself is just over a quarter of that, at £543 million, which is roughly in line with the costs of other bridges in Europe, such as the Vasca da Gama bridge in Portugal, the Øresund bridge and the Storebaelt bridge. We heard evidence about the dangers of comparing the costs of very different projects that are, by their nature, unique. When the minister gave evidence to the committee, we focused for some time on the costs of the project and the funding model, as getting value for the public purse was one of our chief concerns, particularly in the current financial climate. In those discussions, the minister made clear that the total costs of the project have been factored into the £2 billion estimate, so it includes VAT; the cost of capital to the Government; an allowance for risk and optimism bias; and an additional amount for a median estimate of  construction inflation. The cost of the current proposal is a substantial saving on the original estimate of £3.2 billion to £4.2 billion. We must commend the team that made that saving. We would always want to have the best possible bridge with all the frills and extras but, right now, the most important thing is to get a bridge project that is deliverable, and the team has produced one. In evidence to the committee, Transport Scotland stated that the design and build model that is being used has a good record of delivering transport projects on budget and on time. The choice of that model coupled with funding from the Government's capital budget is the correct one. Other funding options were examined but, when the package was being considered, it was becoming increasingly difficult to find finance for public-private partnership or non-profit-distributing models or similar contracts. That is before we consider the unique nature of the large contract that will be involved. I commend the bill to Parliament and I ask members to ensure that it is agreed to at stage 1 today.

Is the member aware that the number of NHS staff has risen by 10,000 since the SNP came into government?

Will the member take an intervention?

To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government's response is to the signs of economic recovery in Scotland highlighted in the latest Bank of Scotland purchasing managers' index report. (S3F-2398)

Under the previous Conservative Government and under the Liberal-Labour coalition in Holyrood, unemployment in Scotland was frequently higher than the United Kingdom average. What steps will the Scottish Government take to ensure that Westminster does not damage the Scottish recovery and put Scots jobs at risk? Will the First Minister press the new UK Government to allow accelerated capital spending, which would protect jobs in my constituency and across Scotland?

Can the member point to an example anywhere in the world of a nuclear power station being built without the injection of public finance?

The suggestion that nuclear power can provide a stable base-load is blown out of the water when we consider countries that are dependent on nuclear power, such as France,  which frequently has to import electricity from other countries when its nuclear power stations are down because the reactors are overheating or threatening to overheat.

The debate provides an opportunity to make Scotland's position on nuclear power clear. I acknowledge that the title of the motion might be a little ambiguous but, just in case there is any doubt, my argument is that Scotland has no need for new nuclear power. We do not need the expense or the risk associated with it and we certainly do not want to pass any more nuclear waste down to future generations. Given the abundance of renewable energy options that Scotland has at its disposal and the wealth of green energy on our doorstep, it would be unforgivable to pursue a new generation of nuclear power stations. I was prompted to submit the motion for debate after the question whether Scotland should have a new generation of nuclear power stations was raised in my local paper, the Dundee Courier , by Bailie George Regan, a Dundee Labour councillor and chair of Nuclear Free Local Authorities. He argued that we should not aim to build new nuclear power stations because, with the wealth of renewable options already in place, the country's huge additional potential in that respect and the work being carried out by the Scottish Government and local councils on energy efficiency and microgeneration, Scotland simply has no need for new nuclear power generation.

I will talk about subsidies later and quote the United Kingdom minister with responsibility for the area.  At present, 11 Scottish local authorities, including Dundee City Council, are members of NFLA, which works with the councils to ensure that they meet their commitments to sustainable development and environmental protection. NFLA also campaigns against nuclear new-build and the proliferation of nuclear weapons. I am against new nuclear power for two reasons: first, we do not need it and secondly, we cannot afford it. On the first point, last year Scotland generated about 50,000 gigawatt hours of energy. As that far exceeded demand, just under 20 per cent of that energy was exported to England and Northern Ireland. At present, 24 per cent of the electricity consumed in Scotland comes from renewables. The figure is growing year on year and we are on track to hit the Scottish Government's targets of 31 per cent by 2011 and 50 per cent by 2020. Scotland's two working nuclear power stations generate around 30 per cent of its total electricity production. The decommissioning dates for Hunterston B and Torness are expected to be around 2016 and 2023 by which time, the figures suggest, renewables will have not only filled the gap but ensured that Scotland continues to be a net exporter. For the record, I am not suggesting that existing nuclear power stations should be closed before their natural lifespan runs out. The figures for Scotland's renewable potential are truly staggering. For example, its potential to generate electricity from renewables has been estimated at 60GW. Given that that is more than 10 times what we need, there is huge potential to export green energy. My second reason for not supporting new nuclear power is that we cannot afford it. We simply cannot afford to divert funds away from the progress that we are making in harnessing Scotland's renewables potential. Scotland is leading the world on measures to tackle climate change and, with our natural resources, we can be at the forefront of renewable technology and reap the benefits of exporting our expertise to the world.

I will come to the point when I come to the point. The potential for green energy is huge, with 26,000 extra jobs expected to be created in Scotland over the next decade. In my Dundee West constituency, we can see both the potential of green jobs and the threat posed by investing in nuclear power rather than renewables. Dundee port is well placed as a hub for the construction and maintenance of offshore wind turbines and the  investment that the Scottish Government is putting in to offshore renewables is providing a major opportunity for companies in the city. It is estimated that over the next 10 years more than £15 billion will be spent on offshore wind turbines and the potential for companies in Dundee and throughout Scotland to supply the European market is vast. To do that, however, we must continue to keep our global lead in new technology. A shift of money and focus away from renewables to nuclear would mean missing out on the opportunity to export skills and goods to Europe and the rest of the world. We cannot afford to waste billions on new nuclear, as we are already paying the price of a costly legacy. Nuclear is the most expensive way in which to produce electricity. To respond to the point that members of pro-nuclear parties have made, I point out that, in 2008, the then UK business secretary, John Hutton, conceded that no nuclear plant had been built anywhere in the world without public money. We must consider the full costs of nuclear plants. The cost of decommissioning alone is more than the value of the electricity that plants generate over their lifetime. The cost of the Chapelcross clean-up is estimated at £1.4 billion and the site will not be available for re-use until 2128. The clean-up at Dounreay will cost more than £3 billion. So we do not need it and we cannot afford it. It is clear that Scotland's renewable potential, coupled with the Scottish people's opposition to nuclear, provides a clear mandate against new nuclear energy. The Parliament needs control over our energy policy to make the most of the potential and to reap the benefits in jobs and tax revenue from a successful renewables industry. Any investment in new nuclear would be a step backwards and would be hugely damaging to Scottish jobs and our carbon footprint. We do not need new nuclear and we do not want it.

Will the member acknowledge that the SNP Government is trying deliberately to make the lives of people in Scotland better?

Will the member take an intervention?

This debate highlights the fact that this is a Parliament with limited powers. The Government's economic strategy is sound, but its well-considered plans for recovery are severely hampered by the looming cuts from Westminster, which are hanging over Scotland's public services like the sword of Damocles. As we have heard from the cabinet secretary, the Scottish Government is doing what it can and the economic recovery plan is beginning to show results. The rate of GDP decline is slowing and growth is starting to return to parts of the Scottish economy. The jobs supported by the plan, particularly the 5,000 protected by the capital acceleration programme, have ensured that economic inactivity rates in Scotland remain lower than those in the UK as a whole. I am particularly pleased about the investment that we have had in the waterfront in Dundee, which has been particularly important for Dundee's construction economy. Despite this Parliament's limitations, the Scottish Government is continuing to do what it can to foster and protect jobs. In my constituency, support for the life sciences industry, which is highlighted as a key sector in the Scottish Government's economic strategy, has ensured that the sector has continued to grow, despite the downturn. The introduction of the new two-for-one life sciences modern apprenticeship framework by the Scottish Government is helping to attract the future talent that the industry needs to grow and is ensuring crucial, on-job training. The industry requested that of the Government and the Government responded to it. The economic recovery plan also focuses on another area where Scotland and Dundee have huge potential—the digital media sector. Some of the world's bestselling games and applications are developed in Scotland. The percentage contribution to Scotland's GDP is double that of the UK. The £5 million that has been awarded to the University of Abertay Dundee from the European regional development fund is helping to support new and emerging games companies. Scotland's £5 million innovation fund is helping artists and creative practitioners in digital media and is ensuring that Scotland continues to be a world leader.

I think that, at the end of the day, we would have done the same as the UK Government did to rescue the banks—there is not a huge difference there. We have to put things in context and remember that there are two sides to the balance sheet. Over the past decade, the UK Exchequer has received the equivalent of what was used to bail out the banks. The member cannot have it one way but not the other. The banks have contributed hugely to Gordon Brown's back pocket, so it was correct that we did something to rescue them. It is a pity that that money was not invested in a way that would help businesses, rather than just the bankers and their pensions. I return to digital media. I welcome the fact that the UK Labour Party has finally accepted the need for tax cuts. I wonder whether, in summing up, Conservative members might offer some reassurance that, certainly here in Scotland, they will ensure that if there is a Conservative chancellor, he, too, will ensure that there are proper tax incentives for the industry, which are particularly important to allow the industry to compete world wide.

We want assurances from whichever party comes into power at Westminster after the election. Those tax breaks are crucial. I guess it comes down to this: if there is a will, there is a way. The French are doing it and the Germans are looking at a system. Indeed, the Irish are looking keenly at whether they can move Dundee's games industry to Dublin en bloc by means of incentives that are aimed at games development. It is really important that the Conservatives and other parties come clean and give a clear direction on the matter. The problem that Scotland faces is that the UK Government's one-size-fits-all approach hampers growth in Scotland. The Scottish economy is very different to that of the UK. I have mentioned advanced technologies such as digital media and life sciences. They are proportionately more important to the Scottish economy than they are to  the UK as a whole. Another important sector is renewable energy, where Scotland has huge potential compared with the UK as a whole, yet the UK parties have failed thus far to address the issue of unfair transmission charges that put a brake on the industry. If we are to do what is best for Scotland, we need to make decisions in Scotland. The UK Government is not deliberately making decisions that go against the Scottish economy. What is best for London and the south-east of England is not necessarily best for Scotland. That may be why GDP in Scotland has historically been lower than that in the UK as a whole. We suffered the bust without benefiting from the boom. If we want to secure recovery, we cannot do that with one hand tied behind our back. We need the same powers that every other nation is using to get back on its feet. It is clear that a Scottish not a London solution is needed if we are to address Scotland's economic problems. London does not even know what is made on the Clyde, let alone what our economic priorities are.

Post independence, the new Government of Scotland would have the opportunity to look at all the options in doing what is best for Scotland. I guess that the initial position would be to stick with UK sterling, but the SNP position is, of course, that Scotland will move to using the euro as soon as that is best for Scotland. That will be sooner rather than later. It is clear that Scotland requires the full powers that every other nation has. It is important that the people of Scotland have the right to say whether they want to be part of the world's most indebted economy and remain under a Government that plans to spend £100 billion on nuclear weapons or whether they want to have the economic security that comes from decisions being taken in Scotland with Scottish jobs and businesses as the top priority, not an afterthought.

The computer games industry is of particular importance to my constituency in Dundee, so I was pleased to hear the chancellor finally accept the argument that computer games development should receive a tax break. Has any light been shone on the timescale for implementation of that measure, which our computer games industry needs now, to allow it to compete on a level playing field with developers in countries such as Canada and France?

Will the member take an intervention?

He is sitting there.

To ask the Scottish Government what progress it is making towards the 2010 target for 90 per cent of adults to have all or some of their own teeth. (S3O-9941)

The minister's answer seems to have cleared the public gallery of all the young folk who were there. Perhaps they are heading off to the dentist. I welcome the progress that the Government is making on the matter, but what can we do to improve dental care in Scotland further? Will the primary care modernisation programme take into account the need for further investment in dentistry?

In speaking to individuals, might the member remind them that, if the bill comes in and they think that the change is unreasonable and that it will make it difficult for them to continue their business and invest in it, they have the opportunity to appeal to the Scottish assessor? That should be the advice that they are given.

The debate highlights the wealth of history, scenery, culture and people that Scotland has in abundance. Any one of our 129 MSPs could speak at length about what their area has to offer, and I will play my part by highlighting Dundee's many attributes and attractions. At the outset, I emphasise the importance of tourism to Scotland as a whole. As we have heard, tourism contributes some £4.2 billion to our economy each year and employs 200,000 people—9 per cent of the country's total employment. In saying that, I acknowledge Mary Scanlon's point on the higher figure that pertains to the Highlands. Tourism has an extra importance in some areas of Scotland. Across Scotland, the figures are significant. Looking at them, we start to appreciate the importance of the industry, given that growth of 10 or 20 per cent would equate to 20,000 or 40,000 new jobs. That is a lot of jobs at a time when we absolutely need them. Of course, things can work both ways. The looming Westminster cuts could have a devastating effect on tourism in Scotland, which relies on Government and industry working together to upgrade and maintain facilities.

Lewis Macdonald and other members have to appreciate that the rates were changed as a result of an independent assessment by Scottish assessors and not by the Scottish ministers. The decision south of the border to impose transitional relief has resulted in savings for the vast majority of businesses that are about half of that which applies in Scotland. Jeremy Purvis spoke about a change that would be cost-neutral to Government. That could be done, but the 60 per cent of businesses that will have savings as a result of the new rating assessment would have to pay more. In some cases, they would have to pay considerably more. When members go back to their constituencies, they should speak to some of the businesses in their area that come within the 60 per cent figure. Members should ask those businesses whether they are prepared to pay more than the independent assessor has set for them so that other businesses will pay less. That is the question that members should take to their constituencies.

No. I must make progress. It is clear that we can boost Scotland's tourism industry, even in a downturn. The year of  homecoming was a success. It demonstrated that Scotland is a destination to which people will make long and short journeys. If we compare what happened in Scotland in the year of homecoming to what happened elsewhere in the UK, there is no question but that the year of homecoming had a major impact. I could put it all down to the better management of Jim Mather and his team, but the fact is that the Scottish Government and members across the chamber worked together to make the year of homecoming happen. Homecoming had the biggest impact in ensuring that Scotland weathered the storm better than other parts of the UK did. One figure that has been cherry picked in the debate is the 43 per cent increase in visits from countries outside Europe and North America. People always say that one should not cherry pick, but I have done that because of the importance to Scottish tourism of tapping into new markets. Tapping into those new markets resulted in a significant boost—a 43 per cent increase. That is crucial if we are to boost tourism in Scotland. The year of homecoming has shown that Scotland is a desirable location and that the Scottish diaspora has a huge part to play in capitalising on that. On Channel 4's "Absolutely", McGlashan estimated the Scottish diaspora at 40 billion. He exaggerated a bit, but the true figure of around 25 million is still impressive. The diaspora affords a unique opportunity to boost further Scottish tourism. Evidence can be found across the globe of Dundonians who have emigrated. We see that in financial institutions such as the Dundee Bank of Canada. The raft of towns called Dundee in places such as South Africa, Australia and the United States of America show those links. Last year, many people from those Dundees visited the original Dundee. I hope that we can build on those links in the coming years. The city of jute, jam and journalism is evolving into a vibrant and cosmopolitan destination that visitors from Scotland and further afield enjoy. Funding from the Scottish Government and its partners is helping Dundee to grow as a tourist destination.

I am sorry; I must make progress. In its one city, many discoveries campaign, Dundee is looking back at its past while also looking forward to the new technologies that are increasingly important to its economic future. Dundee has Europe's top industrial museum, the Verdant Works, and Captain Scott's Antarctic expedition ship at Discovery Point. There is also the newly re-opened McManus Galleries.  However, it is a new attraction that will hopefully define Dundee as a tourist destination for the 21st century. The Victoria & Albert at Dundee will be the jewel in our redeveloped waterfront and has the potential to make Dundee one of the top tourist destinations in Europe. Ten years ago, Bilbao did not make it on to any list of cities and visits. Its disused port area was an eyesore, earning the city some derogatory nicknames. However, following the building of the Guggenheim museum on the Nervión River, the city's fortunes have been transformed, with more than 1 million people visiting the museum each year and an economic impact felt across the Basque Country. It is hoped that we can replicate some of that success in Dundee. An international competition is under way to find a design team to create an iconic building on the Tay to house the V&A. It is conservatively estimated that that will bring 130,000 visitors to Dundee every year, which will be a huge boost to the economy of Scotland as a whole as well as to that of Dundee. The development will tie into other cultural areas in Aberdeen, Edinburgh and Glasgow, putting Scotland as a whole on the map. With the opening of the V&A, Dundee's waterfront, which originally brought the city its wealth, will again bring prosperity to the city and its neighbouring region.

Will the member give way?

Would the member like to reflect on the fact that 60 per cent of businesses will pay less under the new valuations and that all businesses will benefit from the fact that the Scottish Government decided to commit to matching the English poundage rate for 2010-11, which is reducing tax bills across Scotland?

Does the member support the small business bonus scheme, which is helping a large number of independent hotels, bed and breakfasts, guest houses and self-catering properties? The Labour Party has been pretty quiet on the issue.

To ask the Scottish Government what progress has been made towards establishing the Victoria and Albert Museum in Dundee. (S3O-9839)

I thank the minister for that answer, which I do prefer to the previous one. I welcome the Scottish Government's continued support for this vital project, which will be the jewel in the crown of Dundee's redeveloped waterfront. It will create 900 permanent jobs, as well as affording opportunities to our construction industry. What response has there been from the international community to the architectural competition that she mentioned?

Given that the member does not support the council tax freeze, at what level would he set council tax throughout Scotland? What would the Liberal Democrats' top limit be and what impact would that have on economic regeneration?

The chamber has witnessed a few heated debates and it is fair to say that from time to time members have opposing views on various matters. However, from the tone of today's debate, I think that we are all clear that regeneration is a priority for communities throughout Scotland and for us as elected politicians—and that it is even more so in the challenging times of a recession. Last year, after a slight hiccup, the Parliament came together to set up the town centre regeneration fund, through which millions of pounds have been invested in communities to help shake off the recession. We cannot overstate the benefits of regeneration at such an important time. Last August, for example, community members in Lochee in my constituency welcomed the allocation of £2 million from the town centre regeneration fund to bring new life to the town's High Street. I thank the minister and his officers for that decision, which, as well as allowing structural improvements to be made, has allowed community partners to engage in new projects to rejuvenate Lochee. More important, the money from the fund has complemented the previous efforts of active community members who had until then been constrained by a lack of financial resources. With the support of the Scottish Government and Dundee City Council, Lochee High Street is in the process of being revitalised; much-needed repairs and refurbishment are being carried out; and steps to make residential areas safer have been  introduced. Regeneration efforts in Lochee have strengthened not only the High Street's physical structures but the local community, and the emphasis on partnership working and economic, social and environmental benefits is paying big dividends. Dundee has a long way to go before it fulfils its full potential. However, that potential is enormous, and the waterfront project aims to capitalise on that. The Scottish Government's £33 million investment in the waterfront regeneration project can create 3,500 new permanent jobs and generate £2.6 billion for our economy. Although the current SNP council is taking forward those ambitious plans, it is continuing the previous administration's good work and, in line with the tone of the debate, credit should go where credit is due. The process of regenerating Dundee's waterfront started back in 1986, with the return of RRS Discovery and the launch of the city of discovery campaign, which has been quite successful in turning round the city's fortunes. In its new one city, many discoveries campaign, Dundee is looking back at its past while looking forward to the new technologies that are becoming increasingly important to its economic future. Dundee's waterfront remains key to the city's regeneration. The jewel in the crown of the waterfront project will be the Victoria and Albert museum in Dundee, which the Scottish Government is working towards jointly with Dundee City Council, Dundee's two universities and other partners. An international competition is under way to find a design team to create an iconic building near RRS Discovery. It is hoped that that building will be set not only next to RRS Discovery, but on the Tay, and that it will be an iconic building on the waterfront for people from Fife, who will see it as they go across the bridges, as well as within the city. The Victoria and Albert museum in Dundee will potentially generate 900 jobs, and it has been estimated that it will bring in 130,000 visitors to Dundee every year. That will be a huge boost to the Scottish economy as well as to Dundee's economy. It will tie into the other cultural centres in Aberdeen, Edinburgh and Glasgow and really make Scotland a global cultural place to visit. As well as investing in the waterfront, the Scottish Government has been doing a lot of other work with Dundee City Council and other partners to help Dundee to recover. There is £22 million for a new swimming and leisure centre, and there are five new primary schools. The refurbishment of Harris academy in the next few years has been approved. Those things will help to protect vital construction jobs in Dundee and the surrounding area.  Communities throughout Scotland have seen job losses over the past two years because of the recession. Scotland appears to have suffered less than the rest of the UK, but our regeneration efforts must focus on job creation. The Parliament's world-leading climate change legislation represents a huge opportunity for our communities to create jobs. Forth Ports, Scottish Enterprise and Dundee City Council are working together in Dundee to take advantage of the growing renewables markets and to use the port as a location for offshore turbine manufacturing and maintenance. Such opportunities are being grasped not only in Dundee, but in several locations throughout Scotland. The prize is big enough for us all to share. With the loss of manufacturing jobs in Dundee as a result of the closure of NCR's manufacturing base, that could prove to be a real and sustainable alternative outlet for our highly skilled engineering workforce. Scottish companies in the offshore wind turbines industry have the potential to supply the European market, and the construction of renewables sector hardware in Dundee is an opportunity that must not be lost. Regeneration must be about more than just buildings; it must be about communities, and it must provide sustainable benefits on multiple levels. I am pleased to support the motion.

To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to combat the use of legal highs such as bubbles, which is a form of methadrone. (S3O-9520)

Anecdotal evidence suggests that bubbles seems to be a growing problem, particularly in Dundee; indeed, the name first appeared in the media in the city's Evening Telegraph . Given that, as the minister has pointed out, the use of mephedrone can cause adverse reactions, including, in extreme cases, death, does he agree that we really need to urge Westminster to add it to the list of illegal drugs as quickly as possible?

In the light of his comments, will Michael McMahon explain why the Labour Party did not lodge an amendment to the budget that would have resulted in local government receiving more funds?

Will the member give way?

We have arrived at what I hope will be the conclusion of the most open and transparent budget in the Parliament's 10-year history. MSPs of different parties have followed the lead of the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth and engaged constructively with the process to ensure that we have a better budget for the people of Scotland, although Labour members have been notable in their refusal to take part. They were always a bit slow to catch up and I hope that they will have got the hang of the process by next year, if they have not all jumped ship to Westminster by then.

I am talking about genuine engagement with a view to producing a budget that has the support of all parties. I do not think that Labour ever genuinely engaged in the process this year.

The member made a good point. Iain Gray will have to deal with the number of Labour members who are leaving the Scottish Parliament to move to Westminster, but he can rest assured that one Labour MSP will not be leaving for Westminster, not because of loyalty but because he has already secured his seat in London's other house. Lord George Foulkes, the champion of Government scrutiny, has managed to lodge 150 parliamentary questions since this year's budget was published. Meanwhile, the entire Labour Party has been unable to conjure up even one amendment. If Lord Foulkes has time to ask the First Minister what his favourite colour is, surely Iain Gray and Andy Kerr can come up with an alternative proposal that would enable the reinstatement of GARL.

If those proposals had not been unworkable, I am quite sure that Mr Kerr would have been able to conjure up the wording of an amendment to make them happen, but the Labour Party is not much cop at suggesting cuts. Labour members are always so busy spending that they do not bother to consider who is signing the cheques. At a time when their party's chancellor is warning of the toughest cuts in 20 years, Labour members in the Scottish Parliament are rampant in their additional spending demands. Cathy Peattie has called for an extra £5.2 million for community transport schemes; John Park wants £24 million for wage subsidies and £4.5 million for free wireless internet on every bus in Scotland; Richard Baker wants £36 million for mandatory knife sentences and the electronic tagging of all open-estate prisoners; Rhona Brankin wants £80 million for more teachers; and Andy Kerr and Iain Gray are calling for about £200 million for GARL. The list goes on and is added to almost daily. I agree with some of those things. Some of them are good ideas and desirable, but the Parliament has a responsibility to set a balanced budget and, within the current tight financial settlement, it is not possible to do everything that we would like to do.  The budget is about priorities; if the Labour Party thinks that GARL is the number 1 priority and should be reinstated, it should have the honesty to say what is not a priority and what it wants to cut from the budget. One thing that is neither essential nor desirable is Trident. If the Labour Party wants to free up billions of pounds, why does it not press its Westminster colleagues to scrap plans to build a new generation of illegal weapons of mass destruction that are designed to wipe out civilian populations? To put it in context, if the expenditure that is allocated for Trident's replacement were transferred to public sector jobs, Scotland's share would amount to 4,000 firefighters, 4,000 nurses and 2,000 junior doctors. Come on, what are the Labour Party's priorities: weapons of mass destruction or front-line services? The budget that Labour is keen to see fail involves £1 billion investment in Scotland's transport infrastructure; £2 billion investment in higher and further education and skills, including modern apprenticeships; £1.65 billion on housing and regeneration over the spending review period; the small business bonus scheme; £10 million for the marine renewables sector; £150 million over three years for the zero waste programme; further funding to allow councils to freeze the council tax for another year; £1.5 billion through the Scottish rural development programme; and, of course, £2 million for a boiler scrappage scheme for which members of the Labour Party called. That is what new Labour would vote against. Businesses and families throughout Scotland will be relieved that not all parties hold them in contempt like the Labour Party does. I am hopeful that the rest of the Parliament will come together to face up to the financial and economic challenges and to produce a budget that will protect front-line services and assist economic recovery. That is what the budget does and that is what the Parliament will deliver—

Will the member give way?

To ask the First Minister what steps the Scottish Government is taking to reduce the cost to the taxpayer of alcohol abuse, estimated at £3.56 billion a year. (S3F-2157)

Andrew Burnham, Labour Secretary of State for Health, recently said: "There is no shortage of research that shows the link with price and people drinking harmful levels of alcohol—there is no debate about that." The Liberal Democrat spokesperson, Chris Huhne, has stated that he supports expert advice that the best way to reduce alcohol abuse is to introduce minimum unit pricing.  Will the First Minister join me in calling on our Liberal and Labour colleagues in this chamber to follow the lead of their Westminster counterparts and put the welfare of the people of Scotland ahead of party politics by supporting the introduction of minimum pricing?

Will the member take an intervention?

If GARL is essential, as opposed to just desirable, what budget lines would the member cut to put it back in the budget? Why have we not seen the member's amendments? Why were no committees able to suggest amendments?

Will the member acknowledge that neither the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee nor the Finance Committee proposed any amendments to improve the budget? These are difficult times and difficult decisions have been taken, but nobody in the Parliament has been able to offer costed alternatives to the budget.

This budget has a lot to deliver. There is £814 million less to spend than was expected but we must continue to support families and stimulate business to ensure that we emerge strongly from the recession. We are hampered in our efforts by our lack of power to borrow and by the fact that the calls from this chamber—which sometimes came from parties across the chamber—for further accelerated capital were ignored by the Chancellor of the Exchequer. The task at hand would be hard enough for a Government with a majority. However, as everyone is acutely aware, with a minority Government, it is imperative for both the Government and Opposition parties to engage constructively in the budget process. That was acknowledged by Andy Kerr in last year's budget debate, when he stated that it was "our"— his party's—  "responsibility and that of the Parliament to engage positively and constructively"— [ Official Report , 4 February 2009; c 14654.]  in the budget process. That was particularly welcome, coming, as it did, when we had just witnessed for the first time a budget being voted down. We must ensure that we avoid any repeat of last year, when the public's patience with this chamber was sorely tested. I am pleased that most parties in the chamber have, on the whole, engaged extremely constructively in this year's budget process. However, I was disappointed to hear the same dogma from Andy Kerr about money for GARL without saying where the Labour Party would find it. Perhaps it would come from the winter roads maintenance budget, as the Labour Party suggested in 2007-08.

As I think someone commented from the back, where is Andy Kerr's amendment? On the one hand, the leader of the Labour Party on the west coast, Steven Purcell, argues for more money for GARL. On the other, the leader of the Labour Party on the east coast, Iain Gray, yesterday called in The Courier  for extra resources for Tayside. Andy Kerr cannot explain where the Labour Party expects to get those extra resources from, particularly when we are facing an £814 million reduction in the budget that the Parliament expected. It was only a year ago that Labour was vilified by the public for playing politics with people's livelihoods by obstructing the budget, but the party appears to have learned no lessons. We now find ourselves in a similar position to the one we were in last year, with the Labour Party still threatening to oppose a budget that it is unable or unwilling to challenge even one penny of. That is not the stuff of constructive opposition under any circumstances, let alone as we try to recover from a recession. We heard from Jeremy Purvis how the recession is impacting on real people out there in the real world. Labour's tacit consent throughout the committee stage appears to have been forgotten—much like Andy Kerr's promise to engage constructively last  year—and again families and businesses throughout Scotland could suffer as a result. It would, of course, be great if we had additional money. However, as Westminster has made clear, spending is being cut, and we are limited by the current devolved settlement. As Margo MacDonald alluded to, the lack of full fiscal powers leaves us fighting with one arm tied behind our back. Labour Party members must accept that they are members of the party that is imposing these cuts—a party that places more importance on weapons of mass destruction than on avoiding cuts to front-line services. I will now address what is in the budget. It is a budget that will support our schools and hospitals and help businesses and families through the recession. Measures such as the continuation of the council tax freeze and the small business bonus will continue to support families and businesses through the recession. I am particularly pleased that this year, for the first time, not only will the council tax be frozen but people's water rates will also be frozen so that folk know exactly what they will have to pay next year. I encourage every council in Scotland to use the resources that have been made available by the cabinet secretary to freeze their council tax—that is what the people of Scotland expect. There is an increase in the front-line education budget and a 2.7 per cent increase for health, including an extra £16 million for NHS Tayside. There is funding for local government to support the business gateway and funds to support students through the recession. The budget also commits an extra £10 million for renewables projects, and there is an increase of £3 million in the international development budget. This year, the public finances face major challenges, but the majority of members of the Parliament have been constructive in their approach to shaping the budget. As we move on in the next two weeks, there is still time for further debate. I understand that both the Conservative party and the Liberal party have not yet said they will support the budget at stage 3 and that they still have more i's to dot and more t's to cross, but at least they are coming forward with suggestions and proposals. The Labour Party is simply carping with a shopping list that does not accept the fiscal reality. The people of Scotland expect members in the chamber to pull together to get the best budget—they expect nothing less of their politicians. Given the difficult circumstances, the Scottish Government and John Swinney have done the best job that they could in bringing forward this budget. They have taken difficult decisions to protect front-line services and sustain jobs. We must work collectively to agree a Scottish budget  for next year that meets the needs of the people of Scotland. It is not too late for the Labour Party to join the rest of us in the chamber in a constructive approach.

I thank Helen Eadie for taking an intervention. I will ask her the same question that I tried to ask Johann Lamont earlier. Is she personally concerned about the proposals in the green paper?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Again, I need to ask whether the member is speaking to the debate at all. She is talking about the weather.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

To ask the Scottish Government what Barnett consequential money would arise from a cancellation of all nuclear weapons programmes by the United Kingdom Government for reinvestment in front-line services. (S3O-9077)

That is a pretty big number. It is incredible that the Labour Party and the Conservative party are happy to continue spending such huge amounts of public money on weapons of mass destruction at the same time as they are planning to cut budgets for vital services across the board. What further savings could be released if the Trident replacement programme were scrapped? What could Scotland do with our share of that money, if it were allocated across the UK under the Barnett formula?

To ask the Scottish Government what action it has taken to support the computer games industry in Dundee. (S3O-8915)

Following the Chancellor of the Exchequer's decision in last week's pre-budget report to refuse tax relief for computer game research and development, the support offered by the Scottish Government, particularly to Dundee, is most welcome. Despite the lack of an announcement in the PBR on the issue, will the Scottish Government continue to press Westminster for support for the games industry, which is so vital to Dundee's economy?

If the Labour Party does not think that the budget that the cabinet secretary has produced is the best possible, why did it not make alternative spending proposals? Why is the Labour Party not prepared to put on the table the cuts that a Labour cabinet secretary would have made?

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

I add my thanks to the Finance Committee's clerks and adviser for helping to see us through the production of our report on our examination of the draft budget. The Scottish Government's draft budget for 2010-11 is welcome news for Scotland after the disaster that was the UK chancellor's recent pre-budget report, which has failed families and businesses throughout Scotland. Alistair Darling has damaged our economy by refusing to continue capital acceleration and by failing to introduce measures to support our industries, such as tax relief for research and development of computer games. In stark contrast, the Scottish Government's draft budget for 2010-11 delivers the best deal for the people of Scotland in the face of the largest-ever reduction to the Scottish block grant. Despite all the times when the Labour Party has argued to the contrary, it is clear—the fact has been published in SPICe—that next year's Scottish budget has been reduced by more than £800 million.

Had Mr Whitton waited for the next paragraph of my speech, he would have heard me address that, but I let him intervene because he was eager to do so. I will carry on and answer his question in my next paragraph. The reduction is a direct result of the cut by the Westminster Government of nearly £500 million from Scotland's expected budget and the chancellor's refusal to allow continued capital acceleration of £350 million, which puts thousands of jobs in Scotland at risk. Those two decisions by the chancellor and his Westminster Government have resulted in an £800 million cut to Scotland's budget just when we do not need it. It comes at exactly the wrong time—when we are trying to get out of recession. John Swinney has without doubt brought the best possible budget to Parliament, given the reduced funds that are available and the limited fiscal powers that we have at our disposal here in the Scottish Parliament.

The budget that we have is a draft budget. It is more than £800 million less than the budget that would have been had the chancellor made the correct decisions not to cut Scotland's budget by nearly £500 million and not to refuse to allow us to accelerate £350 million of capital. SNP initiatives such as the council tax freeze, the small business bonus and removal of tolls from the Tay and Forth bridges will continue to support families and businesses through Labour's recession. The fact that not one alternative spending proposal was made by any of the committees is testament to the fact that John Swinney has wrung every last penny from our Westminster block grant. Even Mr Kerr could not bring himself to lodge any amendments at the committee stage. His tacit consent to the draft budget is most welcome. In the early days, there was a modicum of disagreement on how to deal with the budget reduction, and there was an awful lot of huffing and puffing from the Labour Party on GARL. The decision to cancel GARL was regrettable, but we are in difficult times and it was the right decision, given that no serious alternative cuts have been proposed that would allow that project to go ahead. I say that there were no serious alternatives because the proposal to reinstate tolls on the Forth and Tay bridges to pay for GARL was met with disbelief by my constituents and those of my colleagues Shona Robison and Tricia Marwick. The silence from the Labour list members of North East Scotland and Mid Scotland and Fife spoke volumes; unfortunately none of them is here  to confirm whether they would have been prepared to sell out their constituents on this issue in the same way that Glasgow's Labour MSPs were prepared to sell out Glasgow by voting to push through the unwanted Edinburgh trams project at a cost of £500 million. There has also been some confusion on the Labour benches about accelerated capital. Of course, the whole issue is now somewhat academic after the chancellor snubbed Iain Gray in last week's PBR; however, the fact remains that brought-forward capital means that schemes that are earmarked for future budgets can start early. Schemes such as GARL that are not in the budget cannot be brought forward without our cutting something else. No matter whether it happens in this year's budget or in future budgets, a large cut would have to be made somewhere to reinstate GARL and, as we have seen, the Labour Party has failed to put any viable alternative on the table.

My point is that that could not have happened. Because GARL has not been included in the budget, it cannot be brought forward. Something cannot be brought forward without something else being cut. It does not matter whether the cut is made in this year's budget or future budgets; we have to be able to say what we are prepared to cut, and the Labour Party has singularly failed to say what it wants to cut either this or next year to allow GARL to proceed. Brought-forward capital is not new capital; because it comes from future budgets, we have to say what has to be cut in those budgets. As I have said, the Labour Party has failed to do so. We are making progress. All the subject committees have recognised that the Scottish Government's budget is being reduced and have supported the draft budget without proposing any amendments. Given the difficult circumstances, the Scottish Government and John Swinney have done the best possible job. They have taken the difficult decisions to protect front-line services and sustain jobs, and I look forward to the whole Parliament's support for the budget in the new year.

The member says that our two parties differ in how they would spend Scotland's budget. However, having read all the committees' reports, I have not seen a single suggestion from the Labour Party about how it would change the priorities in the budget proposed by John Swinney.

The fact that we do not have the full powers of a normal Parliament and are therefore reduced to responding to the Chancellor of the Exchequer's pre-budget report is a regrettable state of affairs. The people of Scotland are growing increasingly unhappy with that as it becomes ever more evident that, no matter how good the intentions of the UK chancellor, Scotland will always be an afterthought in any UK budget and, as a result, will suffer.

I want to make some progress. This year's pre-budget report was worse than usual, because the UK economy is the only G20 economy that is still in recession. With record levels of Government debt, the only good news for the chancellor was the increase in expected North Sea revenues for 2010-11. I guess that there is a union dividend. Historically, UK budgets have caused traditional industries in Scotland to suffer, but it is now industries that use emerging technologies, such as our successful computer games industry, that are being affected. The absence from the PBR of a vital research and development tax break for the computer games industry will stunt growth and put jobs at risk in a sector that is particularly important to my constituency in Dundee. Over the past 12 months, virtually every industry expert has championed tax relief on research and development for computer games, but the Labour chancellor refused to take the necessary action to safeguard jobs and allow that important sector to compete on a level playing field with countries such as France and Canada. The recent report by the Independent Games Developers Association—TIGA—showed that such tax relief would create jobs and boost revenue, so its omission from the PBR is hard to fathom. TIGA's report clearly set out the benefits that would be gained by the industry from the proposed tax break, which in the case of Dundee could create 350 graduate-level jobs over the next five years and generate £45 million of extra investment. The report also laid out what would happen in what we thought would be the unlikely event that no action was taken on tax breaks for the computer games industry. It indicated a potential loss of 200 jobs in Dundee over the next five years. That is a worrying possibility. As well as protecting existing jobs and creating new opportunities, the tax measure in question was estimated to be self-funding. TIGA's figures show that, over five years, the measure would cost about £192 million but would deliver £415 million in extra tax receipts. Those arguments have never  been challenged by the chancellor or other UK ministers. At a time when the largest games employer in Dundee, which last year continued to employ new graduates, is considering relocating to a more favourable tax regime to ensure that it can continue to be profitable, the omission from the PBR of tax relief on research and development for computer games is extremely disappointing to the industry. Dundee is home to some of the world's best-selling games, from Lemmings to Grand Theft Auto, and, proportionately, the industry is worth twice as much to the Scottish economy as it is to the UK economy. I am not suggesting that the chancellor is a malicious man; I am simply suggesting that the measure was not important enough at a UK level for it to be included in the PBR. There may have been another reason for not implementing such commonsense tax relief, but we have yet to hear it. I have not heard it articulated in this chamber or at Westminster. It is not just our computer games industry that is suffering as a result of the UK PBR. The chancellor's refusal to accelerate the £350 million of capital funding that the Scottish Parliament asked for—on a cross-party basis—is further proof, if it were needed, that Scotland's economic stability is hampered by the current constitutional set-up.

Mr Kerr should probably look at the recent International Monetary Fund estimates on gross domestic product based on purchasing power parity per capita before he goes slagging our closest neighbours, as those figures show that Iceland, Ireland and Norway are all well ahead of the UK this year, next year, the year after and into the future. Last year, members of the Scottish contingent of the Labour Party made a big song and dance about how the bringing forward of accelerated capital was down to them, so they must take the blame for this year's snub, whereby a further £350 million has been removed from Scotland's budget. The UK set-up means that Scottish taxpayer money and the billions that are generated from the North Sea are good enough to fund the new generation of weapons of mass destruction but are not to be used to help the Scottish economy through the recession. [ Interruption. ] Mr Kerr mentions the banks, but it should be noted that next to the new, increased estimates for North Sea oil revenues, the bank bail-out pales into insignificance.  By refusing to bring forward capital spend, the UK Government has prevented several shovel-ready projects that could have started early from proceeding. That reckless decision, which goes against MSPs' and economic experts' views, places jobs in our communities at risk. The pre-budget report has come from a chancellor who is out of touch with reality and is looking to the forthcoming general election. It fails to address any of the real issues for the people of Scotland.

Will the member give way?

I do not think that anyone has argued that the money need not be paid back. However, does the member agree that it would be better if it were paid back next year rather than this year?

The First Minister is aware that yesterday's pre-budget report was hugely disappointing for Dundee's computer games sector. The head of Dundee's largest games company described it as a "missed opportunity" to bolster the industry and create hundreds of jobs. Does the First Minister agree that the report was a missed opportunity and that the lack of a level playing field with the likes of France and Canada will hamper growth and could threaten jobs in an industry that is important in Scotland and Dundee? Does—

Does the First Minister agree that the pre-budget report is another example of why it is increasingly important that we complete the Parliament's powers?

The Scottish biomass heat scheme, which is now in its third round, is specifically targeted at small and medium-sized enterprises. SMEs are vital for jobs and the economy, and they have a huge potential in contributing towards cutting Scotland's emissions. Will SMEs be able to benefit from the upcoming UK renewable heat incentive funding stream? How is it envisaged that SMEs will contribute as a sector to delivery of the plan?

rose—

Will the member take an intervention?

I, too, give my condolences to the families of those who died in ward 31 of Ninewells hospital as a result of the recent Clostridium difficile outbreak. Although the debate is important and although I welcome the opportunity to discuss the issue, I have to say that I have been disappointed by the tone of some of the speeches. I believe that it is possible for an Opposition to challenge the Government; indeed, in her speech, Marlyn Glen adopted the right tone and showed how that might be done. Perhaps some of the Labour front bench will consider her example later. Last week, there was a ministerial statement on C difficile at Ninewells. The Labour Party has brought today's debate; the Conservatives have contributed to it by championing electronic bed management; and Ross Finnie has always treated the issue in a constructive manner. It is not often that the Parliament unites over an issue but, this morning, we are united in the common goal of  seeking to reduce the number of deaths in Scotland from C difficile. Health Protection Scotland's latest figures show that the number of C difficile cases is continuing to fall, with a reduction of 14 per cent in the last quarter and 42 per cent over the past year. As the cabinet secretary has made clear, that is still not good enough, and we must continue to drive down those figures. That said, although the fact that we have reduced the number of C difficile cases to the lowest level since mandatory surveillance began will not give much solace to those who have lost loved ones, we should be encouraged by the speedy progress that is being made under the cabinet secretary's leadership. What happened at Ninewells was very serious. However, the outbreak was not allowed to develop in the same way as last year's outbreak in the Vale of Leven hospital, which spanned six wards and led to the death of 18 patients.

Yes. The ward in question was for the care of elderly patients, many of whom had problems that required the very antibiotics that Dr McKee talked about earlier. Also, we must be careful when using percentages when we are talking about single-figure numbers, because a single incident can put the percentages out by tens. Statistics are useful but, in the case of small numbers, percentages are not particularly useful. Obviously, mortality depends on the health of the individuals concerned, and we must always remember that we are talking about individuals. At Ninewells, early intervention contained the outbreak, but we need to learn lessons about not just what went wrong there but what went right. When the Minister for Public Health and Sport, Marlyn Glen, Dr Simpson and I were at Ninewells, we heard about some particularly good practice that we might need to ensure is used elsewhere. The SNP Government, with support from across the chamber, is making progress on the issue. Lessons have been learned from previous outbreaks and new procedures have been put in place to reduce the risk of harm from infection. A national health care associated infection action plan has been put in place, and an independent health care environment inspectorate has been created. An extra £5 million has been made available to pay for more domestic staff throughout the national health service. Further measures are also being taken, such as the revamp of the senior charge nurse role and various electronic bed management and infection tracking pilots, all of which should help to ensure  that the number of infections continues to drop. It was right of the cabinet secretary to acknowledge the positive contribution of the Conservative party, and Mary Scanlon in particular, in pushing those measures forward. Although the Scottish Government and NHS Scotland are doing more than ever, we cannot afford to be complacent. The Opposition continues to play an important role in ensuring that that does not happen. Before I finish, I would like to touch on an issue that was raised at last week's briefing, which I attended with Labour Party colleagues. I was shocked to hear of the verbal abuse to which staff from ward 31 have been subjected as a result of the deaths. We also heard about how upset the staff were at the language that was used by some politicians, which was then twisted and manipulated by the media in a way that the staff viewed as a direct attack on their professionalism. I know that that was not the intention behind the comments, but that is how they were seen by the members of staff, so we have to be careful about the language that we use, and ensure that our contributions are seen as helping the debate, not as attacks on staff, although I acknowledge that that was not the intention.

I am sorry, but I am in my final minute. This is a very serious issue, and NHS staff are the front line against hospital-acquired infections, so we must support them in their work. Yes, we must debate the important issues, such as the outbreak at Ninewells, but we must be careful not to fuel the media witch hunt that often ensues, with blame being directed at the front-line staff. Today's debate is evidence that all parties take the regrettable outbreak at Ninewells seriously. I am sure that none of us wish to have to have such debates but, as I have said, they are important to ensure that lessons can be learned and that we reduce the incidence of such tragic events. Action was taken swiftly in the case of Ninewells, and across Scotland action is being taken that is leading to a reduction in the number of hospital-acquired infections. We must continue to build on that.

The member might reflect that that kind of line of argument is seen by staff in our NHS and in particular in the hospital concerned as a direct attack on their professionalism. [ Interruption. ]

First, I give my condolences to the families of those who died in Ninewells hospital, which is in my constituency.  I welcome the news that the health care environment inspectorate is reviewing procedures. It would be useful to know the timetable for receiving feedback from that. Will the cabinet secretary take a minute to help patients and potential patients to understand how, despite improving hand and ward hygiene, such bacteria can still infect patients in hospitals around the globe?

I am pleased to take part in the debate, keeping the economy at the top of our agenda, where it belongs. This recession has affected families and businesses in ways that we have not seen in a generation, and it is far from over. In times such as these, it is crucial to feed money back into the economy. That is why I fully support the cabinet secretary's plans to accelerate spending. I am pleased that Iain Gray and Scottish Labour appear now to be echoing the SNP's calls—it is better late than never. The cabinet secretary has used every lever available to him to help Scotland through these rough times. However, instead of being able to get the funding that he needs to continue his efforts, he must ask Westminster to throw Scotland a few crumbs. Rather than providing Scotland with acceleration of funding to enable us to get out of the recession and to support recovery, Westminster has reduced our budget by £500 million this year, when we are still in recession, and a further £500 million next year, when we are hoping to be in the early stages of recovery. It is exactly the wrong time to cut Scotland's budget. If Scotland were independent and had the powers of a normal nation, it would be able to recover from recession at a much faster rate. We are not independent, so we are reliant, at least in part, on Westminster ministers making the correct decisions to support recovery. However, both Gordon Brown and Alistair Darling continue to battle from the bow of their sinking ship and are dragging Scotland down with them by refusing to grant the stimulus funds that she is in dire need of. In fact, the UK is the only nation in the G20 that does not have a fiscal stimulus plan for next year. The International Monetary Fund has forecast that Norway will be shielded from the worst parts of its recession due largely to its oil fund—something that could exist in an independent Scotland.

The SNP's economic solution is that the Parliament should have the full range of economic powers so that it can make the best decisions for our nation and people. The member will note the recent IMF findings that Iceland, Ireland and Norway are all still wealthier per head of population than the United Kingdom and that those countries are expected to get out of recession more rapidly than the United Kingdom. Clearly, Scotland's potential for recovery is stifled by Labour's failed economic policies. The video games industry is one of the few industries that have continued to thrive globally despite bleak economic conditions. Last year, video games outsold DVD movies for the first time, with £22 million in global sales. The industry is particularly important to Scotland, nowhere more so than in my constituency in Dundee. Edinburgh-based Rockstar North created the best-selling video game of all time, the Grand Theft Auto series. Dundee-based Realtime Worlds produced the highly successful game Crackdown. However, countries such as France, Germany and Canada are willing to give those companies generous tax breaks if they agree to move their operations. Now Ireland has its sights on Scotland's video games industry and is considering what tax incentives it could offer to entice our businesses to relocate there. Do not be mistaken—the companies love being in Scotland, especially in Dundee, where the University of Abertay Dundee has a top-notch programme to produce highly-skilled graduates attuned to the needs of the industry. However, Ireland's proposed five-year tax holiday might be just too good an offer to pass up. Relocating from Dundee to Montreal might be a step too far, but Dundee to Dublin might not. It is vital that such companies receive similar tax breaks in Scotland in order to level the playing field.

The SNP Government has supported the video games industry in Scotland in the way that it can, providing the skills that ensure that we have the best graduate base for companies. Abertay university in particular is working very closely with the industry to ensure that its graduates have exactly the tools that the industry requires. I had the opportunity to host a panel discussion yesterday among more than 75 members of the video games industry. There were loud calls for tax breaks. Unfortunately, the only thing that Mike Russell and I could say was that we did not have the power, and that they would have to ask Westminster.  There are signs, however, that a concerted effort, co-ordinated by the Dundee-based UK Independent Game Developers Association—TIGA—is starting to pay off, and UK ministers appear finally to have acknowledged the importance of the games industry. TIGA has produced a relatively modest culture-based tax break for games development, and has delivered its proposals to the UK Government. It has the potential to generate 3,500 good-quality graduate jobs, and the signs are positive. Several UK ministers have come to Dundee to see at first hand the centre of excellence that has developed around Abertay university's collaboration with Dundee's games industry. If we are to prevent the loss of thousands of jobs, the chancellor urgently needs to announce the early introduction of tax breaks for games development in his pre-budget report next month.

Will the member give way?

Does the member recognise that the banks have ploughed £40 billion into the Labour Government's coffers in the past decade? Will he acknowledge that the UK Government did not somehow find £37 billion from its own back pocket but had to borrow the money from world money markets?

To ask the Scottish Government which active education private finance initiative project has the highest ratio of lifetime unitary charge to capital value. (S3O-8231)

Can the cabinet secretary give an assurance that any new school that is built with revenue finance will offer value for money to the taxpayer?

Child protection is a very serious issue. Nowhere is that more the case than in Dundee, where we recently had to come to terms with the tragic death of Brandon Muir at the hands of Robert Cunningham. In the wake of that event, the HMIE inspection was accelerated and an extremely thorough case review and independent report, which considered all the issues surrounding the case, were completed. Most significantly, the reports identified that agencies had failed to work together. Those failures must be—and are being—addressed. Additional resources have already been allocated to meet the gaps in service in Dundee, to appoint more front-line social workers and to ensure that all multi-agency partners work together in the interests of Dundee's most vulnerable children. In addition, Dundee City Council immediately agreed that it would implement all the recommendations from all the reports to ensure that the action plan is put in place as quickly as possible so that vulnerable  children in Dundee are better protected in the future. We all have a duty to ensure that lessons are learned from such a sad incident. I congratulate the vast majority of members of all parties who have spoken in the debate, who have stuck to the issue and who have struck the correct tone. It is important that we continue to do so. Members might not be aware that Unison officials in Dundee have complained that the constant attacks on child protection services by a small number of people in one particular party are not helping those services. Our social workers, in particular, feel under threat at every turn. They are damned if they do and damned if they don't. In Dundee at the moment, social workers are being lambasted for taking a child into protection, but they cannot put their side of the story. They are interested only in the child concerned. Such trial by media is unacceptable. I congratulate most members—particularly Marlyn Glen, who is not in the chamber—for not taking part in that attack on our social services.

The member will be aware that I was responding to an attack by him on the SNP Government. My point was that it was not an issue of party politics. We should not put blame on any particular party. I believe that everyone in the Parliament is responsible, and we all have the interests of children at heart. Finger pointing does not help anyone. Unison representatives of people who are involved in children's services in Dundee sent out a clear message in that regard. I suggest that any members who want to point a finger should have a discussion with Unison in Dundee. Each community relies on its social workers to protect its children. Instead of just attacking social workers, we must work together to improve services. As I have said, trial by media and partisan politics do not help the situation. In Scotland, we are constantly working to ensure better protection for children. The Scottish Government has already launched a review of national child protection guidance and has started new targeted inspections to help raise standards across Scotland. It has created the multi-agency resource service, which is the UK's first hub for exchanging child protection expertise, and it is to appoint a national co-ordinator to support the work of child protection committees. This Parliament has always sought to safeguard children across Scotland. The Labour-Liberal Democrat Administration passed a number of  pieces of important legislation in that area, including the Protection of Children (Scotland) Act 2003, and I welcome the steps that it took during its time in government.

All political parties share the same aims when it comes to child protection, and we must work together with local authorities and other partners to ensure that those aims are met.

My final point is about how the Parliament can do more to prevent children from coming to harm. The majority of cases that social work departments deal with are not like the case of Brandon Muir; they are cases of neglect. Evidence suggests that incidents of child neglect and harm are higher in households that have a history of alcohol abuse. If we can tackle alcohol abuse, which is the root cause of a large number of child neglect cases, we can make a real difference. I ask all members to consider that when the Government introduces legislation that will have an impact on the issue.

Will the member reflect on the fact that his politicisation of the issue does neither him nor those involved in child protection any service?

I particularly welcome the cabinet secretary's confirmation that measures that help families and businesses to get through the recession, such as the small business bonus scheme and funding the council tax, will continue in the budget. Will he comment on the evidence that Dundee City Council's director of finance gave to the Local Government and Communities Committee? When commenting on previous council tax freezes, he said: "Not having the freeze would have caused council tax increases of not 3 per cent per annum ... but approximately 5 per cent per annum."—[ Official Report , Local Government and Communities Committee , 9 September 2009; c 2284.]

I begin by echoing the comments of other members—particularly those on the Finance Committee—in thanking the Finance Committee clerks and the SPICe researchers for their work on the report on strategic budget scrutiny, which was, as always, carried out with diligence. The Finance Committee compiled the report against a background of firsts for the Scottish Parliament. A budget had been voted down by the Opposition for the first time; we were in the midst of the first recession in a devolved Scotland; and for the first time, we were facing £500 million of proposed cuts to the Scottish budget. That made the process an interesting one. It became clear early in our evidence taking that we were entering a new and more challenging financial climate in which Governments would have to make some difficult choices about funding public bodies in future budgets. In his paper "The UK Budget Position and Strategic Implications for Public Services in Scotland", Professor David Bell describes the situation that will face the public sector over the next decade as "an unprecedented period of austerity". I record my thanks to Professor Bell for his efforts to pull together some complex economic and financial analysis and distil it in a way that was useful to me and, I am sure, other members of the Finance Committee and back benchers. During the inquiry, I began to appreciate the significance that those events and others would have on future Scottish budgets. With no long-term budget allocations available to us, much of our evidence was based on predictions. Given that position, and without the aid of a crystal ball, it is not surprising that some of those who gave evidence came to very different conclusions about the impact on public sector spending, but there was universal agreement that, at best, the future would be challenging.  The process of producing the report also highlighted the fact that the Scottish block grant is a blunt object with which to combat a recession. Economies that have a full range of fiscal powers at their disposal are struggling to cope. Scotland must face the challenges that lie ahead with the constraints that the current constitutional framework places on us. With that in mind, I was pleased to see in the Scottish Government's programme last week a referendum bill that will seek to give people the choice to have the same powers over their economy as any normal country. I look forward to the passage of that bill in the Parliament and the continuing work of the national conversation.

Of course, the £50 billion is not Government money but borrowed money and it pales into insignificance in relation to the input that Scottish banks made to the UK Exchequer during the past decade. It would be particularly useful to Scotland if the £8 million that Jim Murphy siphons off for the Scotland Office were added to the Scottish block grant. That money is creamed off in order that Jim Murphy can run a Labour Party, anti-SNP operation from the Scotland Office. That is a disgrace. The money should be pumped back into the Scottish budget so that John Swinney and Alex Salmond can use it to benefit the people of Scotland, rather than its being used to benefit the Labour Party. As we have heard, there appears to be a note of disagreement over the forthcoming reduction in the Scottish block grant. However, outside the chamber, most members seem to accept that we have to address the coming cuts and their impact on Scotland's public sector. I take this opportunity to welcome the approach of the members of the Finance Committee, who have, on the whole, set party politics aside to ensure that we get the best possible outcome for the people of Scotland. I hope that that will continue. There is a difference of opinion about whether it will be a cut or a reduction, but let us be honest. Next year, we will receive £500 million less than we expected. I would call that a cut; if others want to call it a reduction, I do not think that that is worth arguing about. There are other, far more important matters to discuss.

I certainly support the Scottish Government's having the same range of powers  as any other, normal Government. That would include the power to borrow and also the ability to save up in the good years and have access to that money later, like any normal country does, rather than having to go to London with a begging bowl to ask for some of our money back—money that is already ours. Rob Gibson mentioned some of Scotland's money that is locked away by the Westminster Government. I hope that the front bench of the Labour Party will take Mr Gibson's message and send it down to their colleagues in London. We should get that money unlocked so that it can be put to use here in Scotland when we need it most. I am not suggesting that we will agree on everything, because we will not. The role of the Opposition is to challenge the Government and my Finance Committee colleagues from all three Opposition parties are good at doing that. However, it is good that they manage to have that political debate while remembering the importance of what we have to achieve. We have managed to achieve consensus when it might have appeared impossible, and I hope that we continue to do so because, after all, we are here for our constituents and it is in their interests that we try to reach a compromise. The Parliament must address the reduction in the budget and think about how to handle future budgets. In that respect, Tom McCabe's comments were very helpful. I know that the cabinet secretary will continue to take a consensual approach to this year's negotiations and ensure that channels of communication are open to all parties. I hope that the other parties will take that opportunity and play their part in what has to be a two-way conversation. I understand that the cabinet secretary will put his cards on the table first but I hope that, when he does so, the Opposition parties will make their own suggestions about how we can minimise the impact of £500 million of cuts on front-line services and the people of Scotland.

Will the member take an intervention?

Obviously, communication is always a two-way process. I am interested to hear what suggestions Mr Purvis put to the cabinet secretary on how we might tackle the £500 million cut to Scotland's budget.

To ask the First Minister what reduction is expected in the Scottish Government's budget as a result of the United Kingdom Government's budget plans. (S3F-1866)

Does the First Minister agree that it is deeply disingenuous of Labour MSPs continuously to demand extra spending in a range of areas while the Labour Chancellor in London is making it clear that he will cut budgets further? Peter Mandelson has admitted that UK Governments will be cutting budgets for the next 10 years. Has the Scottish Government been given any indication of future budget cuts for Scotland? Will the First Minister join me in urging all parties to accept that budget cuts are coming from Westminster and to support the Scottish Government in its work to protect services?

Will the member acknowledge that a clear majority of the Scottish public and a majority of Liberal Democrat voters support being given the right to choose in a referendum?

Will the member explain why he was not prepared to give his views on compassionate release prior to Kenny MacAskill making his decision? When the member was specifically asked, he said that he did not have the medical information and he was therefore not prepared to make his views known.

Will the member take an intervention?

I add my congratulations to the cabinet secretary on his sound management of Scotland's finances, which  has ensured that Scotland's budget is being used to Scotland's maximum benefit in these difficult times. The Treasury has proposed that we fund the construction of the new Forth bridge by, among other things, allowing end-year flexibility to build up over a number of years and drawing down a lump sum. Does the cabinet secretary believe that allowing such a build-up would be a wise course of action, given the current economic circumstances?

Does David Whitton accept that the commission would not have been set up had the SNP not won the election?

When we were asked to be members of the Review of SPCB Supported Bodies Committee, we were advised that it would be a short-term committee  and, in fact, we completed our work and deliberation in a matter of months. However, in that time we were presented with a huge array of written and oral evidence, so I pay tribute to the clerks who helped us put it all into context to inform our decisions. Contrary to what Ross Finnie said, I believe that the SPCB proposals, which Tom McCabe presented to the committee, were helpful in giving us a template to measure where we were going. I understand where Ross Finnie is coming from, but I put on record my thanks to Tom McCabe and the SPCB for taking the time to produce the template and giving us evidence, which I found helpful. Given all the evidence and paperwork that we received, it would have been easy for us to become trapped like goldfish in a bowl, swimming around endlessly but getting nowhere. Our convener, Trish Godman, and our deputy convener, Jamie Hepburn, ensured that our efforts were not wasted. We have produced a report that, in the main, is supported by all members of the committee. The committee worked well together and we were in broad agreement on the majority of issues. However, it would be remiss of me not to concentrate for a few minutes on one of the issues that split the committee: there were three votes for and three votes against the proposed merger of Waterwatch Scotland with the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman to form an all-encompassing complaints commission. The original idea behind the SPSO was to create a one-stop shop for complaints, which would allow ease of access for the public. However, in recent years, we have departed from that original concept by creating a number of different bodies to deal with complaints. The proposal to merge Waterwatch and the SPSO was not motivated by a desire to save money; it was about improving service for the public. Our complaints-handling system should involve less duplication and bureaucracy, which might mean fewer organisations. Some of my constituents have said that when they make a complaint they are bounced between the local authority and the water authority. Who deals with the complaint? Is it Waterwatch or the ombudsman? If the two bodies are pulled together, the system will be much cleaner and more accessible to the public. I appreciate the concerns of some members of the committee regarding the public's need for an ombudsman that can deal with complaints fully by drawing on detailed knowledge and expertise. However, I believe that the skill that is currently deployed in the SPSO in relation to a wide range of public services is no different to that which is  deployed in the types of process that are undertaken by bodies such as Waterwatch. I am certain that if we were to merge the functions of Waterwatch with the role of the SPSO, we would provide the public with a more straightforward, effective and efficient system without compromising service. I believe that that would be in keeping with the recommendations of Professor Crerar, Douglas Sinclair and the previous Finance Committee. I respect the committee's decisions, but I think that this issue would benefit from further scrutiny, either at a later stage in the proposed bill or at some future review. One thing on which we are all agreed is that ours will not be the final review. The subject would benefit from consideration by fresh bodies on any future committee. Our report took us some distance; indeed, it took us as far as we could go while also maintaining consensus. I commend it to the Parliament.

I welcome today's statement, which provides further evidence that the SNP Government is delivering for people across Scotland. What impact will today's announcement have on the Government's aim of reducing class sizes throughout Scotland?

To ask the Scottish Government what steps it has taken to ensure that the best use is made of new medical technology. (S3O-7157)

Life sciences are an important economic priority for the Scottish Government. South of the border, there is clarity about how medical devices are developed and the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence has given its approval. I hear what the cabinet secretary says about LiSAB; it would be good if we had the same clarity in Scotland about how new medical technologies are developed.

I welcome today's statement, particularly the announcement that Professor Spencer will conduct an independent review. Although the events of 18 May were of some concern to my constituents, we have to be careful not to react without consideration. An independent review will ensure that we learn properly any lessons that can be learned.  I ask the cabinet secretary, what would the impact be on the Parole Board if the open prison estate did not exist?

I welcome the Finance Committee's report on  methods of capital investment, which is another nail in the coffin of PFI. The committee report highlights exactly why we need a robust, fully scrutinised and carefully considered model of capital investment for Scotland. Future generations will be utterly shocked by the squandering of public funds and naked profiteering that has gone on in the private sector at the taxpayer's expense. Many will find it inconceivable that such contracts were merely the result of blunder and flawed systems. Unfortunately, however, that is the sad truth of PFI.

In Dundee, the PFI contract for parking at Ninewells hospital typifies all that is bad about the PFI system. Although parking is free at most hospitals throughout Scotland, Ninewells, Edinburgh royal infirmary and Glasgow royal infirmary are stuck with PFI contracts that would be very expensive to buy out.

I think that most people will accept that things have to be paid for. Whether they are paid for in the public sector or the private sector, there are costs, but the problems with PFI are many and extensive. The excessive costs of the PFI system, which we have heard about, will absolutely shock the public. There might be members in the chamber who are partly responsible for the PFI contract for parking at Ninewells. The contract is so badly written that it appears that there is no clause to allow a buy-out, which leaves NHS Tayside at the absolute mercy of VINCI Park, whose priority is its shareholders and its profits. The parallels with the banking crisis are uncanny. A combination of greed, incompetence and denial has left us in a situation where the Scottish Government and local authorities will have to find £700 million to pay debts to private firms for PFI contracts this year. More than £1 billion a year is due to be paid out by 2017 to finance new Labour's credit card spending. Today—April fool's day—Gordon Brown has made a fool of the Scottish taxpayer. Today, new Labour's folly is on the balance sheet for the first time, in accordance with the new international financial reporting standards, which, at a stroke, add at least £200 billion to our national debt, and for what? There is no value for money, as we are  often paying twice the capital cost of projects. There is no transfer of risks, as only the taxpayer ever loses money—it is never the private company that loses. Even the argument that the money stays off balance sheet has now gone. It is a pity that today's debate has been shortened, although I appreciate fully that ministerial statements are important and necessary. I could go on at length about the PFI disasters. However, the evidence is all there, no matter how hard new Labour tries to ignore it. The previous Administration's record is there for all to see, and it is utterly shocking. In stark contrast, the SNP is committed to ensuring the best value for the Scottish taxpayer, rather than taking the build now, pay double later approach of the boom-and-bust parties. With the NPD model and increased flexibility for our local authority partners, this Government has been delivering, and it will continue to deliver, with £35 billion of infrastructure investment over the next decade. The Scottish Futures Trust will ensure that future generations of Scots can benefit from that investment without being saddled with credit card debts.

The Solicitor General will know that concerns have been raised both inside and outside the chamber regarding the position of spouses testifying in criminal cases. What steps does the Government intend to take to address that important issue?

To ask the Scottish Government what further action ministers are taking to combat hospital-acquired infections. (S3O-6338)

The cabinet secretary has announced the establishment of a new care environment inspectorate. Can she explain the inspectorate's role in combating health care associated infections and how the public can use the inspectorate?

I am pleased to introduce this debate on support for the computer games industry in Scotland. Members will be used to hearing me extol the virtues of Dundee whatever the topic of debate, and today will be no different. However, in the case of the computer games industry, there is no need for me to embellish Dundee's role at the centre of the United Kingdom market. Dundee is a world player when it comes to the computer games industry. From the first days of computer game technology, Dundee has been at the forefront. In 1983, Timex produced the Sinclair ZX Spectrum home computer in Dundee, and a generation in the city grew up learning the skills that would make Dundee a global leader. One of the early successes of the Dundee computer game scene was the worldwide hit Lemmings. There were also million-plus selling titles such as Earthworm Jim and Rollercoaster Tycoon and, of course, the huge hit Grand Theft Auto, which was created in Dundee by Rockstar North. Unfortunately, the company is now based in Edinburgh, although it is still successfully working for the Scottish computer games industry. Dundee still produces world-class games. Last year, we had the award-winning Crackdown, which was developed by Realtime Worlds and sold more than 1.5 million copies globally. The games industry in the UK employs 30,000 people and contributes £1 billion to gross domestic product. Dundee is home to 10 per cent of the UK's computer games companies. It is estimated that about 3,500 people are employed in computer  games development and related industries in the Dundee area. Dundee also leads the way on education and training. The University of Abertay Dundee has been instrumental in supporting the growth of computer games technology, and its graduates have set up companies in the city, throughout the UK and in other parts of the globe. Abertay had the UK's first undergraduate degree in computer games technology and Scotland has three quarters of the undergraduate courses that are currently available in the UK. Despite the economic downturn, the worldwide industry is booming, with computer games sales last year overtaking DVD sales for the first time, with £22 billion of global sales. However, this is not a time to rest on our laurels. Yes, Dundee and Scotland are doing well in a booming computer games market, but we must ensure that, in the years to come, the companies still exist and that the news broadcasts stories about the latest great game launch and awards, rather than the latest company closures. Timex has long since closed its doors, and last week the loss of another 250 jobs at NCR in Dundee was a stark lesson that a once-successful business can quickly become less viable in changing market conditions. We are seeing the first signs that problems might lie ahead for the computer games industry. The UK is falling behind on games development, and the countries that are overtaking us are those that have given tax breaks for games development. Scottish and UK firms must pay tax on research and development, whereas countries such as Canada and France give rebates, which gives their companies a competitive advantage over our companies. Although in some cases it might be possible to claim tax credits here, that applies only at the end of the development process. If our computer games industry is to compete on an equal footing with companies in other countries, it needs support during the development process, which can be lengthy. Colin Macdonald, the studio manager for Dundee-based computer games developer Realtime Worlds, recently expressed concern that, unless the playing field is levelled and UK-based companies receive a similar tax break, such as a VAT exemption for games research and development, the industry will suffer. Realtime Worlds is not alone in that view. The University of Abertay Dundee, the Scottish Chambers of Commerce and the computer games trade body Tiga all say the same thing: unless the playing field is levelled, we could lose out in Scotland. Top games such as Crackdown take about five years to develop. When tax breaks of up 25 per cent are available in other countries, Scotland and the UK are simply not as competitive, which is why  the UK is falling behind in the development of new games. The industry is calling for a change to the tax regime, as there is firm evidence that easing the tax burden on games development creates jobs and grows the industry. In Canada, the introduction of a 25 per cent tax break on development has resulted in a flurry of development and increased the number of people who are employed in the games industry by 40 per cent. It has also led to extra investment of $1.5 billion in the Canadian economy. French companies were granted a 20 per cent tax break in 2007, which has proven an aggressive stimulant for the country's computer games industry. That competitive advantage has given new-found confidence to French game developers. The Scottish Chambers of Commerce and Tiga have stated that if we received a similar tax break to bring us back into line with our main competitors, it could create an extra 11,500 jobs throughout the UK and safeguard thousands more jobs in the industry. At the end of the day, companies will go where prices are cheaper, even if development in the UK is of a higher quality. We are already hearing of Canadian headhunters targeting the wealth of talent in the Scottish computer games industry. Dundee generates 15 per cent of the UK's total computer games turnover—some £150 million annually—and would therefore feel more acutely any downturn caused by a loss of competitiveness. Holyrood does not yet have tax powers to support the industry directly, but there is much that we can do in the chamber. I welcome the steps that the Scottish Government has taken to support the industry, most notably through the funding of the University of Abertay Dundee Skillset media academy, which will specialise in computer games education and expand the university's expertise. That new academy recognises Dundee's importance as a centre for computer games development and will provide a skilled workforce to ensure that Dundee continues to lead the field. Dundee used to make Spectrum computers and NCR used to employ thousands in the city. With cross-party support in the chamber and at Westminster, we can ensure that it will never be the case that we have to say that we used to have a computer games industry.

The cabinet secretary touched on esure's welcome announcement that it will create 500 new jobs in Scotland. In the light of that, and of chairman Peter Wood's praise for our excellent people, superb infrastructure and can-do ethic, what else does the cabinet secretary believe that we can do to make Scotland a more attractive place to do business, in not just the financial sector, but all sectors?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

I welcome the debate and the decisive action that the Scottish Government has taken to bring forward the order swiftly. That is the action that local authorities and the public expect from the Government, and it contrasts with the actions of elements in the Parliament who held up the order by delaying their support for the budget. However, last week, we witnessed full support for the budget from the vast majority of MSPs, which will allow the Scottish Government to provide record levels of funding for local authorities and resources for a real-terms cut in council tax bills for households throughout Scotland. Between 2002 and 2007, Scottish Executive expenditure on local government as a proportion of the total budget fell by almost 4 per cent. In stark contrast with the actions of the previous Administration, which resulted in crippling council tax rises for families in every member's constituency—

I can confirm to the member that, over the years of the previous Administration, the allocation that went to local authorities went down year on year, whereas under the current Administration the allocation has gone up. In stark contrast with what happened previously, it has risen as a share of the total budget. The Government will increase the local government financial settlement by 5.1 per cent next year, which will mean a £600 million increase, to ensure that councils can provide the services that our communities need. No wonder we have Labour councillors thanking God for the Administration. They do not need to thank God; they just need to thank John Swinney. This year's local government finance order includes a 4.24 per cent increase in the revenue that is allocated to Dundee City Council, which is a real-terms increase of 2.67 per cent. That increase in funding will ensure that we can provide more services, such as free school meals for primary 1  to primary 3 pupils, fully funded free personal care, and five new schools, at the same time as ensuring that council tax rates stay frozen for a third year. That is welcome news for my constituents and those of my colleague in Dundee East, Shona Robison.

The cost in this budget is £70 million, which is in stark contrast to the £800 million that would have been required to deliver a 2p income tax cut. That would have been difficult to deliver without swingeing cuts in public services at a time when we need to support those services. The view that the freeze is good news is held not only by SNP members. The Labour-Tory coalition that currently runs Dundee City Council has announced a council tax freeze for the people of Dundee. The Labour leader of the council, Kevin Keenan, has stated: "I want the people of Dundee to be confident that they will not have to find any more money to pay for their council services in the coming year." On a day when we have heard the worrying news that the UK economy is forecast to shrink by 4 to 6 per cent in 2009, my constituents can be reassured that they will again be spared the annual increase in council tax. I bet that many council tax payers elsewhere in the UK wish that they had a Government with John Swinney at the helm of its finances—one that could deliver a council tax freeze. The average Dundee household will save £120 next year thanks to the council tax freeze. I welcome the cabinet secretary's announcement that not a single penny will be added to council tax bills in the following year and his further commitment to work with local authorities to ensure that that continues until the end of this session of Parliament and into 2012. That positive news will be welcomed throughout Scotland. The council tax freeze was possible only because of the co-operation of local authorities. Councils of all colours put the "historic" in the historic concordat when they put aside party politics for the good of the people of Scotland. Every single council signed up enthusiastically. It is a pity that Scottish Parliament colleagues cannot be as pragmatic and deliver what the people of Scotland consistently demonstrate they are in favour of at the polls: a fairer local income tax that is based on the ability to pay, rather than the hated council tax, to which the Opposition parties have no realistic alternative.  In 2007, I campaigned for the abolition of the council tax and the introduction of a fairer local income tax that is based on the ability to pay. I will be pleased to campaign for that again in 2011. The process of moving to a local income tax that is based on the ability to pay and set at 3p in the pound would represent the biggest tax cut in a generation. The decision of the Westminster Government to cut our budget by £500 million per year for the next two years makes it impossible for any finance minister, even one as talented as John Swinney, to deliver such a sweeping tax cut. That, coupled with the closed-mindedness of the Labour and Tory parties, prevents the introduction of a fairer system for Scots. I look forward to a more pragmatic Parliament after the people of Scotland have passed their judgment on us in 2011.

Does the member acknowledge that one of the  difficulties that councils face is having to pay the price of the PPP and private finance initiative schemes that Labour left them with?

To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government is taking to support employment in green industries. (S3F-1438)

What effect does the United Kingdom Government's obsession with nuclear power have on the renewable industry and Scotland's green jobs?

Will Margaret Curran tell us her views on the coalition that runs Dundee City Council? The administration there requires the support of the Conservatives to get its budget through and to run the council on a day-to-day basis.

It is with a certain feeling of regret that I find myself speaking in the second stage 3 debate on the 2009-10 budget. The fact that, for the first time, a budget was voted down by this Parliament when we are facing the first recession in a devolved Scotland and the deepest recession since world war two might have damaged the trust that has  been built up in this chamber over the past 10 years. Today, we have the opportunity to start rebuilding that trust. No one can be in any doubt that failing to pass the budget, even for a week, has caused real concerns for people and businesses in all our constituencies. Local authorities want to know with certainty how much funding they will receive, small businesses want to know whether they will get the lifeline of a rates cut, and people want the shadow of council tax increases to be removed.

I am suggesting that, particularly during a recession, there is a duty on the Opposition to act responsibly in the interests of the people of Scotland. There are things that will make a difference. The chief executive of the Scottish Chambers of Commerce, Liz Cameron, summed it up on Sunday when she said that every day the budget is delayed is damaging to Scotland's economy. We all have a responsibility to our parties, but we also have a responsibility to those whom we are here to represent. It is impossible to argue that Scotland and our constituents would be better off if £1.8 billion of funding was delayed. As was the case last week, I am happy to add my support for the Scottish Government's budget. It meets the needs of Scotland's households and businesses at this time of economic uncertainty. I welcome the support of the Liberal Democrats, not least because it gives me something new to say—after several debates on this year's budget, I was running out of derogatory adjectives. In all seriousness, I congratulate the Liberals on their pragmatic approach this week. They have recognised that taking a constructive approach—as the Conservatives and Margo MacDonald have done throughout—can be beneficial for all parties and those whom we represent. I also welcome the Labour Party's support for the budget. It is unfortunate that it did not feel able to support the budget earlier, because it would have saved a lot of angst throughout Scotland. Labour and the SNP might not agree entirely on some issues, but with the consensus that we have reached on the budget today, it is clear that we agree that this is the right budget at the right time for Scotland. I hope that that wave of consensus is the start of a new approach to politics by both the  Labour and Liberal parties. If that is the case, it is the people of Scotland who will be the winners. At the heart of the budget is an approach by the Scottish Government to make things fairer and to ease the burden on those who are most at risk from the economic downturn. The budget allocates a further £70 million to allow local authorities to freeze their council tax for the second year running. In previous years, the regular round of council tax rises led to a doubling of council tax in a decade. That time is past, and I am confident that councils throughout Scotland are working hard to deliver a second historic council tax freeze this year. Today's budget is also about support for small businesses, which are the bedrock of our economy and vital for employment in Scotland. In the economically challenging year ahead, we must ensure that we take the necessary measures to ensure their continued economic success. Phase 2 of the small business bonus scheme will benefit 150,000 small businesses throughout Scotland. With the passing of the budget, 7,500 businesses in Dundee alone will have their rates scrapped or cut. The budget also addresses the need to protect jobs in the current economic climate, particularly in the construction industry. I therefore welcome the £230 million of capital expenditure that is being brought forward from future budgets, which will help to support 4,700 Scottish jobs. As was the case last week, today's budget is a clear choice between supporting families and businesses in Scotland and turning our backs on the problems of our constituents. I believe that the whole Parliament acknowledges that, which is why we have seen much greater consensus this week. I hope that that consensus will result in unanimity by the end of the debate. Throughout the budget process, and in the past few days, parties throughout the chamber have come together to ensure that we do the right thing for the people of Scotland. Be in no doubt: this Parliament let the people of Scotland down by failing to pass the budget last week. Today, we have an opportunity to make amends. A unanimous vote will send the people of Scotland a strong signal that this Parliament takes its responsibilities seriously.

Does the member acknowledge that local councils throughout Scotland are well down the road to finalising their budgets, which they intend to set in just two weeks' time?

It has been said not that it is impossible to introduce a tax cut within a fixed budget, but that it is impossible to do so without major cuts to services. Where would the £800 million of cuts that the member proposes fall, especially in his Orkney constituency?

I add my support for the budget which, as the cabinet secretary said, is vital to Scotland's economic stability. We must recognise that economic stability should be Parliament's top priority, given that it has been confirmed that the UK is in recession since we started this year's budget process. To put that in context, the International Monetary Fund announced today just how bad the recession is: in the past couple of hours, it has revised its prediction that the UK economy will contract by 2.2 per cent and now predicts that it will contract by 2.8 per cent. The worst contraction of any economy in the developed world is happening on Gordon Brown's and Labour's watch. I will not pretend that our constituents are crowded around "Holyrood Live" or hanging on every word of today's debate, but we should make no mistake that what we decide today will make a huge difference to businesses and families throughout Scotland. As a result of the historic concordat with local authorities, the budget proposes a further £70 million a year to ensure  that, in these tough times, families throughout Scotland will not have a single extra penny added to their council tax bills. That is a welcome change from the days when local authorities were forced to make a stark choice between cutting services and making large increases in council tax bills. With a second year of the council tax freeze, my constituents in Dundee will have saved an average of £120 a year. The alternative prospect is, of course, that the budget will be voted down. As local government budgets must be set in a little over a month, substantial increases in council tax bills would be needed to make up for the huge shortfall that will exist if we are forced to revert to last year's budget. In Dundee, the shortfall would be over £12 million, which would necessitate a 20 per cent increase in council tax for hard-pressed households. That would amount to £233 on a band D property in Dundee—or, to put it another way, a £20 a month Labour surcharge on council tax bills in the city, instead of the freeze that this budget proposes. Today's budget vote is a clear choice between a real-terms cut in council tax for every household in Scotland and a potential increase of hundreds of pounds. It might have escaped the attention of Mr Purvis and the Liberal Democrats, but for all their bluster about tax cuts, his party will, if it votes against the budget, be voting for a tax increase. The budget is good news for small businesses. Phase 2 of the small business bonus scheme is set to benefit 150,000 small businesses. The Scottish Government's proposed 2009-10 budget would mean that from April, 3,000 businesses in Dundee would have their business rates reduced to zero, and another 4,500 would have their rates reduced by up to 50 per cent. To vote against the budget threatens the viability of small businesses the length and breadth of the country. Without the budget, those 150,000 businesses will have to navigate what is predicted to be the most economically challenging year in a generation without the lifeline that the small business bonus scheme offers. It is not going too far to say that many of those might not make it to the end of the year. In order to address the economic downturn and to ensure that Scotland comes out the other side, the cabinet secretary gave a commitment to bring forward funding where possible. As a result, the budget proposes a £120 million acceleration in the affordable housing budget over this year and next. That will provide for Dundee £700,000 of housing investment, which has been announced for Hillcrest Housing Association. As well as providing much needed family-sized affordable housing, that  investment will help the hard-pressed construction industry to weather the economic storm. All that is at risk if the budget falls. Members should make no mistake—there is only one budget on the table today. If it falls, we go back to last year's budget.

The fact remains that we are voting for the budget today, and there is only one budget on the table. If it is not passed, the efforts that the Government wants to make to help Scotland's economy will be—[ Interruption. ]

The budget that has been laid before Parliament will help to mitigate the worst effects of the recession. This is no time to play politics with people's livelihoods, so I make it clear to members who intend to vote against the budget that they will be taking money directly out of the pockets of families and small businesses in Scotland. That would be reprehensible at the best of times, but it is unforgivable when it is set against the background of the current tough economic situation. Failure to support the budget would put at risk the massive investment in energy efficiency and the £22 million package that the cabinet secretary announced in his speech. I hope that everyone pays attention to the consequences for the people of Scotland of failing to support the budget. The £230 million of capital expenditure that the UK Government has brought forward; the support for 5,000 jobs, particularly in the construction sector; and the funding that has been brought forward for the Scottish exhibition and conference centre, the Edinburgh bioquarter, the Fife energy park and road improvements throughout Scotland, would all be put at risk. There is £50 million of additional—

Does the Solicitor General believe that the introduction of summary justice reform will free up police to spend more time on the beat making our streets safer?

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

Mr Purvis is aware that we are talking about the Scottish budget, which is a fixed budget. Where would the £800 million of cuts that would be required to fund his 2p tax cut come from? Where would the Liberal Democrat cuts fall?

As members have mentioned, this budget is particularly relevant and important, given the current economic uncertainty. Members such as Alex Neil and John Park have said that we need to put aside party politics and headlines as we embark on what is likely to be a period of economic decline. I am pleased that most of the parties in the chamber have, on the whole, stepped up to the plate, which has led to a constructive approach to this year's budget in the Finance Committee and in the Parliament. The sole exception is one of the fringe parties, which has abandoned all attempts at being constructive to aim for headlines with its frankly ludicrous cuts proposals. I would say that the Liberal Democrats' sums do not add up, but one actually requires figures before attempting to add them up, and the Liberals do not seem to have any. To be fair, one figure is being bandied about, although not often by the Liberals—the £800 million of cuts, and even that figure has doubled from the original estimate of £400 million. A 2p tax reduction, as the Liberal Democrats have proposed, makes good headlines, but it does not make financial sense. The Liberals are forgetting the difference between a normal Government with its full range of economic levers and this Parliament with its artificial ceiling, which means that we must work within the financial constraints that are placed on us by the settlement that we receive from Westminster. To put it another way, we must work within the envelope. Any reduction in the Scottish variable rate must be matched by cuts in spending. At every opportunity, we hear of the Liberal Democrats' proposed plan for a reduction in the SVR, but details of the cuts are always absent. Mr Purvis is not solely to blame for that covert approach to the Liberal Democrat cuts—he is only following the example of his illustrious leader Nick Clegg, who, when asked on "Newsnight" where the proposed £20 billion of UK cuts would come from, said: "I'm simply not going to tell you the rest because if I did that, first, if they were a good idea the other parties would nick it."  There we have it: a party that is so concerned about the economic downturn that it will not tell us what it thinks should be done in case it has any good ideas. I might be a little harsh—we have heard some proposals from the Liberals. Presumably, they are the ones that the Liberals think are so bad and so barmy that no one would think of stealing them. As far as I can make out, the Liberal Democrats plan to scrap new quangos—creative Scotland and the SFT—which they claim would be a cut of £40 million. However, creative Scotland is expected to cost £7 million to set up, and the budget line for the SFT is only £3.1 million, so that is about £10 million, which is far short of the suggested £40 million. I am not sure that everyone got the memo on that, however, as Liberal leader Tavish Scott recently proposed the creation of a new transport quango—although, again, we have heard no costings for that proposal. The Liberals have also said that they would demutualise Scottish Water, cutting £180 million from the budget. Although demutualisation might well achieve the £180 million saving that they claim, it would inevitably lead to higher water rates, which would create a tax rise rather than a tax cut for Scots. In addition, it would take two years to achieve, so it would produce no savings for this year's budget.

That tax cut is being funded by the UK Government from borrowing. Mr Purvis needs to understand that the UK Government can be flexible within its budget, but we cannot. As I have already said, this Parliament has to work within the economic envelope of the settlement that we are given from Westminster. The Liberal Democrats' detailed cuts add up to a total of £220 million, which is far short of the required £800 million. The remaining £580 million comes under the heading "miscellaneous" and is made up of vague efficiency savings, cuts to infrastructure budgets and, of course, the secret idea that is so good that they cannot tell anybody about it. Where would the extra £580 million of Lib Dem cuts fall? The Lib Dems could start with a couple of infrastructure cuts. Scrapping the Borders railway and the Inverness bypass would cut £120 million and £115 million respectively. They could save £187.5 million a year by getting rid of concessionary fares. They could cut £12 million from alcohol programmes, and scrapping free eye tests would save them another £29 million. They  could then end the council tax freeze, which they continue to oppose. That would take £70 million from the pockets of hard-pressed Scottish households. Finally, they could get rid of the central heating scheme, which costs £46 million a year. However, even after all those cuts, the sums would still not add up, because the total would be only £799.5 million. Clearly, most members would consider the cuts that I have outlined unacceptable, but if the Liberal Democrats were to achieve their 2p cut, they would have to go even further. The Scottish Government's proposed budget is a good budget for my constituents and for families and businesses throughout Scotland. It is the right budget to ensure that Scotland can weather the current economic climate. I urge the Parliament to support the bill and let the Government get on with the job. I hope that all Opposition parties, including the Liberal Democrats, will enter serious negotiations with the Government so that we can get a budget—

Will the member give way?

I add my thanks to the Finance Committee clerks and the Scottish Parliament information centre staff, who have, as always, performed their tasks with patience and diligence. I single out Susan Duffy, our clerk team leader, who is moving on to the Local Government and Communities Committee in the new year. The Finance Committee will miss her, and I am sure that we all wish her well in her new post. The Christmas spirit may be getting the better of me, but I also praise my fellow committee members—from all parties. There was a marked difference in this year's proceedings, and it is  apparent from reading the subject committee reports that the constructive approach taken by Finance Committee members was replicated across the Parliament. That will not go unnoticed outside the Parliament, and I hope that the experience will be replicated as the budget moves forward. I understand that we will always have a bit of bluster in the chamber but, across the committees, members genuinely attempted to do what was in the interests of the people of Scotland, which is to be welcomed. There was a feeling in the committees that, given the current financial climate, it was more important than ever that we were willing to get on together to ensure that we got the most from the budget and that we were not seen to allow petty party-political differences to get in the way of our shared responsibility to serve the people of Scotland. The Finance Committee recognises that the actions in the Government's first budget have become even more vital because of the subsequent economic downturn. The policy of putting money back into the pockets of hard-pressed Scottish families and businesses has been broadly welcomed across the country. We need to remind ourselves of some of the ways in which the money has gone back to them, such as the removal of tolls on the Tay bridge and the reduction in prescription charges, which will be further reduced next April. As a result of the historic concordat with local authorities, a further £70 million will be pledged in the budget to enable councils to freeze council tax bills again across Scotland, allowing a real-terms tax cut that will be especially welcome in these tough times. It was therefore disappointing that the Liberal Democrat members of the committee did not welcome that measure—given that it is a tax cut. This year in Bournemouth, which is similar in size to Dundee, the council tax was increased by 5 per cent. As a result of the Scottish Government's partnership with Scotland's local authorities, my constituents, like constituents across Scotland, experienced a zero per cent rise, thus avoiding an average £60 increase in their bills this year. A second freeze on council tax will mean a saving equivalent to £120 a year for households in Dundee and will bring us a step closer to getting rid of that unfair and hated tax forever. Another successful initiative in this year's budget, which will be built on next year, is the small business bonus scheme. Thousands of businesses across Scotland have benefited from the scheme since its introduction in April. The benefits and support will grow when the scheme is extended, as is proposed in the 2009-10 budget. In the first half of this year, Dundee was the top city for business growth in Scotland. Despite the economic downturn, 118 new businesses started up in Dundee. The help that they will receive from  the Scottish Government will be vital in ensuring their survival in the tough times ahead. The 2009-10 budget proposes that, from April next year, just under 3,000 businesses in Dundee will have their business rates removed altogether, with rates reduced by up to 50 per cent for another 4,500. That is real help in difficult times. I add my backing to the support that exists for the plans that have been outlined for the £260 million of accelerated capital investment. Communities across Scotland will benefit from that deployment of resources, which will boost the economy when it is most needed. The £7.5 million that has been brought forward this year for further and higher education will be crucial in ensuring that we weather the economic downturn. In my constituency, the University of Abertay Dundee is in line to receive £0.25 million for refurbishment works to improve the energy efficiency of its buildings. The acceleration of the funds will ensure that the benefits of the energy savings to the environment and to the university's finances will be enjoyed sooner. Such investment in our universities is vital to ensuring a vibrant economy. I know that members of all parties appreciate that. The joint future thinking task force on universities published its draft report in July, in which it emphasised the universities' contribution to the Scottish economy. The report recommended that Scotland's universities should be recognised as the seventh key sector of the Scottish economy in the Government's economic strategy. Indeed, the task force stated that universities were "explicitly recognised as a key sector of the Scottish economy". I welcome the fact that the minister has taken that on board. The proposed budget for 2009-10 will build on the SNP Government's successful programme, which continues to support jobs and families across Scotland. The Opposition parties' constructive approach at committee reflects the fact that it is vital that we make the best decisions for Scotland in these tough economic times. That is what the budget will do. I commend it to members.

Will the member take an intervention?

The people of Scotland would like to know at what level tolls on the new Forth road bridge should be set.

It is with a sense of déjà vu that I find myself again speaking in a debate on local government finance, but I accept that as the abolition of the hated and  unfair council tax is top of the list of our constituents' concerns, it should be at the top of the Parliament's agenda. It has been 21 months since the SNP announced its proposals for scrapping the council tax and introducing a fair local tax that is based on ability to pay. After all that time, we have still not heard about any real alternatives to those proposals.

I will deal with the Conservatives' position shortly. Let me be clear: doing nothing is not an option. The people of Scotland will not forgive any party that stands in the way of the SNP Government's bill to abolish the council tax. In relation to his motion, I remind Mr Brownlee that it is the job of Opposition members to come up with alternatives to the Government's proposals when they disagree with them. I will give credit where credit is due—Mr Brownlee has suggested tinkering with the hated council tax, but he must publish his workings because the sums just do not add up. Some parties have been quite open about their lack of alternatives to the council tax. As Mr Swinney has already quoted what Iain Gray said last October, which was also mentioned in Parliament yesterday, it would be unfair of me to repeat it, but Mr Gray accepted that the Labour Party had no proposals and that the suggestions to tinker with the council tax that it made in the campaign for the most recent parliamentary elections were worked out on the back of a cigarette packet.

I have no idea why the people of Glenrothes did not vote for the best candidate. We will learn lessons to ensure that that never happens again. I am quite convinced that the progress that the SNP is making throughout the country will continue at the next election. Mr Gray said that the Labour Party was working on new proposals for making the council tax fairer, but so far we have heard nothing. However, given that he is often seen clutching a fag packet with a determined look on his face when he leaves the chamber after First Minister's questions, perhaps he is indeed working on Labour's new proposals, which were conspicuously absent from the consultation process. Labour's position remains that it knows that the council tax is unfair, but it does not know what to do about it. Neither Labour nor the Conservatives have  mentioned what is, when it comes to the retention of the hated council tax, the elephant in the room—the much-delayed but ultimately unavoidable council tax revaluation. The revaluation that took place in Wales led to 65 per cent of properties in Cardiff being moved up by at least one band.

Mr Brownlee and the Labour Party need to be open—they must tell the people of Scotland when they propose to carry out a revaluation. It is not possible to keep the council tax without having a rebanding. I conclude by highlighting the views of one of the respondents to the consultation on local income tax. Scottish Action Against Council Tax shares the views of the majority of Scots. That organisation, which is made up of ordinary Scottish taxpayers from around the country, stated that it does not want the council tax to be tinkered with or any one-off payments or reductions to be made; it wants that hated tax to be scrapped altogether and replaced by a fairer local income tax that is based on ability to pay. That is what the people of Scotland want, which is why the SNP Government will introduce the council tax abolition bill, not the council tax version 2 bill.

The cabinet secretary has highlighted the need to increase the research and development that take place in Scotland. What role does she envisage the enterprise agencies playing in achieving that?

PFI.

If Andy Kerr is saying that the SFT is exactly the same as PFI/PPP, what is he complaining about?

Will the member take an intervention?

The debate is an important one made even more important by the current UK financial crisis. Thanks to the union, we are part of the UK economy, which has the biggest budget deficit in the western world. A significant part of that deficit is thanks to PFI and its credit-card interest rates. In that climate, the SNP Government is concerned first and foremost with ensuring maximum value for money from capital investment projects and achieving that value without burdening future generations with huge debt.

We need to ensure that each of our capital investment projects represents best value for the Scottish taxpayer. That is what the Scottish Government is doing. The cabinet secretary has set out plans for the largest ever investment in Scotland's infrastructure, which amounts to £14 billion over the next three years and a total of £35 billion over the next 10 years. That is some pipeline. We must ensure that the money is spent wisely and avoid the costly mistakes that we have witnessed with PFI, under which excessive profits and windfall gains have been made on investments and public access to community facilities has suffered. During the Finance Committee's inquiry into methods of funding capital investment projects, other committee members and I attended  extensive evidence-taking sessions. There was little evidence in favour of PFI. There was a lot of opinion—largely from organisations with vested interests—but no hard evidence to show that its continuation would be in Scotland's national interest. However, there was an abundance of shocking evidence on the travesty that it represents. Let us examine some of that evidence—we do not have time to examine it all, so I will be as brief as I can—starting with a statement from economist Dr Jim Cuthbert that sums up why PFI went so badly wrong. He told the committee that there was a "push to get schemes off the Government's books, almost at any price".—[ Official Report , Finance Committee , 29 April 2008; c 446.] Clearly, that is Dr Cuthbert's opinion. However, unlike those who extolled the virtues of PFI, the Cuthberts backed up their opinions with hard facts, much of which they obtained under freedom of information legislation. Their evidence on Hairmyres hospital was damning and concluded that the PFI contract for the project had delivered one hospital for the cost of two. They found that the companies behind the deal stood to gain around £145 million from an investment of just £8.4 million.

In the same paper, the Cuthberts compare the cost of borrowing under the non-profit-distributing organisation model that is at the heart of the Scottish Futures Trust with that under PFI. The ratio is 1.32 for NPDO, compared with 1.49 for PFI. The Cuthberts looked at early NPDO models that were produced to comply with rules set by the Government of which Andy Kerr was part. It is well known that Andy Kerr and the previous Government were strongly against moving to NPDO. Councils that used NPDO had to do what they could to comply with the Government's rules. I am confident that the Scottish Government and the SFT will improve on the early NPDO models to ensure that we get better value for taxpayers' money. The Finance Committee also saw material from an internal presentation by a construction company that is a major player in several PFI consortia. It included an illustration of the company's expectations from a generic PFI project, which showed that high returns on equity were not the exception in PFI projects but the norm. The presentation went on to suggest that such returns were possible because the complexity of the PFI system reduced competition.  We heard about schemes such as the Inverness airport terminal PFI project, which was bought out by the Scottish Executive shortly after completion at a cost of £27.5 million. The construction cost of the terminal was £9.6 million but, due to the PFI contract, the private company concerned walked away with a 200 per cent profit. That bung of nearly £18 million did not come from some Labour-Lib Dem Executive slush fund; it was £18 million of taxpayers' money—Scotland's money—squandered by Labour. With the Scottish Futures Trust, we aim to avoid repeating the costly mistakes of the previous Administration. We will learn the lessons of PFI/PPP and existing NPDO projects to ensure that we deliver better value for money, with greater public accountability, public ownership and community access to facilities at a price that the public can afford. With the Scottish Futures Trust, we will achieve all that without burdening future generations with huge debt at credit-card interest rates. In contrast to the wasteful spending under PFI, the Government is bringing forward a model of capital investment that, for the first time, will have the public interest at its heart. The Scottish Futures Trust will not only provide more bang for the public pound but provide better management of projects and greater public accountability. I commend the motion to the chamber.

In the light of the announcement by Labour's Secretary of State for Innovation, Universities and Skills, John Denham, that £200 million will be cut from student grants south of the border, can the cabinet secretary confirm that the Scottish Government will not follow suit and that we are still committed to increasing financial support for Scottish students?

When I visited the Elms in Dundee, I was incredibly impressed by the commitment and dedication of the staff. Secure units such as the Elms have an important role to play, but they are no substitute for early intervention. Tackling drink, drugs and deprivation is vital to reducing the number of young people who are sent to secure units. What measures is the Government taking to ensure that fewer of our youngsters end up in secure units?

I am sure that the whole Parliament will agree that Derek Brownlee's motion is sound and sensible. I hope that the cabinet secretary's reassurances will go some way to winning over those members who are still opposed to the abolition of the unfair council tax and the introduction of a fair system that is based on ability to pay. "I believe the council tax must be replaced or reformed to make it fairer". Those are not my words—they are the words that Iain Gray used in a press release on 5 August. A phone call from London prompted a U-turn. Unlike the Labour leader in the Scottish Parliament, the people of Scotland are in no doubt about the fact that the council tax has had its day. They are sick of the burden that that unfair tax places on them and are calling for it to be scrapped. Despite a campaign of misinformation by Labour politicians, the most favoured replacement remains a local income tax. The council tax has been unjust since its inception and it needs to be replaced, not merely tinkered with. The local income tax bill will be an important step towards a progressive tax regime that is based on ability to pay. A pensioner who  earns £9,000 a year must go through a complicated process to claim council tax benefit, and they are still liable to pay the balance. Many pensioners do not claim that benefit, with the result that they pay up to about £1,200 a year in council tax for an average-sized home. Under a local income tax, such a pensioner would not pay a penny and would have no forms to fill in. We are all aware that some high earners, such as MSPs, will probably have to pay a bit more, but that is what one would expect of a fair system that is based on ability to pay. Those who can afford to pay a little more should pay a little more to ensure that those who cannot afford to pay pay less.

The council tax is not a tax that people can choose to opt out of paying, whereas with many other taxes, such as those that relate to having a car, people have a choice. That is a big difference. I do not say that all taxes should be based on the ability to pay. However, taxes to pay for basic utility services should be based on the ability to pay, which is why I support the Government's move towards a local income tax. We have heard calculations from Labour suggesting that many people will pay more. After a recent STV debate, the Labour candidate in the Glenrothes by-election, Lindsay Roy, claimed that under a local income tax couples who earn £16,000 each and who live in properties of band A to C in Fife would pay more under the local income tax than they pay under the council tax. Let me be clear: under the local income tax, the vast majority of households would be better off, and the situation is no different in Fife. I am sure that, if Lindsay Roy had not forgotten to exclude the personal tax allowance, which is of course not taxable under the local income tax, he would not have made that calculation. He is way off the mark. In Fife, a couple earning £32,000 would save £150 a year if they lived in a band A property; £270 a year if they lived in a band B property; and nearly £400 a year if they lived in a band C property. The misinformation from the Labour Party does not help the debate. If the Labour Party has an alternative to a local income tax, let us hear it and put it before the people. The fact is that couples in average properties in Fife and throughout Scotland will have to earn much more than £32,000 before they pay a single penny more under the local income tax. That is the reality of a fair local income tax. The SNP amendment calls for Scotland's council tax benefit to be retained. I was delighted that, during the Labour leadership election, Cathy Jamieson pledged that securing Scotland's £400 million in annual council tax benefit was a priority  for her. That was when she was acting leader of the party, so I hope that the current leader will comply with what she said.

I congratulate Michael Matheson on securing today's debate on a very real problem for cancer patients throughout Scotland. I am sure, however,  that something important is going on that has prevented any Liberal Democrat members from being here tonight. As Michael Matheson said, being diagnosed with cancer is a stressful enough time for sufferers and their families without the added burden of having to worry about their financial situation. Incomes plummet for people who have cancer and, as we have heard, benefits take-up is at its lowest among cancer sufferers in Scotland. The strain on finances results in nine out of 10 households with a diagnosed cancer sufferer encountering financial difficulty. I will concentrate on one area of financial burden for people who are diagnosed with cancer: travel. In Tayside, a new case of cancer is diagnosed every four hours. As we have heard, having cancer puts a huge strain on people's finances, and even small costs can be hard to meet. From the day of diagnosis, the average cancer patient in Tayside will require 60 trips to hospital. In addition to rising fuel costs, patients who attend consultations at Ninewells hospital must pay £1.60 to park there, and their family and friends must pay £1.60 every time they visit. Figures show that cancer patients are, in fact, paying the highest rates for travel in the UK, at £636 per year. I welcome the action that the Government has taken to alleviate that burden by scrapping the car parking charges at hospitals throughout Scotland. Unfortunately for people who visit Dundee's Ninewells hospital, however, car parking charges will remain because of a private finance initiative contract that was signed before the establishment of this Parliament. I await the publication of the cancer care plan, and I hope that the Government will address parking at hospitals that are under PFI contracts. As Michael Matheson said, the Macmillan benefits advice service can make a huge difference—we heard evidence of that from Falkirk. In 2009, there will be seven Macmillan advisers in Tayside working to provide financial support and advice to people who have cancer. That is to be welcomed but, as Michael Matheson said, we must ensure that people who have cancer are aware of the service. I support his and other members' calls for referral to the advice centres, including Maggie's centres, to be given at the time of diagnosis. Parliament enjoys the trust and support of the people of Scotland because we have not turned away from the health problems that face our nation. Under the previous Administration, the Parliament proved to the people of Scotland that it cares about the health and wellbeing of the nation by introducing free personal care and the smoking ban. That commitment to putting the health of Scots at the top of the agenda has been continued  with the phasing out of prescription charges and the introduction of the human papilloma virus vaccine by the current Government. We must continue to put the health of the nation at the forefront of whatever we do. The highlighting of the important issue of cancer poverty by Michael Matheson and other members, and the calls for the provision of financial advice to people who have been diagnosed with cancer are a continuation of what Parliament has previously stood up for. I look forward to the publication of "Better Cancer Care", which I hope will go some way towards addressing cancer poverty. That is what cancer patients and their families deserve and that is what the people of Scotland expect from Parliament.

Michael McMahon asked about the number of schools that had been entirely paid for by the current Government. Of course, the Opposition forgets that the schools that were brought up under the previous Administration are not yet paid for.

What percentage of local authority budgets are committed to paying for the private finance initiative school renewal projects that were approved by the previous Administration?

To ask the Scottish Government what action can be taken to reduce the burden on patients, their families and staff caused by car parking charges at Ninewells hospital in Dundee and other hospitals with private finance initiative contracts. (S3O-4135)

I understand that the cost of buying out the PFI contract at Ninewells hospital could be up to 30 million public pounds. Will the cabinet secretary confirm the size of the financial  noose that the previous Administration's PFI contract has placed around NHS Tayside?

I welcome the cabinet secretary's statement, which represents another step towards delivering more cost-effective investment of taxpayers' money and brings to an end the obscene profits that were made under PFI. Will the cabinet secretary say more about the financial powers that could be available to the Scottish Futures Trust and about how the SFT will be able to assist in finding finance for public infrastructure projects?

To ask the Scottish Government what action was taken during the summer recess to advance the national conversation. (S3O-4015)

During the recess, the Scottish National Party directly connected with people to seek their views on Scotland's constitutional future. I was very encouraged by the responses that I received in my constituency of Dundee West and in John Mason's Westminster constituency of Glasgow East. What other national conversation events have been held in 2008? What does the Government intend to do in the near future?

I start by touching on a couple of areas on which I think and hope there will be a fair degree of cross-party co-operation. As Rob Gibson said earlier, the proposed marine bill and climate change bill will place this Parliament at the fore, leading the way around the globe. This is an appropriate point at which to acknowledge the commitment of the members of other parties who have driven that agenda forward. Robin Harper and Sarah Boyack have been pushing it since the Scottish Parliament was reconvened by Winnie Ewing in 1999. However, if we are to ensure that the bills are passed as swiftly as possible—which they must be—it will be crucial that this Parliament works with the Government and the third sector towards our common goal of a greener Scotland.  Another bill will produce robust debate during its passage through Parliament: the council tax abolition bill will take forward one of the flagship policies of the SNP—a policy supported right across the country, in stark contrast to Labour's hated council tax. The SNP policy, as well as being fundamentally fairer, will reduce the local tax burden across Scotland, reduce the total tax take, and provide the biggest tax cut in a generation.

It is fairer because Mr Souter and Mr Farmer will pay more than they pay under the current system; it is fairer because Mr Foulkes will pay more than he pays under the current system; and it is fairer because the tax system will be based on people's ability to pay. The abolition of the council tax will remove entirely from local taxation the most vulnerable members of society, breaking the crippling chains of the council tax. I am not suggesting for a minute that anyone likes to pay tax—nobody likes to pay tax. We would all like to be tax-free and have the best services in the world. However, by basing the tax take on income, we can, at least, ensure that we have a fair system that does not disproportionately tax those who are on low and fixed incomes. The end of the council tax will see all those who are on low incomes automatically paying less, with the majority of pensioners being exempt. There will be no complicated forms that many pensioners are not prepared or not able to fill in. Under the current council tax benefit system, up to 40 per cent of eligible pensioners do not receive any help towards their bills. That is a lot of very vulnerable people. I will give a real-life example to highlight the point, although it involves someone whom I have not identified personally. I refer to the pensioner who was identified by Iain Gray this morning. Mr Gray said—I paraphrase, as I have not seen the Official Report —that a pensioner with an income of £8,000 would be brought into the local tax system by the introduction of a local income tax. Iain Gray was wrong on two points. He was wrong to suggest that a single pensioner on a meagre income of £8,000 does not pay council tax—they do. I am not sure where Mr Gray's pensioner lives, but if they live in a band D house in my constituency they will be liable to pay council tax. Even if they have no savings and apply for council tax benefit, that benefit will not cover their council tax liabilities. Additionally, we know that about 40 per cent of entitled pensioners do not claim that benefit. In fact, for pensioners to be paying up to 30 per cent of their income in council tax is not  unusual, while Scotland's most wealthy citizens pay a fraction of that. The SNP's proposal for a fair system that is based on the ability to pay will end that inequality. Mr Gray was also wrong to suggest that his pensioner would be liable for local income tax. The UK Treasury, to whom Mr Gray was a special adviser, has set the personal allowance for single people between the ages of 65 and 75 at £9,030 for this financial year. So, any pensioner with an income of less than £9,030—which, I am pleased to confirm, includes someone with an income of £8,000—would pay no income tax, whether local or national. Furthermore, if the pensioner in question is over 75, their personal allowance is even higher. Mr Gray's comments are typical of Labour members, who are happy to scaremonger without checking their facts and who offer no solutions. With the announcement that the Government's second legislative programme will include a bill to abolish the council tax, Labour's day of reckoning on local taxation has arrived. It is no longer good enough for them to criticise the proposals that are put forward by others—at least the Conservatives have some proposals—without coming up with proposals of their own. The people of Scotland have a right to examine such proposals in detail. I understand that Labour members are in difficulty at the moment—they are rudderless without a leader and have no idea which direction they will take on any policy initiative. However, they had eight years in government, throughout which time they promised to tackle the inequalities of the council tax. That was one of many broken promises by Labour in government. The people of Scotland have a right to know where Labour members stand on the £400 million that Gordon Brown and Alistair Darling want to keep from Scotland if we abolish the council tax. Will they stand up for Scotland with the SNP, or will they capitulate as they did on care charges? This has been a good debate. I have enjoyed it, although we have not agreed on everything. There is much in the legislative programme that will bring the Parliament together in the interests of the nation as a whole, and I hope that the bills around which there are fundamental disagreements will serve to generate increased interest in the Parliament.

Will the member take an intervention?

To ask the Scottish Government what steps have been taken to raise awareness of plagiocephaly. (S3O-3958)

I welcome the leaflet's publication, but I have received anecdotal evidence that although the leaflet is available to all health boards, they are not all distributing it as widely as could have been hoped. What will the minister do to ensure that all new parents throughout Scotland are given a copy of the plagiocephaly leaflet?

To ask the Scottish Government whether it shares my concern that many employees of Norwich Union's Dundee call centre will be unable to accept the company's proposals to transfer their jobs to Perth. (S3O-3801)

In offering an enhanced package to encourage workers to relocate to Perth, Norwich Union has recognised the high level of skills of its Dundee workforce. The best way to ensure that those skills are not lost to Dundee's economy is for another company to take over the Dundee call centre with its trained staff. Will the minister agree to work with Scottish Enterprise Tayside, Dundee City Council and Norwich Union to ensure that the call centre is marketed, in the hope that it can be taken on as a going concern?

The people of Scotland have already benefited from the £600 million of underspend that the cabinet secretary has managed to recover from the UK Treasury. In response to Brian Adam, the cabinet secretary said that he has negotiated the draw-down of more money over the next three years. How does he intend to ensure that we do not get into the situation again in which Scotland's money languishes in London instead of being used to benefit the people of Scotland?

To ask the Scottish Government whether there are any plans to review the presentation of exam results. (S3O-3700)

The cabinet secretary will be aware that college suits some pupils better than school. Those pupils begin their qualifications in school and go on to complete them in college. It seems unfair that the school gets no credit in the official statistics for those success stories. In fact, in the way in which the figures are calculated, the school's performance is marked down. Will she agree to examine how the results are presented to ensure that schools are not penalised for supporting students in making the best choice for their individual attainment?

I thank Charlie Gordon for acknowledging the innovation of Dundee business and industry—and some of the things that the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth is doing to deliver the Government's programme. Today's debate illustrates perfectly that the Government is making improvements for the benefit of the people of Scotland and that the bitter Opposition is all over the place. Iain Gray says that the SFT is just PFI; Andy Gray—[ Laughter. ]—is on record attacking the NPD model in an interview with the finance convener of Falkirk Council; and Wendy Alexander claims that it was all Labour's idea anyway.

The big difference is that the NPD model will end the excessive profits, of which there are many examples under the standard PFI model. The evidence from Argyll and Bute Council and from Falkirk Council shows that with NPD there were no excessive profits to be made. The SNP Government is committed to delivering record capital investment across Scotland. As the cabinet secretary said in his opening speech, £14 billion will be invested in infrastructure over the next three years, and £35 billion will be invested within a decade. Of that record investment, £2 billion will be invested in new and improved school buildings, including Kingspark school and Barnhill school in Dundee, both of which will be funded through traditional procurement using that record capital funding as part of the historic concordat with local government. Members of the Opposition parties might not like to hear this, but our SNP Government will deliver 250 schools in the lifetime of this parliamentary  session, which will match Labour's proposals brick for brick. However, in doing so, we will ensure that we get the maximum bang for the public pound.

The Government took the decision that the quickest way of moving a few of those schools forward was to continue with the existing system. Where possible, they were transferred to the NPD model. I am confident that, in future, we will get much better value for the public pound through the Scottish futures trust. The previous Administration had hoped that the Scottish people would never find out about the huge profits that private companies were making at the expense of the Scottish taxpayer as a result of the PFI programme. However, after the facts became available following a freedom of information request, we saw that the evidence was shocking. The Sunday Herald summed up the situation best when it labelled it "The great PFI swindle". The evidence revealed for the first time the huge scale of the profits that were being made by private companies at the public's expense. We were told of regular profits of 1,200 per cent for private investors. That means that for every £1 invested, they got back £1,200. To put it another way, a modest investment of £1,000 delivered a return of £1 million. That is a scandal. In 2006, the capital value of PFI projects in the NHS was £600 million, but the debt created was £2.4 billion. Even Labour members should be able to tell that that does not add up. The huge sums of public money that were being handed over to private companies under PFI are a disgrace. One of the main justifications for those massive profits is the claim that, as part of PFI, risk is transferred. However, another national scandal is the projects that had to be bought out at a cost to the taxpayer of tens of millions of pounds: the Skye bridge, West Lothian College and Inverness airport. It is clear that for "risk" we can read "built-in profit." When a PFI project goes badly wrong, the public purse has to bear the cost. The examples of expensive PFI projects that have cost the taxpayer dearly could fill a whole month's debate. I urge all members to read the submissions to the Finance Committee's inquiry into methods of funding capital projects. In that written and oral evidence, we read and heard lots of opinion. Many comments were made in defence of PFI and against change, but it is important to look at where those comments came from. It is perfectly understandable that people with vested  interests in the current system will oppose any change that will cap excessive profits and ensure best value for the public purse. However, as well as that opinion, the Finance Committee received lots of evidence that was based on fact. The evidence speaks for itself. A damning indictment of PFI is the fact that it will leave an £800 million noose around the neck of Scotland's public finances. The Government has shown that we can move swiftly on infrastructure investment, which is so vital to the success of the economy and to the delivery of services. Since the Scottish National Party came into office, the Government has approved a raft of projects, many of which—including the Forth crossing—had suffered because of years of dithering on the part of the previous Administration. We will take no lessons on finance from the parties that presided over the scandalous PFI disaster that we have witnessed in recent years. Scotland's Government is determined and committed to achieving the best value for Scottish taxpayers, and that is exactly what it is delivering.

In the light of Nick Clegg's announcement that the Liberal Democrats want to introduce road charging, can Mr McArthur tell us which roads in  Scotland would be tolled if the Lib Dems were in power?

To ask the Scottish Government what steps the Cabinet Secretary for Justice is taking to tackle drug misuse in Dundee. (S3O-3596)

As has been highlighted recently by Dundee's Evening Telegraph , drug-related antisocial behaviour is a problem in Dundee and elsewhere in Scotland. My constituents are becoming increasingly concerned about incidents that range from the use of stairwells and other public places for drug taking,  to threatening behaviour in town centres and streets. What measures can be taken to combat drug-related antisocial behaviour in Dundee?

The cabinet secretary has mentioned the new accountancy standards that are being introduced by Westminster. Does he agree that Scotland is now, with the development of the Scottish futures trust, ahead of the curve in finding a solution to the problems that were posed by the introduction of international financial reporting standards?

Jamie McGrigor has told us about the problems that are associated with prepayment meters, particularly for people who are in fuel poverty, and the extra costs to which they give rise. The use of smart meters allows people who are on tight budgets to budget in the same way that they can budget with prepayment meters without incurring extra costs. What steps will the Scottish Government take to push the Westminster Government to ensure that the use of smart meters is expanded throughout Scotland and that particular emphasis is placed on targeting people who live in fuel-poor households?

I want to correct some misinformation that we have heard, as usual, from Labour members. I will deal with just two of the many falsehoods that we have heard so far. The first is Iain Gray's assertion regarding central heating systems. A parliamentary answer of 24 April by Stewart Maxwell made clear that the number of central heating systems installed in the last year of the Labour-Lib Dem Executive was 10,238 and that the number of systems installed in the first year of the SNP Government was 14,377.

I do not have to allow it, but I will.

It is interesting that Iain Gray did not refer to the figure for the last year of the Labour-Lib Dem Executive, which was correctly stated as 10,238, compared with 14,377 under the SNP. The other piece of misinformation that I would like to correct relates to the minimum wage. It was wrong of Jackie Baillie to say that SNP members did not support the introduction of the minimum wage. On 16 December 1997, John Swinney and Roseanna Cunningham, who are both in the chamber, voted for the National Minimum Wage Bill at second reading, along with Margaret Ewing, Alasdair Morgan and Andrew Welsh. Alasdair Morgan was a member of the committee that considered the bill and spoke in the debate at second reading. Let us have less misinformation and more facts. I pay tribute to the previous Administration, which, in partnership with all Opposition parties, made commendable progress in tackling fuel poverty and child poverty in Scotland by using the economic powers that are available to us here at Holyrood. Our SNP Government has also taken advantage of the powers that are available to the Parliament. In the past year, it has implemented a raft of changes, which Christina McKelvie mentioned. It has moved to abolish prescription charges, scrapped the graduate endowment fee, frozen the council tax and increased payments for free personal care. Together, those changes are making most Scots better off. Although, as has been shown, the Parliament has its hands on some of the levers of power and can make a big difference to the lives of the people of Scotland, the current constitutional set-up means that the UK budget has huge ramifications for Scots. Although there was not one mention of Scotland in the budget, it made 500,000 Scots households less well-off. The union dividend is often cited as the main argument against independence for Scotland, but it means that Scots are paying some of the highest petrol prices in the world and that our pensioners are dying of cold each year in Europe's most energy-rich country. The same union dividend cut the pay packets of a quarter of Scottish households to appease middle England in the budget. This week there was disturbing news from the European Commission. In its latest six-monthly economic forecast, Brussels estimated that the UK's budget deficit would rise to 3.3 per cent of GDP in 2008-09, which would mean that the UK was in breach of the 3 per cent limit that has been set by the EU stability and growth pact. That is not the prudent approach to the economy that Gordon Brown promised us. It comes at a time when the  UK's growth rate is expected almost to halve in the next year. The EU is not alone in thinking that the UK economy is heading for trouble. David Blanchflower, a member of the Bank of England's monetary policy committee, warned only yesterday that a UK recession is on the way. It is not clear whether things are as bad as he suggests, but it is clear that the situation is not good. Last month the FTSE 100 company Shire Pharmaceuticals announced that it will relocate to Ireland, where it will join firms such as eBay and Google, which enjoy a corporate tax rate in Dublin that is less than half the UK rate. It is likely that Ireland's competitive taxation regime was a major factor in NCR's decision to locate its European headquarters in Dublin rather than in my city, Dundee.

We want as much industry in Scotland as possible, and if we had the full levers of power we could encourage more pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries to stay in Scotland. We want to provide Scottish industries with a competitive edge that will give Scotland an advantage over other countries. We can deliver that only when we have become independent and have full powers. It is not all doom and gloom. Scotland's growth rate historically lagged behind that of the UK, but the most recent figures show that for the third and fourth quarters of 2007, under the SNP Government, the growth rate in Scotland was higher than that of the UK. That is the first time—at least since devolution—that Scotland's growth rate has exceeded that of the UK in two consecutive quarters. We should be proud of those figures, which are a pointer to the future. The actions of the Scottish Government are making a big difference. We can imagine what we could do if we had the full powers of an independent country. What a contrast there is between the achievements during 11 months of SNP Government and those during 11 years of the dead hand of Labour at Westminster.

Does the member think that it is appropriate that the non-mandatory social tariff allocation of £150 million is a drop in the ocean compared with the £1.275 billion that the energy companies take for pre-payment meters?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

I thank the Labour Party for its choice of debate. I would have thought that, in a month when 500,000 Scottish households have become worse off as a result of the scrapping of the 10p tax rate, Labour would be wary of debating taxation. However, rather than talking about how Labour's policies affect people throughout Scotland, we once again have a Labour debate on one of the SNP's flagship policies—a policy that is popular throughout the country, in stark contrast to Labour's hated council tax. The idea of a local income tax is highly popular. In fact, the most recent academic research found that almost nine out of 10 Scots are in favour of replacing the council tax with a local income tax.

My claims are based on the most recent academic research by the University of Strathclyde; Mr Brownlee can defend Malcolm Rifkind's past actions. We all remember that the council tax was introduced by the same people who introduced the poll tax. I am not sure how many of the 88 per cent of Scots who are in favour of scrapping council tax and moving to a fairer, income-based tax are in the Labour Party but, given that Jack McConnell and Gordon Brown have previously called for the introduction of such a tax, there may be more than we think. It is a shame that party politics prevents the progressive elements in the Labour Party from speaking out in favour of progressive taxation. The reason why the local income tax is so popular is that, as well as being fundamentally fairer, it will leave the majority of Scottish households better off, as we heard from the cabinet secretary. We have heard Labour's made- up costs for LIT, which fail to take into account the SNP Government's commitment to deliver the biggest tax cut in a generation, and have read about the Tories' fantasy families. I will talk about some real-life scenarios in my constituency. A single mother who lives in a band C rented house and works full time as a cleaner will be £35 a month better off when the council tax is replaced with a local income tax set at 3 per cent. That £35 assumes that she claims all the benefits to which she is entitled under the current system, even though we know that many people who are entitled to council tax benefit do not receive it in spite of campaigns by local authorities and anti-poverty groups. We could also consider the police officer whose partner works for the council. They have a joint income of £40,000, live in a band D property and would pocket an LIT saving of £337 a year on what they pay under Dundee's council tax. That is after we have frozen the council tax—we can only speculate what the difference would be if we did not have an SNP Government.

I thank Margo MacDonald for that point, because I came across such a family in Dundee. During the election campaign, I was quite surprised to come across one family who lived in a former council house and would pay more. They showed me that they would pay more, but they said that that was okay because their grannie and mother would pay less. The most vulnerable people in society will pay less, so they were happy to pay a tiny bit more. Other people in Dundee would pay a little bit more, myself included. However, that is the result of a fairer system. For example, I would pay an extra £55 a month as a result of a local income tax, but that is less than 1.5 per cent of my salary as an MSP, which is a small price to pay to remove the crippling chains of the council tax.

Today's debate is another clear sign that the SNP Government is delivering for the people of Scotland. In under a year, the Government has established a new relationship with Scotland's 32 local authorities and given them more powers to make decisions at local level through the historic concordat. We have put an end to the years of council tax increases that took place under the previous Administration by freezing the tax. In doing so, we have set Scotland on the road to a fairer system of taxation that is based on the ability to pay. As usual, the financial experts on the Labour benches have been vocal in the debate. However, we will take no lessons on local government finance from the Labour Party—a party that proposed a ludicrous council tax rebanding policy during the election that even its own candidates did not believe added up; a party that bizarrely voted against the Scottish Government's budget after its own amendment had been accepted; and a party that presided over a disgraceful 62 per cent rise in council tax.  Let us not forget the secret implication of Labour's plans to tinker with the council tax. It is the implication that dare not speak its name, which will terrify council tax payers throughout Scotland—revaluation. I am happy to take an intervention from any Labour member who wants to explain their policy on revaluation—but there is silence, as expected. The fact is that if there are any changes to the bands, there must be a revaluation, and revaluation in Wales resulted in a third of homes going up at least one band and only 8 per cent going down. In my constituency, moving up one band from band D to band E would cost people £350. That would be the cost of Labour's proposed revaluation; no wonder the Labour Party will not talk about the implications of its policy of tinkering with the council tax. As the cabinet secretary stated, we have entered a new era of co-operation with local authorities, which benefits the people of Scotland by offering increased funding and increased control over how that money will be spent locally, but without any increase in council tax.

I would be pleased to take an intervention if the member will talk about Labour's revaluation policy.

No, no, no.

I am not going to—

Sorry.

Not if he is not prepared to talk about—

No. I have made it clear that I will take an intervention from any Labour member who is prepared to stand up and talk about the implications of Labour's council tax policy, but not one of them has the guts to do that.

On revaluation.

Mr McAveety did not answer the question. Our Government is getting rid of the council tax altogether, which means that there is no need for revaluation. Only if we kept the council tax would we need a revaluation, which would put a third of houses up by at least one band. That would cost £350 in Dundee, probably more in Aberdeen and about the same throughout the rest of Scotland. We have heard Labour claim that the council tax is fine, but clearly it is not. Council tax benefit fails to address the major flaws in that form of taxation. Figures that were published by the UK Government show that 150,000 pensioners in Scotland who are eligible for council tax benefit—almost 40 per cent—do not claim. That is clear proof that we need a new approach. Those pensioners will benefit disproportionately from the introduction of a fair local income tax that is based on the ability to pay, and they will benefit most from the council tax freeze in terms of the proportion of their income that the tax constitutes. The Labour Party is not interested in such figures. It is blinded by its opposition to all progressive policy from the SNP Government and would rather snipe from the sidelines without offering any credible alternative.

I am in my last 30 seconds. The arguments that we have heard today from the old Lib-Lab alliance are lacklustre and offer nothing for the average Scot. For the Scottish public, the situation could not be clearer. Under Labour, there has been a rise of 62 per cent in the council tax; under the SNP Government, they will pay not a penny more in council tax and they have a commitment to a cut in the tax burden for those who need it most, based on the ability to pay.

Does the member support the council tax freeze in Aberdeen or does he believe that the £27 million shortfall should be made up by a £356 rise in the council tax?

To ask the First Minister what impact the UK budget is expected to have on Scottish industry. (S3F-595)

Does the First Minister agree that the chancellor missed a vital opportunity to back Scottish business by failing to end the system of fuel duty rises and introduce a fuel price regulator to stabilise prices for Scottish industry?

The motion proposes a local tax rebate. I understand  the sentiment behind that, because anything that we can do to encourage more people to introduce energy efficiency measures and renewable energy sources must be welcomed. However, in effect, the proposal is for a £100 grant. Do members really think that giving a £100 grant will encourage people to spend £3,000 on a solar energy installation on their roof? I do not think so.

I support grants for renewables, but if we introduced that small £100 grant, the money would have to come from somewhere, and it might come from the more reasonable grants that can pay for a third of the cost of solar installations, which makes a difference. If there is a pot of money that we have not tapped into—some of the profits that the energy companies make could be used to provide more investment—grants for cavity wall insulation, which Jamie McGrigor mentioned, would have a much bigger impact. We should consider what more can be done to ensure that no houses in Scotland have cavity walls that are not insulated, as that is probably the easiest measure that we can take to have a big impact on fuel poverty and our CO 2 emissions. It is a sad state of affairs when we must debate fuel poverty in Europe's most energy-rich nation. Scotland produces 10 times more oil and five times more gas than it consumes. We export 20 per cent of our electricity and have huge renewable resources, with 25 per cent of Europe's wind resources and about a quarter of Europe's tidal resources. We know that we face challenges in tapping into that huge renewable resource, but members are up for that challenge. Despite the abundance of energy resources in Scotland, pensioners still die from cold and more than 1 million Scots live in fuel poverty. We all remember the massive price rises a couple of years ago that resulted in fuel bills rocketing. The reason for those huge increases was that the UK had become a net importer of gas, with about 5 per cent coming from overseas, despite the fact that Scotland is a net exporter. Scotland produces at least five times as much gas as the country uses, but a quarter of our households are fuel poor. That is the reality of the union dividend for the people of Scotland. The previous Administration made a worthy effort to tackle fuel poverty—we must give credit where credit is due. The central heating programme made and still makes a big difference  to households throughout Scotland. However, as we have heard from other members, as fast as some people are being pulled out of fuel poverty, more people are becoming fuel poor as a result of rocketing prices. The Parliament lacks resources to combat fuel poverty, the rate of which is three times that in England. We need power over regulation of the energy industry and control over Scotland's oil and gas to make a real difference to the hundreds of thousands of Scots who cannot afford to heat their homes. Communities throughout Scotland hoped for strong action from the chancellor in yesterday's budget to ensure that energy companies put some of the huge profits that they make back into combating fuel poverty. The chancellor is not one for exciting speeches, and his announcement that energy companies will be encouraged to spend £150 million on social tariffs fell flat. Figures from energywatch show that the 5 million customers who have prepayment meters in the UK pay on average £255 more than consumers who pay online by direct debit for the equivalent energy. That tax on the poorest in our country means that energy companies rake in an extra £1.2 billion per year. On the one hand, the chancellor talks about the energy companies spending £150 million, but we should compare that with the £1.2 billion a year that those companies make from the poorest energy users in society—it does not add up. The non-mandatory extra £150 million that the chancellor wants energy companies to put towards social tariffs is a drop in the ocean compared with the profits that those companies make. The budget attempts to tackle fuel poverty, but it fails to address the key underlying factor in the rise in fuel poverty, which is the high prices that energy companies charge people, particularly those who have prepayment meters. Colleagues have shown their willingness to tackle the blight of fuel poverty. I agree with the majority of Liam McArthur's comments. However, the simplest way to combat fuel poverty is surely to take control of our huge energy resources and to ensure that the people of Scotland benefit from them—that would put an end to fuel poverty once and for all.

The First Minister will be aware that, on Tuesday, Texol Technical Solutions in Dundee announced 85 redundancies. I am sure that the First Minister will agree that our first priority must be to ensure the rapid re-employment of those who face redundancy. Will he ensure that Dundee gets the  Scottish Government's full support to develop a forward-thinking economic and enterprise strategy?

Clarity is required as to whether Mr Foulkes's attack on Scotland's media is official Labour Party policy. That was a disgraceful attack on our independent press. I welcome Jackie Baillie's kind acknowledgement that the SNP Government is "modern and progressive". That is exactly the view that is held by civic Scotland, as it engages with the most dedicated, dynamic and hard-working team of ministers that Scotland has seen in living history. The most common description of their approach to government, which I often hear from the most unlikely quarters, is that it is a "breath of fresh air". In recent parliamentary questions, and in today's debate, Jackie Baillie has been calling on the Scottish Government "to adopt the approach taken by ... Gordon Brown ... to have an independent adviser to investigate breaches of the Scottish Ministerial Code to ensure a culture of openness and transparency in government"— [ Official Report , Written Answers, 3 December 2007; S3W-6779.]  Ms Baillie has outlined why, in her opinion, we are in dire need of the apparently much more accountable Westminster system. We must be careful with the presentation of the Westminster system as some kind of gold standard. Labour has a tendency to exaggerate. Examples include the claim of being 15 minutes away from attack with weapons of mass destruction; the bonfire of the quangos; "Education, education, education"; and "Things can only get better". Today, we have heard more exaggerations from the Labour Party, as its members try to pass off the current Westminster system as open, transparent and independent, whereas it is none of the above. In 2006, three years after the Committee on Standards in Public Life called for an independent adviser on ministerial interests, and in a last-ditch attempt to appease the public over the cash for honours scandal, Sir John Bourn was appointed to provide confidential advice to ministers and to conduct investigations at the request of the Prime Minister. The independent adviser must be asked  by the Prime Minister to investigate the facts of a case. If there has been a breach of the ministerial code, the decision on whether to publish the results of the investigation and on what action should be taken remains solely with Gordon Brown.

The Conservative amendment provides the best way forward, with the most appropriate system for the Parliament. That amendment is to be commended. I hope that all members can rally round it and that we can all agree on something that clearly firms up the ministerial code. Back to Westminster. The appointment of the independent adviser is made by the Prime Minister, without whose explicit consent the adviser cannot investigate. When they are allowed to carry out an investigation, they cannot publish their findings without the Prime Minister's say-so. To top it all, the first independent adviser had to stand down after it emerged that, over three years, he had taken his wife on 22 overseas visits, including a week-long stay in the Bahamas—first class all the way—at the taxpayer's expense. The hypocrisy of the Labour Party has reached new heights today, with former ministers such as Jackie Baillie calling for a change to the ministerial code only after they have been kicked out of office. It was good enough for Labour ministers, so why not ours?

I will tell Jackie Baillie why it is not good enough for our ministers: it is because our ministers have a higher standard. That is why we are reviewing the code. It is to make the system more transparent and to get away from the opaqueness of the former Administration.

It is primarily the Labour Party that is responsible for the poor public image that elected members have today. The last three leaders of the Scottish Labour Party have all been accused of breaching parliamentary regulations. One resigned over financial irregularities; one was cleared after the Red Rose dinners scandal in 2002; and let us not forget that the current incumbent admitted breaking the law—but only a little bit, and not enough to face criminal charges.  We must not forget that we recently witnessed a serving Prime Minister being questioned, for the first time ever, by police conducting a criminal investigation. In its short time in office, the SNP has shown itself to be open and accountable, in stark contrast to the previous Administration. We will take no lessons from the sleaze-ridden Labour Party, and we are committed not to adopting the flawed Westminster style of government that Jackie Baillie is calling for but to improving the current ministerial code to ensure the highest standards in our Government and to protect the public in the increasingly unlikely event of the Labour Party ever returning to office.

To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has to improve housing for veterans in Dundee. (S3O-2278)

For some time now I have been working to get appropriate housing for my constituent Sandy Gibson, who was left medically  disabled when he was badly injured on a live firing exercise while serving with the Scots Guards. Because his health has deteriorated, he is now, in effect, trapped in his home. Dundee City Council has been unable to find appropriate housing for Mr Gibson since he first applied in October 2004. I ask the minister to look into the case and consider whether the Scottish Government can do anything to help Mr Gibson and other veterans in similar circumstances.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I welcome this opportunity to take part in the debate. We are nearing the end of the most open and transparent budget process in the Scottish Parliament's history. We have a minority Government for the first time, and the Parliament as a whole must endorse our budget proposals. The previous Administration did not need to listen to Parliament—indeed, there have been times over the past three months when I and, I am sure, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth wished that we did not need to do so—but a minority Government must listen to views from across the chamber, and that must be good for democracy. The cabinet secretary has led the way with the new approach to government. The budget and the amendments testify to the fact that he has listened to views from across the chamber. The Labour Party has learned to its cost that a party will be unable to achieve anything in a Parliament of minorities unless it secures the backing of other parties. Its inability to take on board the views of anyone else resulted in its isolation on the Finance Committee and at stage 1 of the bill, when it failed to secure the support of any other parties for its amendments. However, the SNP Government has listened. I hope that the work that John Swinney has done to take on board the views of other parties will result in the budget and the proposed amendments receiving support throughout the chamber.  A budget has never before been debated as much. Communities have never before scrutinised a budget to the extent that they have, the media have never taken such an interest in a budget and the public have never known as clearly how they will be affected by the decisions that we make today.

That is further scaremongering. I said that the public have never taken such a great interest in a budget. The member should pay attention, please. If the budget is not passed, the public will know who is to blame for the impact on public services and investment throughout Scotland. One of the clearest consequences for the public of our not passing the bill will be a huge rise in council taxes for Scottish households. Massive council tax increases are inevitable if the budget is not passed today: councils will not receive any increases on last year's budgets so, if front-line services are to be protected, they will have to raise the difference through a council tax increase of around 22 per cent. That will be a 22 per cent increase on every bill, which could mean a rise of £350 for a band D property in Dundee. The SNP Government is providing in the budget the resources to deliver on our manifesto commitment to freeze the council tax. The Labour Party said on page 99 of its manifesto: "we will work with colleagues in local government to keep Council Tax increases low." In its document on its agenda for 2007, the Labour Party went further. It said: "Every Labour Council Leader in Scotland will today rule out introducing council tax rises above inflation for the next four years." If Labour fails to support the budget today, the 60 per cent council tax increase under the previous Government will pale into insignificance. Rather than working with local government to keep council tax rises below inflation, Labour members will be voting for the highest rise since the council tax was introduced. The budget will not pass without the support of Opposition members. If it is not passed, the Parliament will have failed the people of Scotland. The cabinet secretary has listened and addressed many of the Opposition's concerns in the amendments and in his statements. It is now up to  the Opposition parties to raise their game and rise to the challenge. I commend the budget and the amendments to members.

Will the member take an intervention?

I welcome this debate on an issue that is of great importance to all members, although I was amazed to hear, in Mr Whitton's speech, a Labour MSP arguing against the removal of prescription charges and the freezing of council tax, and in favour of more means testing. If Mr Whitton went out to speak to working-class people in his or any other constituency, he would quickly find out that the people of Scotland want the council tax to be frozen, prescription charges to be abolished and the council tax to be removed altogether.

If those are the answers that Mr Whitton is getting in his constituency, perhaps he is being selective in whom he speaks to. Perhaps that is why Labour did so poorly in the election. The importance that the Government places on tackling poverty can be seen clearly in its actions during its first eight months in office. A free school meals pilot, the scrapping of prescription charges, the council tax freeze and commitment to introducing a local income tax, a 19 per cent rise in spending on affordable housing, and a ministerial task force on health inequalities are just a few examples that show that the SNP Government takes the issue of poverty seriously.  As well as congratulating the SNP Government, I acknowledge the work of the previous Administration. The fight against poverty is far too important for us to allow narrow party-political interests to come in the way of progress. That is why the SNP supported most of the previous Executive's anti-poverty measures. It is disappointing that only one part of that previous Executive has come to today's debate with constructive arguments on how to tackle poverty. As we have heard, the situation in Scotland is not getting any better for those at the lower end of the income spectrum. Let there be no doubt that there is still a serious problem in Scotland with poverty. Dundee is a much-changed city—members have heard me extol the virtues of the growing science, technology and digital media sectors—but the blight of poverty remains. Levels of child poverty in Dundee are twice the national average, and 20,000 people live in what are classed as severely income-deprived households. The situation is bad and, in spite of efforts, it has not been getting much better. Figures provided by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation show that the number of children in Scotland in low-income households did not change between 1997 and 2006. That is in contrast with the rest of Britain, where the number declined. Barnardo's, the Child Poverty Action Group, Save the Children and the Poverty Alliance all argue that the main areas of focus for targeting child poverty should be to support parents into work and help them to remain there, and to increase the uptake of benefits and tax credit. While those policy areas remain under the control of Westminster, we will continue to work with one hand tied behind our back. Scotland's priorities are not the priorities of the UK and will inevitably be ignored by Westminster.

I think that the decision should be made by this Parliament. Scotland's priorities are not the priorities of the UK and will inevitably be ignored by Westminster. The contrast is perhaps best demonstrated by comparing the tax policies of the Scottish and UK Administrations. On the one hand, our SNP Government is determined to scrap the unfair council tax in favour of a system that takes into account people's incomes. That is a progressive tax change. On the other hand, Gordon Brown and  London Labour have abolished the 10p tax rate. That is a regressive tax change. One policy will remove a heavy burden from low-income families; the other will see the poor subsidising the rich. Margaret Curran's amendment refers to the needs of the poorest households and to social justice. It is plain to see which of those two approaches to tax meets her criteria—and it is not Gordon Brown's. As long as Westminster panders to middle England, the most vulnerable in our society will be ignored. Scotland is faced with problems for which we need Scottish solutions. I had hoped to touch on disability poverty, which has been championed by Leonard Cheshire Disability. Its recent report paints a damning picture of disability poverty in Scotland, with people twice as likely to live in poverty if they happen to be disabled. We cannot accept that that situation should continue. Over the past 10 years, the issue of disability poverty has been marginalised. In the case of disability poverty, instead of "Things can only get better", things have got worse. Figures show that, whereas 80 per cent of non-disabled Scots are in employment, only 48 per cent of disabled people are in employment. That is not because disabled Scots are less likely to want to work, as only a tiny number of disabled people are unable to work. That issue needs to be challenged, and it needs to be challenged soon.

This debate has highlighted the contrasts between an  SNP Government that is determined to deliver its positive vision for Scotland and a Labour Opposition that is confining itself to negative carping from the sidelines and is bereft of ideas. We have heard from members about the impact of some of the cuts that Labour would have made throughout Scotland had it gained support for its budget amendments. Having failed to gain the support of any other party in the Finance Committee for its package of cuts, Labour has now brought forward an uncosted amendment, which asks the cabinet secretary, John Swinney, to do the sums for it. However, in lodging its uncosted amendment—which, without saying how, seeks to change, as we have heard, about 1 per cent of the budget—the Labour Party has eaten humble pie and accepted 99 per cent of the SNP Government's proposals. That dramatic turnaround is to be welcomed. It is also welcome that the Labour Party in the Scottish Parliament appears to have come some way and has finally caught up with Pat Watters and other Labour council leaders across Scotland. Its amendment does not seek to challenge the historic concordat between the Scottish Government and Scotland's local authorities. The concordat will reduce bureaucratic reporting and will allow more resources to be directed to front-line services, to be used to protect Scotland's most vulnerable citizens instead of time and money being wasted on ticking boxes and form filling. I am delighted that Iain Gray listened to the comments that Tom McCabe made at the meeting of Parliament on 13 December in support of the Government's move to single outcome agreements, which will ensure that we are delivering for Scotland and not just spending Scotland's money. The concordat represents a seismic change in how Scotland is governed. To give credit where it is due, I congratulate the Labour Party and, in particular, Tom McCabe, who has gone some way in persuading the Labour Party to listen to the debate and not to oppose that important change in its amendment. I am pleased that many important measures in the first SNP budget—the abolition of prescription charges, the removal of tolls from the Tay and Forth bridges, the provision of the funds to allow Scotland's local authorities to freeze the council tax, the restoration of free education with abolition of the graduate endowment fee and the transition from loans to grants, and the removal or reduction of business rates for about 150,000 small businesses throughout Scotland—are not being challenged by any of the amendments, despite Labour having opposed them in the past. Even today, we have heard arguments against some of those measures, but it is welcome that Labour's amendment does not challenge any of them.  Those are some of the matters on which Labour's public opposition to the SNP's proposals has disappeared as it has listened to and been persuaded by argument, to the extent that today, as has been said, the Labour amendment contests only 1 per cent while supporting 99 per cent of the Scottish Government's budget. Most of what I have covered so far are issues on which there was once disagreement, but there now appears to be some form of consensus—or at least a lack of opposition. I will move on to a matter on which there has always been a considerable degree of cross-party agreement: the environment. There is no doubt that this is the greenest budget Scotland has ever seen, with £154 million being invested to take Scotland closer to becoming a zero-waste society, £127 million for flood defences, £45 million for new woodland, £30 million for a new sustainable development and climate change fund, £2.8 billion for public transport, a £2 million saltire prize to inspire innovation in renewable energy and the tripling of funding for community and microrenewables. The degree of consensus on those issues is highly significant and places Parliament in a position to be a world leader in tackling global warming. Although the consensus on those important issues is to be welcomed, it means that much of the debate on green matters goes unreported. One such debate came about as a result of the Finance Committee's decision to focus part of its budget scrutiny on sustainability—a highly significant decision, which I think went unreported outwith Parliament. The committee had an interesting and informative question-and-answer session with some eminent experts, including Dr Dan Barlow, who is in the public gallery. That was a positive step. Although the experts recognised that the budget goes some of the way, concern was expressed that it was difficult to determine how each budget line would help sustainability. I am sure that Dr Barlow will have been delighted to hear the cabinet secretary's commitment to bring in carbon accounting by 2009-10. It is imperative that we take that step forward if we are going to make a difference.

We must consider the context of today's debate, which is that almost every environmentalist throughout the globe accepts that our planet is at risk from global warming. That is, every environmentalist except for the one we just heard about—Patrick Moore—who does not accept that global warming is happening. If he is the one person who members use to justify nuclear power stations, the argument speaks for itself.

No. It will not surprise members that I will highlight some of the contributions made to Scotland's energy needs by Dundee. I remind members of the twin 2MW turbines that are generating about one third of the energy needed by the Michelin tyre factory in Dundee. As two of the largest urban wind turbines in the world, they are a positive reminder of what can be achieved when there is a will. I encourage members to find time to visit Dundee to see the turbines for themselves. As well as helping to reduce Dundee's carbon footprint, the turbines have shown how the technology has improved to such an extent that many fears, such as fears of noise pollution, are no longer relevant—even when we are talking about large turbines very close to housing. I am sure that members will also be aware that Dundee is the sunniest city in Scotland—that is a fact. With a south-facing aspect, Dundee is in a position to make the most from solar energy, although it is a technology that is appropriate for other parts of Scotland as well. Solar energy—specifically solar water heating—is the most mature renewable energy, with the shortest payback time, that people can install in their homes. It is ideally suited to many urban settings and can be retrofitted to existing homes. However, in spite of a well-proven technology that can be shown to be financially advantageous to many, we are still harnessing only a tiny fraction of our solar potential in our cities and rural communities. Traditionally, solar installations in Scotland have been exclusive to a very small, environmentally conscious, relatively affluent minority, but we have moved on in recent years. The majority of solar installations in Dundee have been in social housing, with housing associations and the council including solar renewables projects as part of new-build housing and reroofing projects. That has had an impact in tackling fuel poverty in some of the  poorest areas in Dundee, and I congratulate all those who were involved in making it happen. I know that Sarah Boyack was instrumental in the previous Executive, and I give her credit for the work that she did. The housing associations and councils did not carry out solar energy projects just because Sarah Boyack and environmentalists said that it was a good idea. They installed the systems after rigorous cost analysis indicated that the schemes were financially beneficial as well as environmentally sound. We have made considerable progress in Dundee, and we are making progress throughout Scotland, but we are still tapping only a tiny proportion of our solar potential. The main problem with solar energy is its seasonality and dependence on the time of day, so I want to talk briefly about another form of solar energy, which is my main source of heating—wood. Wood is stored solar energy, and the burning of it is carbon neutral. The problem that I faced in choosing to use wood instead of gas for my space heating was that Dundee is a smokeless zone. The legislation has failed to keep up with technology. I am pleased that considerable progress has been made on that front, and I again acknowledge the work of Sarah Boyack during the previous parliamentary session. However, it cannot be right that our legislation still makes it easier to burn mineral fuel oil than use a clean-burn carbon-neutral wood fuel. As has been mentioned by many members, Scotland has huge renewable energy potential. Each year, new developments are ensuring that Scotland moves closer to claiming the title of Europe's renewables powerhouse. One such innovation is creating biofuel from seaweed. The Scottish Association for Marine Science is currently working on converting kelp into methane and ethanol to provide clean green energy to power everything from cars to central heating systems. The SAMS marine laboratory near Oban is at the forefront of the emerging marine biology industry in Scotland, with 60 doctors of science researching both global warming and potential sources for renewable biofuel energies. Some members may be sceptical, but using seaweed for energy is a viable option, and as long as it is not taken from the beaches around Scotland's nuclear power stations, it is a very clean fuel. In Japan, scientists are currently working on a biomass fermentation system that uses seaweed to produce fuel for generating electricity, and work to create the world's first power plant to run off seaweed has begun.  There are several advantages to using seaweed as a source of fuel. First is the growth speed: seaweed can grow from a few centimetres to a few metres in a season. With Scotland home to the majority of large kelp in the UK, we have huge potential to produce methane and ethanol for use as a biofuel. Another advantage of using seaweed is that it does not use land for biocrops—it involves harvesting from the shores and seas. Great concerns have been voiced that cultivating some soils can result in the release of carbon, meaning that the overall carbon balance of the fuel may not be neutral. That is especially significant in the carbon-rich soils to be found in north and west Scotland. Again, that problem is avoided by the use of seaweed. Members will be aware of the issues surrounding palm oil and the associated deforestation. The use of seaweed has the potential to ensure that we are not reliant on imports to meet our biofuel targets, and I look forward to seeing the results of the SAMS research in the months to come. I have touched on just a few of the areas in which Scotland is embracing renewables, and it is clear for all to see—with the exception perhaps of some Labour and Conservative members—that Scotland is on the way to becoming Europe's renewables powerhouse and that nuclear energy is a thing of the past.

I welcome the opportunity that is provided by today's debate, because it clearly highlights the difference between a Government that is delivering and an Opposition that is just going through the motions. We have heard a lot of scaremongering from Labour members regarding ring fencing. Despite reassurances from the COSLA president—the Labour councillor Pat Watters—that ending ring fencing will enable local authorities to deliver services better to the most vulnerable groups, the Labour Party persists with its misguided attacks. "We know that effective service delivery for families and communities cannot come from central command and control but requires local initiative and accountability. For all the time I have been involved in politics I have believed in devolving power, so that those who are affected by the decisions are close to and can hold accountable those who make the decisions—and our aim must always be the maximum devolution of power possible: government encouraging not stifling local action, local people making local decisions about local needs ... the goals we share cannot be realised in practice without central government devolving power to local communities" and that is why this Government is committed to "reductions in ring fencing of revenue from central government". I should have said that in a Fife accent, because those are not my words, but the words of the then Chancellor of the Exchequer, Gordon Brown, in a speech to the Local Government Association general assembly in 2001.

I would have to check the specifics, but I am sure the cabinet secretary will look at that—later, perhaps. We have heard derogatory comments about the historic concordat that the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth, John Swinney, has made with Scotland's local authorities, particularly from Iain Gray, who has left the chamber. Yet when the Labour Secretary of State for Communities and Local Government, Hazel Blears, signed a similar concordat with local authorities in England last month, she stated:  "The historic shift outlined today will help unleash the potential of local communities, giving them new freedoms in delivering what local people want. For local authorities, it promises the progressive removal of obstacles that prevent them from pursuing their role." The United Kingdom 2007 comprehensive spending review clearly supports the reduction in ring fencing, and the UK Government has established a presumption against ring fencing in local authority spending. So to recap—we have the Labour leader in favour of scrapping ring fencing and the Labour Secretary of State for Communities and Local Government enthusiastically signing up to greater financial freedom for local authorities. Labour councillors throughout Scotland also support the reduction in ring fencing, and Scottish Labour MSPs appear to be the only ones who disagree. That has, however, not always been the case, as we heard from Christina McKelvie earlier. In the past, Labour MSPs have been clear about their support for the removal of ring fencing, and today their UK counterparts are enthusiastically moving towards financial freedom for local authorities. Today's debate has seen Labour members at their most petty, as they have failed to grasp the issues and ignored the reassurances of Pat Watters and COSLA. They have failed to read the concordat, which clearly states the outcomes that are expected of local authorities in relation to vulnerable groups. Their message is clear: the removal of ring fencing is acceptable as long as it is proposed by Labour politicians. One thing that is evident from today's debate and from Labour members' response over the past couple of months to the budget is their inability to give credit where credit is due. The SNP has produced a budget that will benefit the whole of Scotland, and although we do not expect Opposition parties to agree with everything in the spending review, I would have hoped that they could put party politics aside in the areas that clearly aim to improve the lives of Scots. One such area is the commitment in the budget to delivering a healthier Scotland. In Labour's manifesto, the party called for action on tackling health inequalities in areas of multiple deprivations. That is a laudable aim, and when the spending review announced that there would be a particular focus on the areas and communities with the worst health records, with an extra £12.5 million pounds a year to strengthen primary health care in the most deprived areas, it seemed that Labour would welcome such a commitment. However, we have learned during the Labour Party's time in opposition that its members look not at the delivery of the policy, but at the party that is proposing it. For the benefit of Labour members, I remind them of what the spending  review will deliver for the health and well-being of all our communities. It will deliver £350 million of new money for health improvements and better public health, including £85 million to reduce harm done by alcohol, £3 million a year for further action to reduce smoking and £11.5 million a year to prevent obesity. There is £270 million allocated to ensure that, by the end of 2011, nobody will wait longer than 18 weeks from a general practitioner's referral to treatment for routine conditions and £30 million to ensure more flexible access to primary care. Most important, there is £97 million to phase out prescription charges to ensure that sick people are not financially disadvantaged. I would have loved to be a fly on the wall at the Labour group meeting when members were told that they would be voting against the scrapping of prescription charges. Any pretensions that the Labour Party had to represent the working Scots were lost forever on the day that it decided to vote in favour of a tax on ill health, which is what prescription charges are. The Labour Party failed to listen to the people of Scotland and it paid the price at the ballot box. From what we have learned in today's debate, its members are still a long way off learning their lesson.

Do the Liberal Democrats support the council tax freeze throughout Scotland?

I welcome the cabinet secretary's confirmation that, in spite of all the scaremongering that we have heard from the Opposition, the rolled-up moneys have not disappeared from the settlement. I seek clarification on one of the areas in which moneys have been rolled up. I think that the cabinet secretary has been clear on the matter but, for the avoidance of doubt, can he confirm that the money that would have been available to Scotland's cities had the cities growth fund remained ring fenced will continue to be available to Scotland's cities? How will that money be allocated?

To ask the First Minister what discussions Scottish ministers have had with the United Kingdom Government concerning the development of offshore wind projects. (S3F-371)

Given that a significant proportion of the UK's potential offshore wind, wave and tidal capacity is in Scottish waters, what steps will the Government take to ensure that the discriminatory connection charge regime comes to an end, thereby enabling Scotland to benefit fully from our huge renewable energy resource?

I agree with the minister that the environment plays an important role in ensuring good health among our constituents. That is equally true in rural and urban constituencies. Members will not be surprised that, as I am an MSP for an urban constituency, I think that green space and woodland are most valued in urban areas. I grew up on the Dundee housing estate of Whitfield, which is in the constituency of my colleague Shona Robison. It was known in the citizens band radio community as the concrete jungle—a place where green space had been given little, if any, regard in early planning. I am pleased that we have learned much from the mistakes of the past and that describing Whitfield as a concrete jungle now would be wrong. We have a much greener new Whitfield. The importance to health of access to good-quality green space cannot be overestimated. Not just physical health, but mental health can benefit from green space. Green space is of great benefit to people who live in cities such as Dundee. Evidence is emerging that access to high-quality green space can reduce stress, provide an opportunity for physical activity and build community spirit. Deryck Irving, who is the senior development officer for Greenspace Scotland, has said:  "Research has shown that access to appropriate, good quality greenspace can have a positive impact on both mental and physical health. Equally, a lack of access to such greenspace can have a negative impact on mental and physical health and well-being." In 1980, 12 per cent of Scotland was covered by woodland. By 2006, that figure had risen to 17 per cent. The aim is to increase that to 25 per cent, which will result in an additional 650,000 hectares of woodland throughout Scotland. I am sure that we all agree that we should aim to travel in that direction, but the placement of our new woodland must be well thought out. The Royal Society for the Protection of Birds has expressed concerns about that and has stressed the importance of developing new woodland, because inappropriately locating new woodland can damage wildlife. I seek reassurance from the minister that careful planning will be involved in aiming to achieve the target of increasing forestation so that it covers 25 per cent of Scotland. A number of green space projects in Dundee have enjoyed success. The Baxter park restoration project, for example, revamped and cleaned up that park and installed urban rangers to engage with the public, and the Middleton community woodland project in my old ward has created a community woodland on an area of land adjacent to the Whitfield housing estate. That project has been successful in engaging young people from Braeview academy, local youth groups and community organisations. One of the most successful projects in my constituency of Dundee West has been in Ardler—I refer to the Ardler in bloom project and the Ardler Environmental Group. In 2004, when the Ardler estate was newly finished, a local gardening competition was set up to encourage residents to grow their own plants and take pride in the environment. Many residents of the new village of Ardler had moved from multistorey flats that were demolished, so they had no experience of owning their own garden. The project supported those residents in their new gardens, and it has continued. The Ardler Environmental Group, which has also been supported by the urban ranger project, was established with the aim of making the area more attractive to wildlife and local communities. The people involved in such projects played a large part in Ardler estate winning a British Urban Regeneration Association award for best practice in regeneration in 2006 and the Queen's award for voluntary service this year. Good-quality green space can be the cornerstone of the economy. Last month, I spoke about Camperdown country park, which is Dundee's top attraction. It has 400,000 visitors every year and is home to the Camperdown elm  and Scotland's last city-based red squirrel population. It is a huge asset to the people of Dundee. In 2006, it managed to play host to Radio 1's big weekend festival. It has been estimated that that festival boosted the local economy to the tune of around £10 million. All our constituents would benefit much from improved access to green space and woodland. There should be a holistic approach to community regeneration, as there has been in Dundee, with green spaces properly planned. I urge members to support the motion.

I welcome today's debate, not least for the opportunity to talk about some of Dundee's top tourist attractions. I was up all night thinking about how I was going to do that, but it struck me over coffee this morning that I should just welcome the debate. As the new signage at Scotland's airports shows, the simplest words are sometimes the most appropriate. That is the case in welcoming people to Scotland, which is what we are trying to do with the signs. That is the correct way in which to do it. Liam McArthur talked about the cost of coming up with the signage—it seemed an awful lot of money for the three words "Welcome to Scotland"—but the words are attached to images and we who are in politics are well aware that, whether in the media or in the leaflets that we produce, a picture is worth a thousand words. In those terms, the signage is extremely good value for money.

I absolutely agree that there is an issue in terms of lowland Scots. We should argue for lowland Scots to be used more in the appropriate places. I hope that we can all agree on that, and I hope that the Government might take that forward. As has been mentioned, tourism is extremely important to the economy of Scotland. Dundee is no exception to that. Each year, 780,000 tourists visit the greater Dundee area, contributing £130 million to the economy. Tourism now accounts for about 7 per cent of employment in Dundee. The figure has risen recently, with the demise of Dundee's traditional manufacturing base. As we aim for a 50 per cent real-terms increase in tourism throughout Scotland by 2015, that figure is expected to grow.  Dundee was a city of jute, jam and journalism, but in the 21 st century it is evolving into a vibrant, cosmopolitan destination that tourists from Scotland and further afield enjoy. The funding that is being provided by our SNP Government—which we have heard is £90 million in this year alone—will help Dundee to grow as a destination for tourists. Dundee, the city of discovery, has Captain Scott's Antarctic expedition ship at the award-winning Discovery Point and Europe's top industrial museum, the Verdant Works. It is important that Dundee has managed to tap into its industrial past as part of its tourism future. Those two attractions are good examples of that. We also have the McManus galleries, which is undergoing extensive refurbishment. It holds an art collection that is of international as well as of local importance, and I look forward to more visitors coming to Dundee to see it. Dundee is also the home of the Scottish Dance Theatre and hosts annual jazz and blues festivals. DC Thompson & Co's classics the The Dandy and "The Broons" also hail from Dundee. Dundee is developing a new image that is far removed from the run-down view that was often incorrectly associated with the city in the past. One of the most important new developments is the waterfront project. The SNP budget provides the funding to allow Dundee to complete the vital infrastructure for the central waterfront project. The waterfront project is central to the new image that Dundee will portray to its inhabitants and to the world, and the visionary project will benefit the whole of Tayside. Revamping the waterfront can boost the economy and attract tourists, as has happened in Edinburgh and Glasgow. However, as impressive as the waterfront project will be, our best tourist attractions are our natural ones. It would be wrong not to mention the beautiful Angus glens and rural Perthshire, which Dundee finds itself nestled beside. The importance of green spaces as a draw for tourists is demonstrated by Dundee's top attraction, Camperdown country park, which in 2006 welcomed almost 400,000 visitors. I hope that the new regionally focused VisitScotland will ensure that we continue to invest in such areas to maintain popular outdoor sites. Another major boost to tourism in the area has been delivered with the first bill of the SNP Government, which will abolish tolls on the Tay bridge. The reduction in congestion when the tolls are removed can only encourage tourists to visit the area. We want to encourage as many commuters as possible to use public transport; however, it is safe to say that all parties in Dundee—right across the political spectrum—are keen for our city to retain its reputation as a car- friendly city. Removal of the tolls will do more than that; it will also make Dundee more welcoming to tourists in buses and will increase the niche tourist market of cyclists, who currently find Dundee city centre a nightmare to navigate when the toll congestion is at its worst. We have heard a lot today about the year of homecoming and the celebrations to mark the 250th anniversary of our national bard's birth. Given the fact that Dundee is associated with Scotland's second-best—or, at least, second-best known—poet, William McGonagall, we should have a large part to play in the celebrations. Evidence can be found across the globe of Dundonians who have emigrated. We see that in financial institutions such as the Dundee Bank of Canada and in the raft of places called Dundee that are to be found in South Africa, Australia and the United States of America. It is clear that Dundee's influence furth of the River Tay has spread far and wide. The winter festival provides the perfect vehicle for a city break to Dundee. With hotel occupancy rates between St Andrew's day and Burns night currently running at less than 40 per cent, the festival period gives Dundee the greatest potential for growth. Dundee is a growing tourism destination that has huge potential. For too long, the city has been seen, wrongly, as run down. Dundee has the potential to provide a large slice of the 50 per cent increase in tourism in Scotland to which we all aim. Edinburgh, Glasgow and the Highlands enjoy a high profile. There is room for the city of discovery to join them. I am sure that members agree that Dundee has a lot to offer visitors to Scotland.

We have already had some talk about the electronic transfer of data. Given the inherent cost benefits of that method, what tests have taken place on the security of electronic transfer using the Government intranet, for example?

I am delighted to welcome the Scottish National Party Government's first bill, which addresses an issue of great importance to my constituents and the constituents of my colleague Shona Robison, on the other side of Dundee. The fact that the first bill of the new Administration focuses on the abolition of tolls on the Forth and Tay bridges sends a strong message that the unfair tolls that the Labour and Liberal Democrat coalition kept in place have no place in a Scotland headed by an SNP  Government. The people and economies of Fife and Tayside have suffered as a result of the unfair tolls, but the Labour and Lib Dem Executive refused to remove the tolls, despite having numerous opportunities to do so during its eight long years in power. The Executive that removed tolls from the Skye bridge in 2003 and the Erskine bridge in 2006 left the people of Fife and Tayside as the only people who paid tolls. This session of Parliament has seen a welcome—if somewhat half-hearted—U-turn by Labour and the Liberals, and I am glad that they are beginning to see the error of their ways. I welcome their support for the removal of tolls from the Forth and Tay bridges. However, it would be wrong of me not to acknowledge the role that the campaign by The Courier played in putting pressure on those parties to make that U-turn. It was incredible to see the U-turn spreading across the Labour and Lib Dem benches during the debate on 31 May—that was something to behold. I will focus on the tolls on the Tay bridge, which are of most relevance to my constituents. No matter where people are trying to get to by car in Dundee, the congestion from the queues of traffic from the Tay bridge toll booths will affect them. Car and bus journeys are lengthened, and at peak times the town centre can come to a virtual standstill, with a knock-on effect on air quality. Anyone who has tried to get around Dundee in the early evening knows how bad the situation is. It is clear that the situation in Dundee is caused by cars idling in the city because they cannot reach the Tay bridge, or cannot traverse the city centre from east to west or west to east because they cannot get through the queues of traffic that are trying to get to the tolls, which often stretch right round the inner ring road. I see that Patrick Harvie has gone, but—just to clarify—the tolls on the Tay bridge do not just slow down traffic that is crossing the bridge; they slow down traffic, including public transport, that is crossing the city. I appreciate the position of members in the Green party, but in the case of Dundee, speeding up the flow of traffic will reduce the amount of emissions that are caused by static traffic and will benefit bus users just as much as those who are travelling by car. In 1991, when the two-way tolling was replaced by southbound-only tolling on the Tay bridge, the benefits were clear, as congestion was reduced on the south bank. On 28 March 2006, when the toll collectors were on strike, the congestion disappeared almost altogether, even in the evening. There is good evidence that congestion in Dundee is caused by tolls, and removing the tolls will alleviate that daily congestion. I assure members that the bill is warmly welcomed in my constituency, as the people anticipate an end to  the unjust tolls and, more important, the queues of traffic that they have suffered for so many years. I also welcome the proposal in the bill that provides for central Government funding for the running of the bridges and for taking on the Tay bridge capital debt. We should remember that central Government took over the £26 million Skye bridge debt, which is double the amount of the Tay bridge debt. Local councillors in Dundee, north-east Fife and Angus will also welcome the proposals to retain the Tay Road Bridge Joint Board as the body that is responsible for the day-to-day management of the bridge. There was some concern, particularly among staff, that when the tolls went the bridge board would go as well. I particularly welcome the fact that we will maintain the wealth of experience that has been built up over the years by board members, managers and—most important—members of staff. I am pleased that the new arrangements that have been laid in place by the Tay bridge board will be arrived at with no compulsory redundancies. I hope that all members of the Parliament will welcome that, which is in stark contrast to the shoddy way in which workers were treated when the former Labour-Lib Dem Executive removed tolls from the Erskine bridge with no regard for the workers involved. The effect on the economy was raised earlier, and it should not be underplayed. In order to benefit fully from inward investment, Dundee requires transport across the Tay bridge. North-east Fife is naturally geared towards Dundee, and we need to ensure that as much as possible of that business comes into the city centre. That will be important when the waterfront development is advanced, and we want Dundee to take maximum benefit from that—the people of north-east Fife are very welcome in our city. The removal of the burden of tolls is essential to ensure that businesses in Dundee compete on an equal footing with businesses elsewhere. The bill will remove the extra tax that the tolls add and give an extra boost to the economies of both Fife and Tayside. We are not giving the people of Tayside and Fife anything more than what the rest of the country expects—and has, at present. There are almost 30 road crossings over tidal waters in Scotland, and tolls are charged only for the Tay and Forth bridges. There can be no argument in favour of keeping the unjust tolls, and I call on all members to support the bill.

It is with great pleasure that I welcome the new Scottish Government's first budget. The announcements that it contains will be welcomed by communities all across Scotland, but I hope that members will forgive me for concentrating on my constituency and on why the budget is particularly good for Dundee. I want to concentrate on three key areas. First, my constituents will be delighted to hear the Government's proposals to freeze the council tax at last year's level. The agreement with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities that was signed today is historic. Since it was introduced, the council tax in Dundee has risen by an average of £50 a year and has more than doubled. That increase has not been replicated in people's incomes or in our older people's pensions. With one of the highest council tax rates in Scotland, Dundonians will be particularly supportive of John Swinney's determination that the council tax be held at last year's level until we can get rid of it altogether. That will be a real-terms reduction that will provide relief to pensioners and hard-working families in Dundee and throughout Scotland. The second point that I would like to highlight is the cabinet secretary's continued funding for Scotland's cities, by rolling up the cities growth fund, which was due to end this year. That money will allow Dundee to finish the infrastructure for the central waterfront project that is so important to my city. I was one of the councillors who were involved in agreeing to that visionary use of the cities growth fund back in 2003, so it is particularly close to my heart. The waterfront project will deliver a higher quality of life and it will improve our city's image. It will also provide new high-quality development opportunities to support economic initiatives. The economic potential of Dundee will always be held back unless the problem of our waterfront is resolved and the opportunity that it offers is realised in a visionary manner. The central waterfront project has that vision and will result in a step change not only for Dundee but for the whole city region. As I said, the allocation of money will allow for the completion of work on infrastructure. Dundee City Council is confident that the rest of the central waterfront  master plan can be self-financing as our vision is realised. The announcement of investment will be of equal importance to Aberdeen, Edinburgh, Glasgow, Inverness and Stirling, as well as to the greater city regions that they serve. I said that I would concentrate on my constituency and on why the budget is particularly good news for Dundee. However, the inclusion of additional funding to enhance capacity in Dundee to support the life sciences is good news not only for Dundee—it will be welcomed by the life sciences sector across Scotland. That sector consistently punches above its weight internationally. The University of Dundee's vision for the Scottish institute for life sciences—or SCILS—is for a new centre of excellence that is equipped and managed to the highest international standards. SCILS will attract outstanding scientists to Scotland and train the most promising young researchers to conduct world-leading biomedical research, and it will translate the outputs into new medical and commercial opportunities. I am pleased that proposals to site the Scottish institute for life sciences in Dundee have cross-party support. We should recognise the hard work of Sir Philip Cohen in pressing the case and winning the support not only of the current First Minister but of the previous First Minister. I am delighted that the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth and the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning have been able to include extra funding for life sciences in this first SNP budget. I have focused on just three areas of the budget statement that are particularly good news for Dundee, but there are many more areas on which I could have focused. This budget is not just for Dundee but will be welcomed across Scotland. It is a historic statement that shows the implementation of the joined-up approach that previous Administrations merely talked about. The deal that is available to local government goes much further than the headline council tax freeze: it represents a sea change in the relationship between central and local government that will have a positive impact for years to come. I want to congratulate Pat Watters and Councillor Neil Fletcher for putting the interests of local government above personal party-political interests.

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government has any plans to cut red tape for businesses. (S3F-187)

I thank the First Minister for his answer, which will be welcomed by small, medium-sized and large businesses throughout Scotland. I speak mainly to small businesses, and their top issue is the amount of red tape and bureaucracy, which is a distraction from their main aim of delivering economic success for their companies and the Scottish nation. In 2006, a survey of members of the Federation of Small Businesses—the biggest non-governmental survey of businesses in the UK—found that 49 per cent them were dissatisfied with the volume of legislation, 51 per cent were dissatisfied with the complexity of legislation, and—

Forty-seven per cent of small businesses were dissatisfied with the rate of change. Given those levels of concern, can the First Minister tell me what specific actions have been taken by the Government since May to begin the process of removing unnecessary burdens?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate and welcome the Scottish Government's publication of its skills strategy earlier in the week. If the Parliament will indulge me, I will give a brief background to the situation in my constituency, to underline why I believe that the skills strategy is a valuable step in getting people into work and tackling the unacceptable levels of deprivation in parts of Dundee and elsewhere in Scotland. One of the main themes of the election campaign in Dundee West was employment. In the past 18 months, Dundee has taken a massive jobs hit, losing more than 1,000 jobs. The labour market statistics that were published by the Office for National Statistics this morning show that, as a proportion of the resident working-age population, the claimant count—the number of people who claim jobseekers allowance—in Dundee West is 4.2 per cent, which is the highest rate in Scotland. The Scottish average is just 2.7 per cent. The unemployment rate in Dundee West is 6.7 per cent, which is above both the Scottish and the UK averages and is one of the highest rates in Scotland. Those figures provide a comparison between areas in Scotland and it is clear that my constituency is an area that needs a successful skills strategy more than most. However, the headline figures do not tell the full story. If we flip over the question and ask how many people are working, the true extent of the problem is revealed. The employment rate in Dundee West is just 71 per cent, which is lower than the Scottish average and suggests that nearly 30 per cent of people are not in gainful employment. I acknowledge that some of those people may be on incapacity benefit or unable to work for other reasons, but the figure is still high.  The figures also fail to indicate the relatively high number of people who, although in employment, are in what most people would describe as low-paid employment, which adds to the deprivation levels in Dundee. It is in that context that the loss of more than 1,000 jobs in Dundee in little more than a year should be considered. Tesco's decision to move its distribution depot to Livingston was followed quickly by the announcement that one of the city's biggest employers, NCR, was to shed more than 600 jobs, which was a particular blow to the city. Along with Dundee City Council, the then Executive put in place a programme to help those workers who were losing their jobs, which included the provision of help to retrain and to learn new skills that they could use to gain new employment. Now is not the time to discuss the rights or wrongs of what happened—I pay tribute to Nicol Stephen for his involvement in trying to lessen that blow—but there was considerable disquiet among the workforce that obstacles remained in place that made it more difficult for them to access training. A number of constituents who worked for NCR have come to me for help. They wanted to work and were willing to retrain—they just wanted a chance. That is just a snapshot of what is happening in Dundee. I am sure that there are similar stories from around Scotland of people who want to get into work but who just do not have the opportunity to do so. One of the startling statistics in the skills strategy emerged from the survey that was carried out by Futureskills Scotland, which outlines that one of the biggest challenges for many businesses is to attract appropriately skilled staff. When the survey was carried out, there were 76,700 vacancies, 30 per cent of which were skills shortage vacancies. The jobs are there; it is just that there is a mismatch in our skills base. I remind members that, whichever figures we use, the unemployment rate in Dundee is one of the highest in Scotland. Comparison of the two sets of statistics tells us that more needs to be done to get those people who are out of work, many of whom are desperate to find a job, back into employment. We need to increase the employability of people in Scotland, by enabling them to gain new skills or to utilise and develop the skills that they have. The most recent labour market statistics for Scotland indicate that 160,000 people who are classed as economically inactive want a job. I am pleased that in its skills strategy the Scottish Government acknowledges the importance of that wasted resource. The strategy provides a new agenda for skills and learning and will enable us to develop Scotland's skills policies in a way that addresses the country's requirements. The  strategy encompasses lifelong learning, including early years provision, schools, further and higher education, work-related learning and informal learning opportunities. The Parliament should welcome such an approach. The 16 to 19-year-olds who are not in education, employment or training are of particular concern. According to the labour market statistics, 12.4 per cent of all 16 to 19-year-olds in Scotland are in the NEET group. It is imperative that those young people are not left behind and it is essential that we give them every assistance. I am pleased that the Scottish Government is developing proposals that will help those young people. It is clear that making individuals stay at school when they do not want to be there is disruptive to the kids who want to be in school. I support the motion and I am pleased that something is being done to tackle the skills shortage in Scotland. We need more participation in learning and training if we are to increase employment and economic activity, which in turn will increase productivity and lead to economic growth, helping to tackle deprivation in my constituency and throughout Scotland. I am pleased to support the Scottish Government's proposals, which represent a valuable step in the process.

First, I will take a second to acknowledge the work of my predecessor, Kate Maclean. Kate was respected for her work with groups and on committees and will be missed by many in the Parliament. I am sure that all members join me in wishing her well for the future. I will concentrate on the urban aspects of energy use and production in a greener Scotland. Those of us who live in cities are responsible for the overwhelming majority of energy use, whether in industry, our homes, our institutions or through transport, so we have a responsibility to find ways to reduce our energy use. Many homes in Scotland are still without proper insulation or use inefficient heating systems. I hope that the Government intends to continue to tackle that by extending grant schemes, and I hope that we will redouble our efforts to advertise them, particularly in areas where fuel poverty remains a concern. As a Parliament that is committed across the parties to a greener Scotland, we need to determine whether there are ways that we can reduce energy consumption. One of the first things that we need to do is examine ourselves and the Parliament. I was surprised, to say the least, by the number of energy-guzzling light bulbs that we have around the Parliament. Replacing such light bulbs with energy-efficient bulbs would be one of the easiest ways to save energy, and with a short payback time, so why has it not been addressed in the Parliament? People are becoming increasingly aware of the need to be energy efficient but, in some cases, it is increasingly difficult to make choices that best serve the environment. I am talking about domestic appliances that, on the face of it, provide easy access to information on energy ratings by having such information stuck to their side. However, that information may be misleading. The energy rating system has encouraged washing machine manufacturers to move towards cold-fill-only machines to gain the maximum efficiency. Clearly, the most inefficient part of a washing machine is the heating of the water. If they use  only cold water, the overall efficiency rating is driven up, so we have the strange situation whereby a washing machine that is rated AA for energy efficiency—which is high—can be less efficient than an older, inefficient washing machine that has a warm fill. We need to address that issue and ensure that we provide people with the proper information so that they can make real choices. Although I am convinced that the biggest contribution that urban society can make towards reducing CO 2 emissions is to reduce its energy consumption, I am also convinced that we can make a real contribution to green energy production. Much of the debate about renewable energy centres on harnessing the power of the wind to provide energy for our cities. That debate is often polarised as one in which people are either for or against large-scale wind farms in areas of natural beauty. I challenge that by suggesting that, with the correct support and investment, there are many possibilities for wind generation in our cities. In Dundee, the Michelin tyre factory has successfully installed the UK's largest corporate wind energy project. The twin 2MW turbines generate around 8 million kilowatt hours of clean, green energy per year, which covers around one third of the plant's energy needs. Generating the energy on site reduces transmission costs and improves the efficiencies of the system so, as well as reducing CO 2 emissions by more than 3,000 tonnes, Michelin has increased the efficiency of the Dundee factory and protected jobs in a highly competitive market. The project required considerable investment on the part of Michelin. The turbines are close to two housing estates, and are a few hundred yards from my father's house, where I grew up. As with anything new, people were concerned. They said, "They will be noisy, I won't be able to sleep at night and they will interfere with our television reception." Rather than run away in the face of public hostility, Michelin engaged with the residents of the area to win support from the vast majority of people. There will always be some people who will object to any major development, and some people remain unconvinced, although the turbines are turning and they cannot be heard above the background noise, and any problem with TV reception has been dealt with. Whether the turbines are an eyesore or a thing of beauty is a matter of opinion, but I for one am proud that Michelin has chosen to site them in Dundee and I congratulate the company on its long-sighted view. Large turbines will not be appropriate for every factory location, but Michelin has proved that an urban location is not in itself a reason to discount them.