Reinforcing the electricity grid in Orkney and its subsea links to the mainland is a top priority for the Scottish Government. We engage regularly with SSE on the issue directly and through wider forums, including the intergovernmental Scottish islands renewables project. The Scottish Government remains committed to finding a solution for Orkney and works with all parties to find solutions that can enable the islands to realise their great renewables potential. On 24 February, I will chair an islands electricity grid summit in Stornoway, which SSE and others—including representatives of the United Kingdom Government—will attend.

Yes, I will be happy to raise those issues with SSE. I will also shortly meet Councillor James Stockan who, as Liam McArthur knows, chaired the Orkney grid constraints working group. The group’s report was submitted in December last year and we will study it carefully. Members across the chamber will want to ensure that the islands achieve their potential in renewables. I am keen to work closely with Liam McArthur, who has worked hard on these matters.

I will have a bash, Presiding Officer. Jamie McGrigor makes a fair point that, for renewables projects in the islands to achieve success and for us to achieve our potential across the spectrum of massive opportunities throughout Scotland in renewable energy and oil and gas, we need to encourage and, indeed, inspire young people to pursue careers in engineering. The private sector, universities and the Scottish Government are doing a huge amount of work to achieve precisely that, and I am happy to discuss those matters further with Mr McGrigor.

Will Murdo Fraser give way?

Will Murdo Fraser give way?

Does Gavin Brown accept that we have extended the small business bonus over the years and that more than 90,000 small businesses now receive the benefit of it and pay low or no business rates, to a maximum relief of £4,620 per annum? How much lower is that relief in England?

With access to all the policy levers that independence would bring Scotland could, at last, create the fiscal incentives that would not only allow the industry to realise its potential and avoid the damaging taxation provisions previously made by successive United Kingdom Governments, but allow all Scotland’s people to benefit. For decades our oil wealth has been squandered and, unlike Norway and virtually every other oil-producing country, no oil fund was set up. That was a huge error, as politicians including Alistair Darling, David Steel and Neil Kinnock have indicated. As Denis Healey said, the UK has underplayed the value of Scotland’s oil.

The answer lies in our hands on 18 September. Since oil and gas production began in Scotland, the UK Government has raised approximately £180 billion in direct tax revenue from it. Adjusted for inflation, that is equivalent to approximately £300 billion in today’s prices. Those revenues have gone directly into the UK Exchequer, with successive Governments failing to invest the windfall for the long term. To date, around 90 per cent of total oil and gas tax revenue has been generated in Scotland’s waters. Independence for Scotland will ensure that Scotland’s vast oil and gas reserves are efficiently and safely extracted for the benefit of the Scottish people. With more than half of oil and gas reserves by value still to be extracted, there is ample opportunity to invest Scotland’s oil wealth for future generations.

Yes, it will. It will also be based on a policy that has been sadly absent in the UK: namely, stability and predictability. With three unheralded tax hikes in the past decade or more, as Sir Ian Wood said: “fiscal instability has been a significant factor in basin under-performance.” We rely on what Sir Ian Wood says, not what the Conservatives say.

I am grateful to members for contributing to the debate as they have contributed to debating the issue at stages 1 and 2. I understand that the amendments in this group are identical word for word to ones that were previously submitted. We have debated the matter before, but I am grateful for the contributions that members have made. Sustainable economic growth is an essential component of the Scottish Government’s purpose. We are determined to promote in all Scottish regulators a broad and deep alignment to it. The sustainable economic growth duty in the bill provides an important line of sight to the Government’s purpose. It will complement existing duties, increase transparency, encourage greater regulatory consistency and encourage more engagement and joined-up working. Many regulators already contribute to sustainable economic growth in their day-to-day activities, as has already been mentioned. The wording of the duty seeks to build on that to support and empower regulators to contribute to the Government’s purpose, making them more accountable for the decisions that they make. The Scottish Government and regulators in Scotland value sustainable economic growth and the protection of the environment. Those need not be mutually exclusive. The duty does not prioritise sustainable economic growth over other regulatory objectives. Regulators need to determine an appropriate balance between regulatory and economic objectives, and the code of practice will help them do that. The duty is underpinned by the code of practice, which will build on and encourage best practice and support regulators who deliver the duty in contributing to achieving sustainable economic growth. Regulators have signalled that they already act in that way. The duty will support and build on that, helping to protect our people and our environment and helping business to flourish and create jobs. We are firmly committed to promoting sustainable economic growth and to the current provisions in the bill. Sustainable development is an integral part of sustainable economic growth and, therefore, the Scottish Government does not support the amendments in the group.

No. Amendment 2 agreed to. Section 19—Enforcement undertakings Amendment 3 moved—[Paul Wheelhouse]—and agreed to. Section 32B—Offences relating to supply of carrier bags: fixed penalty notices

Amendments 5 to 7 change the terminology in proposed section 63B of the Marine (Scotland) Act 2010 to align with the intended terminology in the upcoming courts reform (Scotland) bill by changing references to “leave” to references to “permission”. Amendment 8 removes what we consider, on reflection, to be an ambiguous provision on the interaction between the application for a review of marine licensing decisions and the court’s decision on whether to grant permission for the application to proceed. Currently, proposed section 63B(4) of the Marine (Scotland) Act 2010 suggests that there may be a separate need for the applicant to apply for permission for the section 63A application to proceed before the court can make its decision. That is not the process that is envisaged. There is no need for a separate application for permission. The court will have sufficient information to make its decision for permission on the basis of the section 63 application. Amendment 7 therefore simply removes proposed section 63B(4) of the Marine (Scotland) Act 2010. I move amendment 5. Amendment 5 agreed to. Amendments 6 to 8 moved—[Fergus Ewing]—and agreed to. Section 41—Planning authorities’ functions: charges and fees

Will Jenny Marra give way?

I thank all members who have participated in the debate. I also thank Murdo Fraser, who has taken the office of Captain Fraser this afternoon, although I do not know whether that is a promotion. More seriously, I thank the convener of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee and its members for their work, which has helped us to improve the bill throughout its passage. We are grateful to them and of course to the clerks to that committee. A number of hard-working officials have been involved, and I would like to slightly break with precedent and say who they are. They have done a considerable amount of work on what is a comprehensive bill that covers a wide range of areas, which poses particular challenges. I therefore give my most sincere thanks to Joe Brown of better regulation and industry engagement; Ian Black of planning modernisation; Stuart Foubister of marine licensing in the licensing division; Bridget Marshall and Richard McLeod of better environmental regulation; and Neil Watt, the bill manager. Also, Sandra Reid, who serves with the regulatory reform group, has done a power of work on the bill, which has made our task as ministers somewhat easier. This afternoon, we have the unusual occurrence of a trio of ministers. I suspect that this will be our one and only public performance—I assure members that, unlike Frank Sinatra, we will not make a comeback. I will touch on a couple of points that have been raised in the debate. Gavin Brown made the good and solid point that the hard work has not yet really begun, because the work that Derek Mackay, Paul Wheelhouse and I will do with our respective portfolio responsibilities will be substantial and demanding, and parts of it will not be easy. We take extremely seriously the duties to come forward with guidance and codes of practice and to engage with stakeholders, and the onus on the Scottish Government to proceed in a transparent, open and fair way. That underpins the approach that we have taken on the bill and it will also underpin the approach that we will take in implementing it and making it work. Mr Brown made that point well, and it is apt to repeat it. It is important to say that it is not correct that local authorities are exempt from the bill, as I think Jenny Marra said. Section 1 is clear that the planning functions of local authorities are exempt from the bill, but local authorities themselves are of course included in the list in schedule 1 of bodies that are covered by the generality of the bill. That relates to section 1, on duties in respect of consistency of application of regulatory functions, and section 4, on the duty to have regard to sustainable economic growth. We have had useful debates, and I must be fair to Alison Johnstone and say that she led them. I have not agreed with her, but she has made her arguments in a reasonable fashion throughout and I thank her for that. I understand her perspective, and although the Government does not share it, I hope that we can implement the bill in a way that will, in most cases, secure her agreement. On the plastic bag tax, we listened extremely carefully to Murdo Fraser’s trenchant remarks. We will let the Parliament know, through a letter from cabinet secretary Richard Lochhead at the end of the stage 1 process, as soon as we are aware, regarding the points that Murdo Fraser raised. I wanted to respond to that.

I think that the point that I am being asked to make is that we let the Parliament know what we intended to do, through a letter from Richard Lochhead at the end of the bill’s stage 1 process. Murdo Fraser made the point that the Parliament should be properly consulted in the progress of any legislation, which is a point that I made a great deal—especially, I may say, when I was in opposition. [Laughter.] It is right that one puts into practice what one preaches, even if it was preached in a past life, long ago. What the bill does will be enhanced by COSLA’s co-operation. In that regard, I mention Stephen Hagan and his officials. I have been hugely heartened by the positive and constructive approach that we have been able to take together. Mike MacKenzie mentioned the Federation of Small Businesses. The FSB and other business organisations, such as Scottish Chambers of Commerce, have taken the lead in driving the process forward. It was as a result of engagement with business organisations that I became aware of the difficulty that mobile food vans encounter, which Mr Fraser mentioned. I was at a meeting that was hosted by the Confederation of British Industry, one of whose members had encountered the problem. I mention that because today we are putting right an inconsistency, which seemed to me to be manifestly unfair, and engagement with the business organisations—the Institute of Directors and the Scottish Council for Development and Industry, as well as those that I have already mentioned—and trade associations helps us to find out what is happening on the ground out there in the business world. We have shown that we can respond to what businesses want when they raise issues with their organisations. The point is well worth making. More recently, the Scottish food enforcement liaison committee has provided us with a draft set of national standards for mobile food businesses, on which we will consult later this year. In September, I attended a meeting at COSLA at which local authority regulators discussed where it might be appropriate to introduce national standards, to increase consistency. As a result, COSLA and local authorities are considering, first, whether a more consistent and transparent approach to setting fees can be agreed in respect of civic and miscellaneous licensing, and, secondly, how to streamline the process, procedures and fees that relate to food export certificates. I do not expect either matter to engage the public on the front page of newspapers, but that does not mean that they are not important. The level of fees, the need for consistency and so on are extremely important to businesses, especially small businesses, as Mike MacKenzie said. Presiding Officer, you indicated that I should come to a close early. My speech was considerably lengthier, but I will not have the opportunity to read it all out. I thank everyone involved and commend the Regulatory Reform (Scotland) Bill.

I was saddened to learn of the situation at Ortak, which is of major concern. On 8 January I spoke to James Stephen at BDO Accountants and Advisers, who advised me that trading would continue while efforts are made regarding the sale of elements of the business. We are supporting those efforts, through our agency Highlands and Islands Enterprise. I also made the offer of support through our partnership action for continuing employment initiative, for any staff who might be affected by redundancy, and I stressed the need for the PACE team to have early access to provide support.

I acknowledge the hard work that Liam McArthur has put in on this issue on behalf of his constituents, as is right and proper, and the private discussions that we have had. I will continue to ensure that I am fully abreast of developments with HIE and the administrator and to communicate with Mr McArthur. To answer Mr McArthur’s question, yes, I agree. It is important that we make all reasonable and proportionate efforts to ensure that manufacturing capability is preserved in Orkney, which has a reputation for distinction in providing high-quality jewellery, not only in Ortak but in Sheila Fleet.

I wrote to the UK Government on 17 September 2013 and again on 20 November 2013 requesting that royalties collected by the UK Coal Authority for coal produced in Scotland be made available now to help to fund or part-fund the restoration of legacy opencast sites across Scotland. On 8 January 2014, a holding response was received from Michael Fallon, the UK energy minister, to say that that request is being actively pursued with the UK Treasury. We will continue to pursue this line of inquiry with the UK Government.

Yes, I do. I was pleased that all parties in the task force, which has cross-party representation—including Mr Fraser, who is in the chamber today, and Labour members—agreed that we should pursue this matter in a reasonable way. There is an extremely strong case that that money—£15 million, as Christina McKelvie says—should be used for the enormous challenges that we face in tackling the restoration of opencast mines in Scotland. That £15 million is money that has been paid from the mines since the privatisation of the coal industry in the early 1990s. Unless it is simply a tax, surely there is a strong moral and reasonable case that that money should be put to good use to meet, in part, the substantial costs of restoration throughout this country.

The Scottish Government welcomes Sir Ian Wood’s interim report. We believe that it should be implemented and that a shadow body should be set up, as he suggests. That is urgent, given the prize that is involved, which he estimates as £200,000 million. We believe that Sir Ian Wood’s recommendations should be implemented with speed and that the shadow body should be headquartered in Aberdeen.

I believe that it should be possible to set up the shadow body very quickly indeed and I think that spring of this year would be a reasonable target. I have communicated the view to the industry and to the UK Government—at the PILOT meeting on 31 October 2013 and at a meeting of the UK Oil and Gas Industry Council on 7 November 2013—that the Scottish Government strongly supports the implementation of Sir Ian Wood’s proposals. If they are implemented expeditiously, we can make enormous progress. I believe that Sir Ian Wood himself argued that a shadow body should be set up as soon as possible in order to take forward the important work that could make such an enormous difference through increasing revenue for the industry and through a potentially enormous windfall gain to the taxpayer, regardless of which Treasury is entitled to the money at the time.

Credit unions are encouraged to access the Scottish Government’s third sector organisational development and support programmes. We are working with the credit union representative bodies to ensure that their members across the country are aware of the programmes. Support includes the enterprise ready fund, which opened in September 2013 and which will distribute £6 million during the period 2013 to 2015 to help to maintain, develop and grow Scotland’s enterprising third sector. The just enterprise programme works alongside the enterprise ready fund. It is a tailored service that provides business development support and training for third sector organisations across Scotland, and it is also available to credit unions.

The campaign continues. The second phase of the campaign is being rolled out as we speak, which I hope is welcomed. I met a representative of ABCUL just yesterday. One of the things that credit unions in Scotland want are the reforms that are contained in our Bankruptcy and Debt Advice (Scotland) Bill, which will require debtors who are able to pay to make a payment towards their debts for a period of four years. Sadly, as far as I can understand its position, the Labour Party opposes that. It is one concrete measure that virtually all the credit unions in our consultation supported, and I very much hope that, after reconsideration, it will have cross-party support throughout the chamber. There was not majority support for the loan guarantee fund as proposed by Kezia Dugdale. We considered the issue extremely carefully, but there was strong opposition from a considerable number of credit unions. Fortunately, the Scottish League of Credit Unions has made alternative proposals, and we are considering them. I am happy to inform members that they include the possible examination of the merger of credit unions to enable a smaller number of perhaps more financially robust organisations to provide the excellent services that credit unions provide throughout the country. I hope that that, too, will have cross-party support.

Both ministers and officials are in regular contact with Energy UK on a range of issues, including electricity market reform, energy efficiency and fuel poverty.

Yes I do and yes I can. I have spent a lot of time working with people in industry on that matter. Michael McMahon has asked a very sensible question on those matters. One of the enormous opportunities in Scotland comes from the planned huge investment in the oil and gas industry—not just £13 billion this year but £100 billion in the pipeline. Last week I heard about the Mariner field from the chief executive of Statoil, whom I met in Oslo on Friday. It is clear that the world has confidence in Scotland and it is investing in Scotland. We must work with Oil & Gas UK, with OPITO, with the offshore contractors association, with the United Kingdom Government, with the local authority—with all parties—to deliver the skills. We also need to look at other parts of Scotland such as Ayrshire—which Mr Gibson represents—the north of Scotland, the Highlands and the north-east. Many parts of Scotland can contribute to the continued success of the industry and there are opportunities for people to transition from engineering across to oil and gas. Above all, we must dispel the lingering perception that oil and gas have run out in Scotland. The contrary is the case. There will, as we now know, be extraction of oil and gas until beyond the middle of this century. It offers an enormously rewarding and interesting career to young people so we must inspire young people and fill them with confidence about the industry, and not decry it, belittle it or say that it will not produce enormous wealth.

I welcome the conclusion by Scottish Renewables that the overall number of people who are employed in the renewables sector in Scotland in a range of areas such as wind energy, biomass, hydro power and work on the grid currently stands at a record level. That is a tribute to the Government’s support and to the success of the industry and developers, as well as to communities, which receive enormous community benefits. Of course, it goes beyond political observation to say that the uncertainty over electricity market reform has hardly filled investors with confidence. There are concerns that the announcements that have been made will mean that offshore wind, for example, will not be able to achieve its full potential, and that the feed-in tariff rules with regard to hydro power and degression do not help either. We are working closely with Scottish Renewables to overcome those problems. Electricity from Scottish renewables is necessary to keep the lights on in England. The margin of excess between supply and demand is now 2 per cent, and if there is any further failure of coal generation stations there, there will be a deficit. That is a very serious situation, but fortunately Scotland is at hand to provide the solution and to keep the lights on in England.

In 2012, oil and gas production was estimated to have contributed around £22 billion to Scottish gross domestic product. Approximately 225,000 people are employed directly or indirectly in the sector throughout Scotland. Oil & Gas UK estimates that there are up to 24,000 million barrels of recoverable oil and gas remaining in the North Sea. With a potential wholesale value of up to £1.5 trillion—or £1.5 million million—that means that more than half the value of North Sea oil could still be extracted. If that is realised, it will afford Scotland greater choices and chances to strengthen its already diverse economy.

I must confess that I do not make a careful study of the collected oeuvre of Mr Darling on such matters. However, I can say that we in Scotland—especially young people—have an enormous opportunity to follow careers in an industry that is leading the world, and to husband that resource, as Norway does, with the powers of independence. Just last week—the day after I visited Norway, by sheer coincidence—it so happened that every citizen in Norway became a paper kroner millionaire, such is the effect in just over two decades of the country’s accumulating through good husbandry the enormous wealth that it generates. The great news is that the industry is alive and kicking, and—provided that we meet the challenges—Scotland, with the powers of independence, can do the same.

We want revenue to be maximised. If Mr Brown had been listening earlier, he would—[Laughter.] He laughs but, actually, he is laughing at his own Government’s plan. [Interruption.]

If we want to maximise the revenue, we have to take Sir Ian Wood’s analysis very seriously. I commend to Mr Brown a good read of Sir Ian’s interim report. Its analysis is that it depends entirely on the policies that we pursue. Will we pursue the policies of the past, which have undermined confidence in the United Kingdom—

I presume that Mr Brown enjoyed the tax hike in 2011, which undermined confidence in the UK in boardrooms throughout the world. Alternatively, will we pursue the policies of the Labour Party in the past decade, which involved similar unheralded tax hikes? [Interruption.]

The answer is that it entirely depends on the policies that one pursues. Quite simply, the UK has pursued the wrong policies. That is why Norway has succeeded in recovering about 50 per cent of oil and gas from its fields, whereas, sadly, the recovery rates in the UK have been much lower. The industry understands that and I hope that, in time, Mr Brown and his colleagues and friends in the Labour Party will understand it.

The UK Government has not yet acknowledged the need for different levels of support across the three main island groups—Orkney, Shetland and the Western Isles—a need that was identified by the research that was initiated by both Governments. The single proposed strike price of £115 per megawatt hour falls short of the level required for some projects, especially in the Western Isles.

I share the serious concerns that the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets and National Grid have already expressed about security of supply and the risk of blackouts over the coming years, especially in England. Electricity margins—that is, the excess of aggregate supply over peak demand—could drop to as little as 2 per cent as early as 2015-16. That is a very slim margin indeed. The Scottish Government is clear that it wants to use the surplus electricity generated from renewable sources, which is now at record levels in Scotland—40 per cent in 2012—not only to supply homes in Scotland but to keep the lights on for our good friends in England.

I thank Murdo Fraser and the members of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee and its clerks for producing a sensible, considered and helpful stage 1 report. The bill will address one of the most serious problems that Scotland faces in the 21st century—debt, specifically unmanageable debt, which can give rise to bankruptcy. I am pleased to say that the Government has been active on this important issue in a number of respects. First, we started out with a vision that was developed by the Accountant in Bankruptcy for what we call a financial health service for Scotland. Over the course of this year, we have been building on that vision and have translated it into the bill that is before us today. Secondly, this year we have acted on payday loans. With others, we have pressed home our campaign to have the United Kingdom Government place a cap on the interest rates that are charged for payday loans. Just last week, I welcomed the Financial Conduct Authority’s decision finally to impose that much-needed cap. Of course, as we debated last week, the Scottish Government believes that that could and should happen sooner than 2015. We argued that it should happen in April next year, and we will keep pressing the UK Government to bring the cap in as soon as possible. As I informed the chamber last week, I have written to Jo Swinson, the UK Minister for Employment Relations and Consumer Affairs, to make that point. I recognise that there has been some movement on the regulation of payday loans, as I informed Jo Swinson when I met her fairly recently, and we welcome those steps forward. Nevertheless, we think that the cap could be introduced earlier. Thirdly, in July our changes to the debt arrangement scheme delivered greater protection from accumulating interest and charges. In the first half of this financial year, almost a quarter of the people who entered the statutory debt solution in Scotland chose debt management instead of debt relief—a fact that shows the continuing, year-on-year success of the debt arrangement scheme, which allows people to pay off their debts rather than seek to write them off. Fourthly, this autumn, in regulations, we made changes to protected trust deeds to ensure, inter alia, that contribution payments cannot be taken from a debtor’s benefit income. Fifthly, more recently, at the Grampian Credit Union in Aberdeen, I launched our 12 days of debtmas campaign. The campaign will raise awareness across Scotland of the negative impact that high-interest borrowing can have. It also promotes credit unions as an ethical, sensible alternative. After this debate, we will have John Wilson’s members’ business debate on the topic, which I welcome. I am pleased to inform the chamber that, thus far, more than 18,000 people have visited the campaign website. A lot of members have worked hard on the campaign, including Kez Dugdale. I do not follow the programme “River City” avidly, but I know that it is promoting the issue and the real-life consequences that debt has for people. It is truly an issue of our time, and we are promoting it through the 12 days of debtmas campaign, which we will debate later. Those are five positive, active and concrete steps that we have taken this year. All those initiatives support our vision of a financial health service, as does the bill, which delivers the most significant change to the bankruptcy process in Scotland for a generation and takes us closer to making the financial health service a reality. I thank all the stakeholders who took part during stage 1. All involved should be congratulated on a process that has demonstrated the Parliament’s ability to scrutinise complex legislation thoughtfully and constructively. I will respond to a few of the major points—I am afraid that I do not have time to deal with all the many recommendations—in the committee’s report. First, the committee has asked what impact the requirement that all debtors entering bankruptcy should benefit from advice from an approved money adviser will have on client numbers. If the increase is 8 per cent, which is at the upper end of the AIB’s estimated range, then, based on forecasts for bankruptcies in 2013-14, I am told that the AIB estimates that the change would give rise to an additional 500 cases per annum. That shows that our changes will have a proportionate and manageable impact compared with the United Kingdom’s welfare reforms, which will drive up the need for advice. Indeed, Citizens Advice Scotland estimates the rate of 10 benefit problems for every 100 benefit claimants each year. Secondly, the committee has expressed concerns about ending automatic discharge in the bill. The key point to make here is that we expect that the trustee will apply automatically for the debtor’s discharge unless there is evidence to show that the debtor has not co-operated. It is reasonable to say as a generality that that is not the case and that, in most cases, debtors co-operate, so that point in practice must be borne in mind. However, we are looking at what would make this part of the process more straightforward and we will see what we can do at stage 2 in order to achieve that. We take the technical criticisms made by bodies such as the Law Society of Scotland on that aspect of the bill very seriously. Thirdly, the committee has passed on concerns about the £10,000 threshold for entry into the minimal assets process—MAP—which is our new route into bankruptcy for debtors with a low income or an income solely from benefits. I am happy to say that we will come back in January with an amendment to raise the maximum debt level. We are proposing an increase to £17,000. That would set the threshold high enough to enable 75 per cent of all current low-income, low-assets cases to enter the MAP. I hope that that helps to provide the necessary assurance that that important debt relief will be available to those who need it most. Fourthly, the committee has raised the important issue of bank accounts for undischarged debtors. It is important that we look at that and do what we can to make the necessary provision during the amending stages. I have written to the British Banking Association to enlist its support. The committee has agreed with the Scottish Government on a number of areas. I am pleased that the committee has agreed with our proposal to extend the payment period after bankruptcy to cover 48 monthly payments. I know that not everyone supports that proposal, but it is important to have a debate on the basis of the facts. First, it is not correct to say that that change would mean that people in Scotland would have to pay back more to creditors than people do in any other parts of the UK. That is because there are insolvency measures in England and Wales, such as individual voluntary arrangements, in which the payment period is usually five and not four years. Secondly, at the same time as that change comes into force, we will be fixing the common financial statement, which is run by the Money Advice Trust and is already applicable to debt arrangement scheme cases and, from November, protected trust deed cases, as the Scottish common financial tool. That is important, because it means that contributions will be set according to a consistent transparent determination that our research has shown should result in a more sustainable level of contributions. We also recognise, as the committee has done, the importance of providing guidance on the practical operation of the tool to ensure that it works in practice. Thirdly, it is not true to say that longer payment periods automatically lead to an ever rising rate of breakages. With regard to DAS, for example, the proportion of live cases that are revoked per quarter has remained reasonably stable since 2011-12 at approximately 3 per cent. I think that a 3 per cent breakage rate means that in 97 per cent of DAS cases the debt is honoured or obtempered—in other words, the debtor pays off his debts in full. That is strongly to be welcomed. As paragraph 34 of the policy memorandum says, “One of the key principles of the Bill is that those who can pay should pay.”

I am afraid that I must correct the member in a number of respects. First, in the consultation process, 27 respondents supported the three-year option and 32 supported a five-year option. Plainly, our four-year option is a compromise, but a majority of respondents supported a repayment period of five years. Secondly, Ms Marra said that, in England, debtors do not pay over as long a period. Perhaps she was not listening to what I said a moment ago, which was that the individual voluntary arrangements that are used in England and Wales usually last for five years. That is longer, not shorter, than four years. I am afraid that those who argue that the position in England is that debtors do not pay over as long a period do not take account of the fact that the opposite is the case, because individual voluntary arrangements usually—not always, for various technical reasons—last for five years. If the Labour Party is mounting a campaign, as I understand that it is, I suggest that it should take advice from Tam Dalyell, who knew a bit about campaigning. He said that the first thing that someone should do in a campaign is get their facts right.

No. I am sorry to have to disagree with the member, because I respect the strong passion that she brings to the topic and the work that she does, but it is simply not correct to say that we are comparing like with unlike. Individual voluntary arrangements are perfectly comparable with the insolvency arrangements in Scotland. The truth is that the Labour Party’s campaign has got off to a faltering start, because it is not founded on the facts.

No, I will not, because I have the AIB’s analysis in front of me, as I rather thought that the topic might come up. Question 10.41a asked: “If yes, for what period? A) 3 years B) 4 years C) 5 years”. As I said earlier, 27 respondents answered three years and 32 respondents answered five years. A majority of respondents were for a longer period than the one that we are proposing. It could be said that the numbers are evenly matched between three years and five years. That being the case, it is difficult to see how it would be unreasonable to propose four years as a compromise, as it is exactly equidistant between three years and five years. Another point that must be made is that in Scotland we think that debtors who can pay their debts should do so. As I have pointed out, those who pay under the debt arrangement scheme on average pay for a longer period than we have proposed for insolvency cases. That is because it usually takes longer for people to pay off their debts in full. However, people want to do it—and, in fact, it is what most people do. We should celebrate the fact that most people want to pay off their debts when they can. The bankruptcy process exists to provide debt relief; although such relief should be provided, it should not be an easy option, because that would be unfair not just to those who enter into debt arrangement schemes but to people throughout Scotland who pay their rent or their mortgages not for three, four or five years but for 20 or 25 years and expect those who are able to pay to do so. It will be interesting to see whether this particular campaign is pursued beyond its faltering start when almost every fact on which it is based seems to be wrong. In conclusion and reverting to the bill’s provisions, I am very pleased to say that, in recognition of the concerns about the funding of the bill’s financial education provisions, we intend to support the roll-out of that programme with an additional £200,000 of ring-fenced funding. I informed the convener of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee of this announcement shortly before the debate. I certainly hope that it demonstrates the value that we place on the scheme, and I think that the £200,000 will be money well spent.

I am very sorry—I might come back to the member in my closing speech. The stage 1 report demonstrates that a lot of solid work has been done on this matter. I welcome the chance to work further with the committee on amendments at stage 2. Indeed, I have indicated a number of areas where we will listen carefully to suggestions and lodge amendments and there are other technical areas on which we will work with all stakeholders. This is a very important bill and I hope that later this evening members will agree to support it. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Bankruptcy and Debt Advice (Scotland) Bill.

Will the member take an intervention?

I hesitate to say this but I wonder whether Ms Marra has read section 16 of the bill, which does not provide what she is talking about. It does not provide a fixed period of three years. It talks about a period of 12 months, subject to the application being made by the Accountant in Bankruptcy. Does she understand what the bill proposes?

We do not think that the taxpayer should be put to extra expense. If the Labour Party thinks that taxpayers should take responsibility for matters for which they do not pay at the moment, it must bring forward budget amendments to that effect and say where the money will come from. Ms Marra says that four years is far too long a period for debtors to pay, even when they can pay—and they pay for a longer period in other parts of the UK—so why did the Labour members not oppose the period of four years when it was introduced for protected trust deeds, when they considered the regulations in committee?

I repeat that 32 of the respondents to the consultation wanted a payment period of five years—longer than we proposed. That is a fact and I will write to Kezia Dugdale to list those 32 respondents. I am still waiting for an answer to what seems to be a mysterious event. If the Labour members are so strongly opposed to a four-year period of repayment—which seems to be the main reason that, contrary to what they did in committee, they will now oppose the bill—why did they agree to a four-year repayment period for protected trust deeds, which is simply another insolvency procedure?

Does Alison McInnes accept that under the debt arrangement scheme, the average period is in excess of six years and that therefore debtors who can pay are paying for six years, which is two years longer than those who enter into debt relief options, either bankruptcy—under these proposals once they are implemented—or protected trust deeds, for which the period will be four years.

I understand the point that the member is making. However, I do not understand why, if he thinks that the period of four years is wrong, he supported a period of four years for protected trust deeds, which is the other type of insolvency, when the matter came before him. Why did he support four years for one type of insolvency but does not for another insolvency process?

The point to bear in mind is that the bill will make it mandatory for people to take advice before they enter sequestration. The evidence shows that 92 per cent of those people who enter sequestration already receive such advice. I am anxious to establish the fact that, because only a relatively small number of people do not presently receive advice, the additional burden that will arise as a result of making it mandatory for people to take advice will be proportionate and relatively manageable.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I have rather a lot to say, so I am confident that I will be able to fill the time that is available to me—and much more, if more were available. Mary Scanlon kindly alluded to the fact that there was a time when I knew a bit about bankruptcy law. For some reason, I was accredited as a specialist in insolvency law by the Law Society of Scotland for many years. I once made the mistake of pointing that out in Kilmarnock sheriff court to the great Sheriff David Smith, who is still with us although he is not on the bench. He rubbed his hands and said, “Ah, Mr Ewing—an expert.” At that point, I knew that I had made a big mistake. I am not an expert in bankruptcy law, but I know enough to know that the technical detail is extremely important and complex, as Mary Scanlon rightly said. In bankruptcy law, it is essential to master the detail and make the best efforts to ensure that we get it right, because the risks are serious. Those risks were manifested back in the Bankruptcy (Scotland) Act 1985, when, without any malign intention, the Scottish Law Commission grossly underestimated the number of people whose bankruptcies would end up being paid for by the public purse and carried out by insolvency practitioners. The bill for that rose to more than £20 million a year. As a result, Michael Forsyth introduced the Bankruptcy (Scotland) Act 1993. At that time, he was generous enough to give me some credit for campaigning on the issue, together with Tom Shields of The Herald newspaper. My point is that that happened because of unintended consequences. No one ever intended that it would cost the taxpayer £20 million to process bankruptcies of people who had no assets and, very often, modest debts. In some cases, the debts were less than the fees—it was ridiculous. The law was amended, but the point is that we have to study the detail, and we have to master it—I say that to all members who are participating in the debate. I want to answer a specific question that Mr Fraser and Mrs Scanlon asked about how we compiled the figure of £200,000 in respect of the education responsibilities. That was done after considering representations from the advice sector at a meeting that I held fairly recently involving Money Advice Scotland, citizens advice bureaux and local authorities. We had that meeting to discuss the details of the bill, to ascertain what changes—technical and other—they felt should be made and to consider generally how the education function and a financial national health service in Scotland will operate. The money is a one-off payment, not an annual payment, because we recognise that for the money advice sector and the individuals who will be required to implement and provide the education, there will be an initial requirement to prepare things such as modules and instruction manuals. Assistance, information and guidance will be required for those who will have to discharge the new functions, and £200,000 is a reasonable estimate of the sum that is involved. It will be allocated to Money Advice Scotland and monitored by the AIB. Many members have asked about the level of fees for the process. The Accountant in Bankruptcy indicated her view at committee. Plainly, we want to ensure that we keep fees to a minimum. I was pleased to hear Mike MacKenzie pay tribute to the work of the Accountant in Bankruptcy. Of course, when he says that, he means her staff, who actually do the work under her leadership and with the excellent support of the senior staff, many of whom are at the back of the chamber. They do a terrific job and carry out the processes with a high degree of professionalism. I have met the staff at the Accountant in Bankruptcy office in Kilwinning and discussed their views on how bankruptcy law should be changed. I will always remember that, when they were asked what one thing they would like to be changed in the way in which we handle debt in Scotland, they said that they would like better education, especially for young people. In the long term, the vision of a financial NHS must encompass and encapsulate parents, teachers, schools, debt advisers, people in business and people in the voluntary sector all playing a part to ensure that we live in a society in which we inculcate in children and explain to them good financial management from an early age. We should do that to counteract what has become the malign scourge of payday loans—a form of venal usury that few people of my age, when we were at university, could have contemplated would be a feature of the system in Scotland.

We have worked carefully with CABx and we have an analysis—I have it in my papers somewhere and I will send it to the member—that estimates the current debt case load of CABx. From memory, I think that the figure is about 15,000 debt cases per annum. If that is wrong, I will correct it. I understand that the additional burden will be of the order of 3 to 5 per cent, but we will look carefully at the figures. We want to continue to work closely with CABx, as we have always done. As Mr Malik said, CAB officers work at the coalface. I was pleased recently to meet Nairn CAB members, who are working with and sponsoring Nairn County Football Club. The CAB is advertising its services at the football club; payday lenders have bought advertising rights at football clubs that are perhaps more successful than Nairn County. I turn to the bill’s principles. The bill aims to ensure that appropriate and proportionate debt management and debt relief mechanisms that are fit for the 21st century are available to the people of Scotland. As many members said, including Mr Don, there is a balance to strike between the interests of the creditor and those of the debtor. That has not changed since Goudy’s textbook, Meston and the 1985 act, or in more recent legislation. That balance must be struck. A framework must provide for debt management to allow people to pay their debts and for debt relief for people who cannot pay their debts. Scotland has two debt relief mechanisms—protected trust deeds and sequestration. The bill deals with sequestration, and its proposals have been broadly welcomed by most respondents, including citizens advice bureaux. The debt arrangement scheme has been an enormous success story. We have gone from just over 400 cases per annum when it was introduced to more than 4,000 cases, which is a tenfold increase. Ten times as many people use the scheme now as when it was introduced. We were grateful when a previous Executive introduced it, before we became the Scottish Government in 2007. Since then, we have made a number of changes to the scheme. We have introduced payment breaks and frozen interest and charges. We have now backdated the application of the freezing of charges, to avoid additional misery. We have made the scheme more and more effective and more and more people are using it. It is interesting that the overwhelming majority of people who enter the debt arrangement scheme continue to pay their debts and to pay them almost in full—at a rate of 90 per cent. That tells a good story about the people of Scotland. They want in large part to pay their debts. We therefore do not want to do things in the law that would introduce a lack of consistency and transparency and which would discourage people from entering the debt arrangement scheme. I am told that the average period in which people pay their debts under the scheme is about six and a half years. If we made the period in which those who can pay must pay only three years, they would pay for only half the period for which those who wish to pay their debts in full are on average required to pay. That creates the possibility of the unintended consequence: that some people who are able to pay off their debts in full will instead opt for the debt relief solution, because—

Hang on a second. Those people will have to pay only for a very much shorter period. That is why at the beginning of the debate I introduced the story of unintended consequences, which we have to be very careful we do not end up with.

I find it strange that the point does not seem to have been grasped, because it is set out in the bill: those who are on benefits pay zero, and those who are on modest earnings may well pay zero—those who are most vulnerable will pay zero. By and large, we are not talking about those who are most vulnerable, because they are required to pay zero. Indeed, the Government clarified that in the recent trust deed regulations. We are talking about a relatively small proportion of people across bankruptcy who pay a contribution: a contribution is paid in one third of bankruptcy cases. It is totally wrong—it is a misunderstanding of the process, I am afraid—to suggest that what we are doing will result in those who cannot pay having to pay. That is a false assertion. Marco Biagi hit the nail on the head in his contribution. I will not repeat his remarks, which had a certain force. It is extremely difficult to understand why the chief Opposition party supported the bill at committee but now appears, because its members have concerns about a few of the sections, to be opposed to a bill that is supported by the vast majority of the money advice sector, including Citizens Advice Scotland. Yes; we can have debates at stage 2 about the detail of the bill—that is what stage 2 is for. However, it is very disappointing that, instead of supporting all the good measures in the bill that Mr Biagi read out, the Labour Party is choosing to adopt—

Ms Marra and I have exchanged a lot of views and I already have on the record all the answers to the questions that she repeated in her closing remarks.

Incidentally, as far as I know, the arrestment of earnings process can be carried out only against an employer. That was part of the law of Scotland during all the periods in which the Labour Party and Liberal Democrat Party were in power. Had they wanted to scrap the diligence of arrestment of earnings in Scotland, they had ample time to do so. I am not sure whether that is their policy now and neither, after Jenny Marra’s contribution this afternoon, is anyone else. I turn to the functions of the sheriff and the AIB, because those are serious matters. In response to Nigel Don’s remarks, I say that we will of course consider the issue extremely seriously. However, it was wrong to suggest, as Jenny Marra seemed to do in her closing speech, that the process began with the bill. That is untrue; it is factually incorrect. The process was begun a long time ago, and was hastened by the Bankruptcy and Diligence etc (Scotland) Act 2007, in which many processes were referred to the Accountant in Bankruptcy that hitherto had been carried out in court. At one point, one had to go to the Court of Session to recall sequestration, at ludicrous expense to private or public funds. It is absolutely sensible that relatively routine matters are carried out by the AIB.

That will provide greater consistency and clarity and is supported by the Scottish courts administration. The AIB is most certainly not “judge, jury and executioner”, to use Jenny Marra’s phrase. We did not have executions in Scotland the last time I looked, but we are in favour of the effective transfer of process. The requirement for advice was supported by 93 out of 129 respondents. I was disappointed that Hanzala Malik is opposed to it and is with the minority that thinks that people should not get that advice. The main issue is the question of what contribution debtors should make, and the Scottish Government’s view is that we are striking the right balance. The proposals that we have set out are designed to ensure that the creditor gets a reasonable turn; that the debtor is treated fairly; that there is provision for payment breaks and variations so that people’s changing circumstances can be taken into account; and that, once the bill becomes law, people in Scotland will receive a system of managing debt that is second to none.

I thank John Wilson for lodging the motion and for all the work that he does in the cross-party group on credit unions, which is one of the best attended and most active cross-party groups in the Parliament. Members from across parties have taken this opportunity to highlight the problems, misery, unhappiness and difficulties that can be caused to those who get into unsustainable debt, especially that associated with and caused by payday loans. The festive period can be a time of enormous financial strain for families throughout the country, with the pressures to buy presents for children and others. The 12 days of debtmas campaign aims to prevent people from getting into debt, especially at this time of year. The campaign was launched at the Grampian Credit Union in Aberdeen on 18 November. I take this opportunity to thank its chief executive, Gill Mathieson, for hosting a very successful launch event. I also thank her staff and the volunteers who were there in force. I had some interesting engagement with them and, during that time, which was punctuated by television cameras, radios and so on, the staff still took calls and were still advising people. The campaign is a bold one. It highlights the dangers of taking out payday loans. Last month, the Money Advice Service published its annual Christmas spending survey results, which showed that almost one in five people admitted that they were still paying off debts from last Christmas, and that 6 per cent planned to turn to payday loans to cover the costs of this Christmas. Like Rhoda Grant, I save with Hi-Scot, which is an example of a credit union that is achieving a great deal, as are many credit unions throughout the country. Sadly, more and more people are turning to payday loans. In six months, StepChange Debt Charity has helped 30,672 people with payday loan debts, which is nearly the same amount as it helped during the whole of 2012, and 800,000 people in Scotland are in serious debt. Plainly, it is vital that we do everything we reasonably can to ensure that people who need to access money and debt advice do so, and that they know where to get it. I am pleased that the credit unions are supportive of the Bankruptcy and Debt Advice (Scotland) Bill, which we have just debated. I very much look forward to that bill becoming law for the provisions that the credit unions generally welcome therein. We take our responsibility for raising awareness very seriously. That is why we have undertaken not one but three campaigns this year to seek to prevent people from entering into unmanageable debt. As Alex Johnstone said, there is no foolproof way of doing that. The power of Government is not absolute, and those who are taking out payday loans today will not be listening to this debate. We must therefore remember that, out there in the real world, people are making their own decisions, right or wrong, and we want to get across to them the alternatives that are available. That is why we decided that the 12 days of debtmas was a good, popular way of doing that. For the second time this year, we have worked in close partnership with the Daily Record, as we did when we produced the “Deal with your debt” publication, and the help out of the hole advertising campaign, which raised awareness of the debt arrangement scheme and directed people to money advice rather than to payday lending. Earlier, I advised members that 18,000 people had responded to the 12 days of debtmas campaign, but I inadvertently misinformed them. We are supposed to put that right as soon as possible and I have this fortunate opportunity so to do right now. I have been informed that there were 19,000 visitors to the website, not 18,000, and more than 2,000 people have searched for details of their local credit union. That has been a reasonably solid result. The other point that I make, in response to one of Kez Dugdale’s questions, is that the second phase of the campaign is to run from the third week in January, so the campaign is not a one-off event and activity will go on after Christmas. It is important that the campaign should be sustained. The Scottish Government has allocated £250,000 to the campaign for the year, which is split into the two phases that I mentioned. We must ensure that we get value for the taxpayers’ money that is used. We must evaluate campaigns and ensure that they are efficacious, which is their purpose. There is a reasonable balance to be struck: we need to use the money carefully, but we have a duty to promote the risks of payday lending, and we will continue so to do. Kez Dugdale asked about a loan guarantee fund. We have examined the idea closely and I will write to her with full details on the matter. Our examination took some time, because we asked the four main trade associations to consult their members and gather views. The results were inconclusive and polarised; members of the Scottish League of Credit Unions remain strongly opposed to the suggestion. The trade associations provided information that was based on the views of 72 credit unions, of which 37 were supportive of a loan guarantee fund and 35 were not. I make no judgment here, but it might be that the reason for that division is that many credit unions want to inculcate the ethic of saving and thrift. That is an important factor for some.

I will do so in a minute, if I have time—I am sorry, but I do not think that I will have time. I will write to the member with more detail, because she and Jackie Baillie raised the issue. We have not ruled anything out at this stage and we are happy to consider all advice, but there are mixed views on a loan guarantee fund. I think that many credit unions think that there are many other ways in which they can be helped in the short and long term. For example, public sector organisations, such as the Scottish Government, can encourage employees to sign up to credit unions. That is going on and it does not involve a great deal of money. I pay tribute to the people who are involved. The Bankruptcy and Debt Advice (Scotland) Bill is another short-term measure but, in the long term, as Mike MacKenzie said—and I do not make this a political point—given the consensus in the Parliament that payday loans should be properly regulated, it would be best if the Scottish Parliament were able to do that. The first thing that we would do is bring forward a cap on interest rates, which I think could be done by April 2014. That would really help people to avoid the iniquities of payday loans at Christmas 2014. I thank all members who have taken part in the debate. Meeting closed at 17:47.

I am very pleased indeed to have the opportunity to debate this important topic, especially at this time of year. I thank Kezia Dugdale for giving us that opportunity and praise all the members who contributed to the debate and made substantial speeches on a variety of points. I do not propose to rehearse all the statistics, some of which I was planning to use, but I underscore the Scottish Government’s view that the uncontrolled growth of payday lending in Scotland and the UK has been one of the causes of extreme social misery and hardship in our times. It is a relatively new social malaise and disease. It did not really exist about a decade ago, and there are not many other social scourges about which we could say that.

I will in a minute, if John Wilson will bear with me. It is beholden on us all, irrespective of party politics, to do our best with the powers that we have and to urge those in Westminster who have other powers to address the matter. It is clear that we have argued consistently since Margaret Burgess first raised the matter in a members’ business debate—the first one to which I responded in this session of the Parliament—that the lack of a cap on interest for payday loans in the UK is a serious omission, which allows companies to charge interest rates of more than 5,000 per cent, which seems quite extraordinary. We felt that that was wrong simply because many countries in the world have a cap on interest rates. I think that 37 states in America have controls on lending. In countries such as Germany, France, Finland and Australia, there are caps on the amount of interest that can be charged. To have a cap on interest is the norm, but in the UK it is the exception. Therefore, as the minister, I raised the issue a number of times with the UK minister, Norman Lamb, in April 2012. At that point, the response was that there was a lack of evidence and that a cap would lead to more consumer detriment. I respectfully disagreed with that and persisted in seeking to get the UK Government to introduce a cap. In March of this year, I raised the issue with the current minister, Jo Swinson, and with the chairman of the OFT, and I met Jo Swinson again just a month or so ago to urge her to introduce a cap. I am very pleased that, as a result of all the pressure that has been exerted by parties and many others, a cap is to be introduced, but the decision not to introduce it until 2015, which I understand is the UK Government’s position—I hope that I am not misrepresenting it—is the wrong decision. I think that a cap can be introduced in April of next year, so yesterday I wrote to Jo Swinson to urge her so to do and to hold an immediate consultation on the issue. There needs to be a consultation on what level the cap should be set at, whether it should apply to monthly interest and whether—as happens in Australia—it should include a limit on the amount of charges. This is not a matter of party politics; it is about something that we can all see is necessary. The control of a cap, among many others, is needed and it must be implemented as quickly as possible. We need to get it right, but I say, with respect, that I think that we can get it right sooner than 2015. That is why the Scottish Government has said that the cap should be introduced in April next year, so that we can join the many other countries in the world that regard this form of venal usury as socially unacceptable. It is ironic that, just this morning, I received on my mobile phone—from a company that I will not name for fear of inadvertently advertising or recommending it—an unsolicited text message that stated, “Need a loan for Christmas? Get cash in your account today with up to three months to pay back.” I have had no dealings whatever with that company; indeed, I have never heard of it. Members can rest assured that I will write to the FCA to complain about it. As we have heard from members such as Alison Johnstone, the behaviour of some such companies is absolutely unacceptable. In addition to the cap on interest rates, mandatory affordability checks need to be carried out, as Kez Dugdale mentioned. There also needs to be a curb on advertising, which NUS Scotland has rightly called for. Councils throughout the land do good work on that. Further thought needs to be given to restrictions on continuous payment authorities, which, as Kez Dugdale rightly said, give companies the right to plunder people’s bank accounts. Frankly, that is absolutely wrong. On some occasions, hundreds of attempts have been made to go into people’s accounts. Every attempt leads to more bank charges. That is quite simply scandalous, yet it is happening because it has not been properly regulated. The Scottish Government has done many things to address the issue by using the powers that we have to best effect. To be fair to all the parties that are represented in the chamber—and the Liberal party, which is not represented in the debate—we have done so with cross-party support. Through the Bankruptcy and Debt Advice (Scotland) Bill, we will make the provision of advice mandatory. We want there to be a financial national health service in this country, and we want to ensure that young people who are at school—many schoolchildren are listening to the debate in the gallery—learn about such matters. Why do we learn about physics, maths and history, yet we do not learn—or at least, we do not learn sufficiently well—about how to manage money? As a country, we need to do that. Much is done by the debt advice sector, banks and others, but we need to do more. As Mike MacKenzie indicated, we have made changes to the debt arrangement scheme, which freezes interest and charges earlier, thereby saving people who have payday loan debt significant sums in interest. We have undertaken major marketing campaigns with the excellent partnership of the Daily Record, which has led the charge, as it often does on the social issues of the day. In November, I launched in Grampian the 12 days of debtmas campaign, which has had an extraordinary response. Presiding Officer, my time is nearly up.

I think that I am restricted to seven minutes; otherwise, I would give way.

I apologise to Mr McNeil, but I am under a time order, which I must comply with. The Scottish Parliament has spoken clearly today, as we will next week in John Wilson’s credit union debate. I thank members for participating in the debate. I will continue to do everything that is in my power to address the extreme social misery that payday loans cause in Scotland today. 13:20 Meeting suspended. 14:00 On resuming—

The Scottish Government is helping businesses to create jobs all year round, through capital investment in infrastructure development, public procurement, business and export support services, and training and skills programmes. Scotland also offers the most competitive business tax regime in the United Kingdom, which frees resources to enable businesses to create permanent jobs.

As we have made clear on several occasions, the economic development agencies in Scotland, which deal with grant funding such as regional selective assistance, take account of such matters. In particular, zero-hours contracts are not consistent with successful grant funding through RSA, so I think that the matter has already been taken into account. On employment over the festive period, it is reasonable to expect some companies to need, first, to ask staff to work longer hours to reflect the greater volume of work that requires to be done, and secondly, to take on temporary staff. In other words, that is part of the market, and we recognise that. At the same time, we must ensure, as far as it is within this Parliament’s powers to do so, that all employees are properly and fairly remunerated for said work.

We and, I think, all parties in the Parliament view blacklisting as a totally unacceptable practice. The practice has received a great deal of attention recently, which is fortunate. As Mr Eadie knows, under the current constitutional arrangements employment law is reserved to the UK Government. I am confident that any Government of an independent Scotland will deal with blacklisting in a way that is as effective as Mr Eadie and the vast majority of members would want it to be.

The answer to Mr Fraser is no, I have not seen that research. When I read it, I will apply a considerable degree of sceptical forensic analysis thereto. It seems a dubious proposition that people on zero-hours contracts, who by their nature tend to be on low pay, should somehow be the happiest people on the planet. That seems to be a somewhat dubious proposition, even—if I may say so—for a Conservative.

I am a lawyer, but I think that it is important that we in the Parliament should not be legalistic. The objective that Mr Findlay wants to achieve is one that we all share, as our broad approach. Whether the matter is in the bill—

I am giving Mr Findlay the answer; if he wants to hear it, he should listen. Whether such issues are dealt with through primary legislation, subordinate legislation or guidance is a matter of judgment in each case. In this case, it is a matter for the minister who is handling the legislation. Mr Findlay should rest assured that we are determined to tackle blacklisting and that we will take all appropriate steps to do so.

The Scottish Government is committed to supporting and encouraging sustainable economic growth in North Lanarkshire, including Motherwell and Wishaw, and we are using all available levers to deliver that growth. Last Friday, we announced the 22 successful projects that are being funded by the regeneration capital grant fund, including the Cumbernauld community enterprise centre and the Forgewood community centre in north Motherwell, which will receive £5 million to develop new multifunctional community spaces, thereby kick-starting renewed physical regeneration that will benefit some of North Lanarkshire’s most deprived communities.

That is a fair question. We share the same objectives as Mr Pentland in that respect. We have made a commitment to the area and are working with North Lanarkshire Council. Phase 2 of the Ravenscraig tax incremental financing project, which ministers provisionally approved in March 2011, is one of four pilots that have been approved by the Scottish Government. It includes £73 million of public infrastructure investment, which should lever in £425 million of private investment and create more than 4,000 full-time equivalent jobs. The regeneration of Ravenscraig continues apace. Recently, £2 million was invested in working up the technical design and costings of area planning briefs for phase 2 developments with 93,000m² of retail and leisure facilities and 10,500m² of commercial space. In addition, there has been a great deal of activity by Scottish Enterprise in support of small businesses and larger businesses and a great deal of effort by the business gateway, as well. I will write to Mr Pentland on that. We are agreed that we must do everything we can to help the regeneration of Ravenscraig and the surrounding area. We are making good progress towards that objective.

We encourage credit unions to access our third sector business support and development programmes, including just enterprise and the enterprise ready fund.

Mr Macintosh and I and our respective parties share the objective that, irrespective of where they live, citizens throughout Scotland should have access to a local credit union. He is right to imply that the position is patchy. Some parts, such as Glasgow, have strong and active credit unions, but in other parts, access is not of the same degree. There are more than 100 credit unions in Scotland, but their sizes and capacities vary. The question is perfectly fair. We are completely determined to ensure that more and more people should be able to access credit unions and proceed to exercise their finances on the principle of thrift, rather than resorting to payday loans, which are the source of such social misery in this country. Although members such as Kezia Dugdale and John Wilson have been extremely active in campaigning for shared objectives, the tragedy is that we do not have the regulatory powers to introduce a cap on payday loans right now. However, I am pleased that, apparently, the UK Government has been persuaded towards that objective.

The provision of VisitScotland information centres is an operational matter for VisitScotland. It categorises sites for visitor information centres according to a range of factors, including footfall, bookings, the footprint of international visitors, proximity to high tourist traffic routes and proximity to significant clusters of attractions and activities.

We agree that the Borders is a magnificent place to have a holiday. That is why we have promoted golfing in the Borders to more than 2 million consumers and invested £650,000 in capital works at Abbotsford, the home of Sir Walter Scott. Jim Hume is right to point out that the Scottish Government’s policy of reopening the Borders railway will lead to many great opportunities. Many advantages will follow from the policies that we implement. Therefore, I am perfectly happy to engage with the member in due course on considering the manifold opportunities, such as the one that he has posited today.

The recent United Kingdom Government amendment to its Energy Bill 2012-13 to 2013-14, debated in the House of Lords last week, will remove the Scottish Parliament’s power and discretion over the renewables obligation in Scotland. The Scottish Parliament has twice expressed support for the underlying principles of electricity market reform if it remains consistent with Scotland’s existing policies and priorities. However, EMR risks failing in its objectives. That has serious repercussions for our existing generation and security of supply in Scotland, as well as for our renewables potential and ambitions. The UK’s amendment to the Energy Bill, and its new power to close the RO in Scotland, is a cause for serious concern. Successive Scottish Governments and Parliaments have used these devolved powers to advance renewable generation across Scotland. The proposed removal of Parliament’s discretion has caused consternation among stakeholders. The amendment cut through a live Scottish Government consultation. Decisions on issues such as grace periods—the flexibility beyond 2017 for stations that experience delays, a matter of huge importance to offshore and marine projects—will be taken out of Scotland’s hands. I have written to Ed Davey seeking justification for his decision to neither consult nor seek the Scottish Parliament’s agreement to that move. I also share the concerns expressed by the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets and the National Grid about the risks to security of supply. Electricity margins could drop to as little as 2 per cent by 2015-16, which is a huge challenge to security of supply. The margin is the difference between the aggregate capacity to generate electricity and the peak demand. The equivalent Scottish margin is 20 per cent but, in the medium term, we, too, could be at risk. Some think that Ofgem’s assessment is optimistic and that there should be a full-scale independent audit of capacity margins and security of supply. Scotland exports around a quarter of its output, helping keep the lights on across the UK. Longannet, Scotland’s largest power station, for example, could feasibly meet a quarter of our annual electricity demand. Longannet needs significant investment. Ofgem’s transmission charging review and the design of EMR’s capacity mechanism are key factors. The UK Government’s locational pricing methodology and EMR will impact on Longannet. The uncertainty also means that we have the ridiculous situation at Peterhead where the station has de-rated from 1,800 to just 400MW. Meanwhile, there are no plans to develop the new gas station at Cockenzie, which was consented to two years ago, due to UK energy policy confusion and uncertainties. Our thermal generation must be cleaner, and it can be, but those stations will power Scotland while new technologies are developed, balancing the grid and seeing the UK through this period of investment hiatus. The UK Government must ensure that EMR’s capacity mechanism takes into account Scotland’s role in providing secure supplies of power across the UK. The UK’s proposals for offshore renewables are sorely limited, with forecasts for 8GW of offshore wind, a level which jeopardises Scottish round 3 and Scottish territorial waters projects. That should be compared with Scotland’s higher renewables obligation certificate—ROC—bands for floating offshore wind. That support is unmatched by the UK just as its proposals for hydro degression jeopardise small schemes across Scotland. Hydro matters in Scotland. That is why we used our discretion to maintain higher support for hydro under the RO than there has been in the UK. SSE plc confirmed that its £30 million project at Glasa was explicitly linked to the Scottish Government’s decision. Meanwhile, our intergovernmental work on support for island renewables shows that Orkney, Shetland and the Western Isles could provide up to 5 per cent of total Great Britain electricity demand by 2030. However, the current UK Government proposals fall short of what is required to deliver that potential. The contrast with the UK Government’s support for imported nuclear technology could not be clearer. Consumers will pay up to £1,000 million each year for 35 years, which is more than twice the period of 15 years that is available for renewables technologies. That contract will give new nuclear electricity double the current wholesale price for electricity. Carbon capture and storage is another concern. Peterhead power station and the captain clean energy proposal in Grangemouth are excellent candidates for support, but Professor Stuart Haszeldine spoke recently of the “anger and depression” that are felt by the sector at the UK Government’s lack of progress. Those factors create risks. Renewables fabrication at Nigg, Methil and elsewhere, research in Orkney, the export of machines that have been invented in Edinburgh, Glasgow and Inverness, and community ownership and benefit across Scotland can still move forward, but only if the right decisions are made. Costs remain a vital issue, quite rightly. Investment in new technologies comes at a price. Of course, offshore technologies and CCS have huge economic potential for Scotland and the UK, unlike nuclear, which is all cost and little benefit. Costs and benefits matter, particularly in the light of gas and electricity price increases. The Department of Energy and Climate Change’s own research shows that renewables can deliver smaller bills in future than can the status quo, which is a point that seems to have got lost amid the UK Government’s confused claims about green levies and costs. The Scottish Government takes the interests of vulnerable consumers extremely seriously. I have written to and spoken with the energy companies to seek transparency and a commitment to protect people who are in need. We maintained the warm homes programme, even as it was abandoned south of the border. The Deputy First Minister has outlined how an independent Government will ensure that the costs of vital energy efficiency measures are met centrally, rather than by consumers. That will cut consumers’ energy bills by approximately £70 a year. In our view, that is a fairer system. This Parliament has supported the EMR process, but that support has been based on our achieving an outcome that is consistent with Scottish policy priorities and ambitions. Such an outcome now looks at best uncertain. The removal of Scottish parliamentary discretion in the matter of the RO is troubling and demands an explanation. The chamber should also understand the threats that EMR poses to Scotland’s renewables ambitions and to our established position as a provider of secure energy supplies. The Scottish Government agreed to maintain a common energy market in 2011, and the chamber has twice supported the process of EMR. I can update Parliament because, in the past few hours, I have received a reply from Ed Davey. It is remarkable what a parliamentary statement can elicit. At least in tone, if not in substance, Mr Davey responds to some of our concerns. If that signals a change in approach, we will be the first to welcome that. However, as things stand, the concerns that I have set out remain. Should they be fully addressed, we will remain willing to sign a memorandum of understanding with DECC that gives form to our joint commitments, but we will not do that at the risk of leaving Scottish consumers as vulnerable to power shortages in the future as consumers south of the border are to the power shortages that they already face over the next two years.

Iain Gray is absolutely right to highlight the challenge of security of supply. The first obligation of energy policy is to avoid power disconnections. However, as Ofgem, the National Grid and many other expert commentators have made clear, England faces very real risks of brownouts—or intermittent power supply—and even blackouts as soon as two years from now. We are extremely keen to avoid that situation and, indeed, the thermal generation capacity at Longannet, Peterhead and our two nuclear power stations is significant enough to supply that power. It is essential that we address the problem of security of supply, which is why I have suggested that an independent audit be considered for these matters. As for Iain Gray’s final question, I hope that it will be recognised that I have sought to have—and indeed have had—a constructive relationship with UK Government ministers. We want to continue that relationship, but it is right that we set down markers with regard to very serious concerns that we have heard not only from the renewables sector but from the thermal generation sector, where stations such as Longannet are seriously concerned about the various threats to their continued operation in accordance with their ambitions. Finally, we are extremely keen to ensure a workable system of connecting the islands to the opportunity to participate in Scotland’s energy revolution.

First of all, as I have said, I am keen to continue to maintain constructive relations with all UK Government ministers. Indeed, that is how I do my job. However, as I have clearly expounded in my statement, my primary duty is to stand up for the Scottish interest. Let me turn to the nuclear issue, which the majority of Murdo Fraser’s comments were about. Sadly, Mr Fraser did not really provide us with the whole story. [Interruption.] Mr Fraser should wait a minute; he will get the rest of the story. Mr Fraser equiparated and compared the headline rates of the proposed CFDs and the price for nuclear, but he left out a few other facts about that. The length of contracts for offshore wind will be 15 years, but the length of the contract for nuclear will be 35 years. [Interruption.]

Mr Fraser may not like that information, but it is information of a factual nature. The contract length that has been agreed between the UK Government and EDF Energy will be 35 years and the contract will be worth an estimated £1,000 million a year. Given that the stations may not be in commission until 2023, that means that UK consumers will subsidise output under the terms of the contract until 2060. There is another difference: decommissioning costs. Another fact that Mr Fraser chose not to mention is that the existing decommissioning cost of clearing up the UK’s nuclear waste legacy at Sellafield has reached £67.5 billion, and there is no idea when the costs will stop increasing. Finally, the total cost of subsidies to the nuclear industry is not far off from being on a par with the cost of the subsidies for the renewables industry. We therefore believe that these are not Scotland’s priorities. Unlike the Conservatives, we see a different future ahead for Scotland—in renewables—but that future will potentially be placed in jeopardy unless we can continue the dialogue with the UK Government over the crucial coming months in a constructive vein.

I certainly hope that it will. Using the powers that we have enjoyed under ROCs, we have set an incentive for floating and innovative offshore wind turbines to enable their test and development. They are particularly suitable for Scottish waters, which are deeper. A floating system, as opposed to systems that have concrete bases or are fixed to the sea bed, has cost benefits in the long term, so it is essential that we continue our work with a number of developers that are close to going ahead with investing in floating and innovative turbines in Scotland. If they do so, one of the benefits will be that places such as the Kishorn yard can reopen. If they do not, such places are unlikely to reopen. That is why I have pressed the case with the UK Government. I very much hope that we will be able to work together to ensure that that vital nascent technology can receive the support that it needs to contribute to meeting our emissions targets, generate electricity and generate a considerable number of jobs in this country.

The position on nuclear is absolutely clear. We have two existing nuclear power stations, which are generating electricity, and we recognise that they are making a substantial contribution to maintaining security of supply. Electricity needs to come from a variety of sources and, as long as they can be safely operated, they should continue to be operated. Hunterston and Torness were purchased, constructed and erected a long time ago. Mr Macintosh alluded to the fact that I have visited them but, contrary to his statement, I mentioned them earlier as well. However, the difference with new nuclear power stations is that they involve a massive amount of expenditure. Two nuclear power stations are being constructed in mainland Europe as we speak: the EDF project at Flamanville, whose cost has increased to £8 billion from the original estimate of £3.3 billion—it has more than doubled—and which is four years behind schedule; and Finland’s fifth nuclear reactor, which is six years behind schedule and has a cost overrun of up to £3.6 billion. It is sensible to learn from experience, so we should learn that the cost overruns of new nuclear power stations are a strong argument for not adopting them.

Yes, I do. I had the pleasure of visiting Longannet a few weeks back. It supports directly 270 jobs and has made a substantial contribution to Scotland’s energy needs. Mr Coffey raised the point of transmission charges. It is estimated that the transmission charges facing Longannet and Scotland are between £20 million and £30 million more each year than for an equivalent power station in the south of England. Plainly, those additional costs are a burden that has to be paid and met, but they point to a discriminatory charging system across the UK that makes it extremely difficult for companies to replace existing thermogeneration or, indeed, extend its life while we transition to a low-carbon method of generating our electricity needs.

That was a mixed and varied couple of questions. However, I can assure all members that I have made those points over a long period with DECC and set out Scotland’s particular case, not least our support for Scottish islands’ renewables as a top priority for the Scottish Government. I have welcomed on many occasions the fact that Ed Davey has had a consultation on an island strike price. However, the problem about that is that many of the consultees have indicated very clearly that one strike price for three islands will not form the basis of connections to all three island groups. Indeed, that is not surprising, because the Baringa and TNEI report, which was published this year and which was sought by both Mr Davey and me to prove the need for the island connections, found that each of the island groups requires individual strike prices. That is a clear illustration of what is at stake here. Mr McArthur will know far more about the island that he represents than I do. However, are we going to see the islands of Scotland connected, or are we not? We have a shared objective, but it is essential that the method that the UK Government introduces will be capable of delivering that objective. It is absolutely right that I come here and set out concerns, of which Mr McArthur will be aware and which many in industry and representatives of his area have expressed, in the hope that we can move from where we are at the moment to a set of proposals that will secure the objectives that Mr McArthur rightly points out we broadly share.

There is a lack of certainty at the moment as to the incentive to be provided for the future of both wave and tidal energy. Just last week, I attended an expert group in Edinburgh in relation to these matters. I entirely agree that there is a will across both the UK and Scottish Governments to support wave and tidal energy. I know that Greg Barker is committed to that, and I will say so. However, the question is not whether there is a will and a shared objective but whether the specific proposals that will be made will be sufficient, and the delay in the consideration of specific measures for wave and tidal in the islands is not necessarily helpful to securing that outcome.

As a matter of form and with some hesitancy, I think that I should refrain from commenting in direct response to that question, given that the matter is sub judice in the courts in Edinburgh today, but I will write to Mr Macdonald on those matters.

Mr Brodie raises a good point. The CFD that the UK Government has offered for Hinkley Point is, broadly speaking, twice as much as the wholesale electricity price. It is not clear what specific account has been taken of huge decommissioning costs in respect of the property. Mr Brodie is also right to say that the subsidy applies not just to the CFD but to other financial obligations. The UK is committing taxpayers to a massive subsidy from about 2023 to about 2060. This is an enormous subsidy and it has completely changed the dynamic of the equation. In the meantime, the real concerns are about security of electricity supply in the UK. It seems to me that we must collectively give much more thought to that, and an independent audit would be the right first step.

I will work with commoners or anybody to deliver the renewables ambitions for Scotland.

What we found disappointing was that the decision was taken without any prior consultation with the Scottish Parliament. That is, by any view, at odds with the rhetoric and the promises that are being made in relation to another debate that is going on at the moment.

The Scottish Government places on record its gratitude to COSLA and to Stephen Hagan for the assistance that he has given in the work that we have done in that regard. I offer Mr Fraser, as convener of the committee, an unqualified assurance that our collaborative work with COSLA will continue throughout the bill’s passage to ensure that it does not imperil local democracy in Scotland.

Does Jenny Marra not recognise that, on the regulator’s duty in respect of sustainable economic growth, section 4 quite clearly states: “In exercising its regulatory functions, each regulator must contribute to achieving sustainable economic growth, except to the extent that it would be inconsistent with the exercise of those functions to do so”? That surely makes it clear that what Jenny Marra has said—that the economic duty would override those functions—is factually incorrect.

I thank members for their contributions to the debate. I pay tribute to Murdo Fraser, the convener of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, for the way in which he presented the arguments, and I thank the clerks of that committee, who as always performed a power of work in the background to assist members in their scrutiny of the bill. We have had a useful debate, although I cannot say that any of it has been desperately surprising, because we have rehearsed and rehashed arguments that were put at some length in committee and perhaps probed to a greater extent, as is possible given the committee procedure. I hope that I will cover most of the points raised in the debate but, as always, I am happy to correspond with any member should I fail to deal with any significant point in this relatively short speech. Better regulation is an important example of the Government’s determination to use every available lever to support sustainable economic growth and make Scotland a more successful country with opportunities for all to flourish. The Regulatory Reform (Scotland) Bill is a key element of our continuing work to deliver better regulation. As Jamie McGrigor stated, better regulation should be characterised by a number of principles: it should be transparent, accountable, proportionate, consistent and targeted. Those principles have been expounded and developed by Professor Russel Griggs and the regulatory reform group, whose recommendations are always worthy of careful scrutiny by members of the Parliament and have helped us enormously in a great many areas of Scotland’s economic and environmental life. The bill will help to provide a favourable business environment, in which companies can grow and flourish. Successful businesses create wealth and jobs, as well as improving communities and ordinary people’s lives. I was delighted at the support that the business community in Scotland evinced for the bill. Much reference has been made to the Federation of Small Businesses, which has taken a particular interest in the bill. It starts off its briefing not by talking about business, economic growth and jobs but by saying: “We know that regulation is necessary to protect communities and the environment from potential harm. We also know that it protects small businesses, employees and the public from the irresponsible and unscrupulous practices of a minority.” That is the beginning of the FSB’s comments and it is extremely welcome. We are for better regulation, not for removing all regulation. Regulation meant that children were no longer put down mines or up chimneys. Regulation—the Parliament has seen a lot of it—helped to deal with some of the horrific illnesses and problems associated with asbestos. Regulation has produced a health and safety regime in our oil and gas industry that is regarded as an example to other countries around the world. Regulation is not per se wrong but necessary. However, it must be the best regulation and conform to the principles that we have described. Laws and regulations play an essential role in fostering a prosperous, fair and safe society. They provide essential rights and protections for citizens, consumers, workers, businesses, communities and the environment. In so doing, they also support sustainable economic growth. However, as ever, we are ambitious for Scotland and want much better regulation—better in concept and development. I am delighted to have worked, along with the Scottish Government officials to whom much credit is due, with our key stakeholders, especially COSLA. I mentioned Stephen Hagan and those who work with him in COSLA. We have spent quite a lot of time trying to reach a modus operandi with which COSLA and local authorities in Scotland can broadly feel comfortable. We are on course to achieve that, but that work will continue. We have also engaged closely with SEPA and SNH on their role. Paul Wheelhouse has led that aspect of the work. In his opening remarks, he covered clearly how it relates to the bill’s provisions. I am delighted that the bill reflects the views and active input of the key stakeholders. To suggest that it does not is somewhat unfair to all those who have been involved in that serious work. However, the committee’s consideration of the bill will also enhance it, and we will lodge a number of amendments based on its recommendations. We listen carefully to what the committees say, as is right and proper. I am delighted, too, that Mr Wheelhouse will lodge amendments designed to protect those who are working for SEPA from assaults and attacks on them in the course of their employment. That was covered very clearly by Graeme Dey in his contribution. As Mr Wheelhouse indicated, protection will be extended to employees who face that type of threat in their work in the same way as we have extended such protection to other emergency services workers. Out of a sense of inquisitiveness, I turn to those members who would vote against the bill today and say to them that, were the bill to go no further, one effect would be that that protection could not be extended to the workers of SEPA. This is really an issue for members of the Labour Party to consider. Were they, as appears to have been indicated, to vote against the principles of the bill—rather than being split down the middle, which is what they appear to have been in committee—rather than to try to amend it, improve it and deal with the points that Claudia Beamish and others made, the effect would be to deny SEPA employees the very protection that I would have expected Labour members to wish to extend. Perhaps, even at this late stage, they will reconsider. I turn to what is perhaps the main point, which Jenny Marra—to be fair to her—Alison Johnstone and several other members mentioned, and that is economic growth. As I think the committee has recognised and acknowledged, we have made it absolutely clear that the duty in respect of sustainable economic growth will be clearly set out in a strategic code of practice. I recall that we alluded in committee to the fact that John Swinney has already provided a definition of sustainable economic growth in response to parliamentary written question S4W-10994. Although the code of practice will not necessarily duplicate that definition, the suggestion that there is no definition perhaps means that people need to pay a bit more attention to what we have said in the course of this session of Parliament, including what the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth said in responding directly—as is right and proper—to a parliamentary question. Having listened to businesses, and with the endorsement of local authorities, we are minded to lodge amendments to introduce a framework for primary authority in Scotland, which will deliver consistent regulation through partnership working with local authorities. A more supportive business environment through consistent, effective and efficient regulation will be provided through other specific measures in the bill, such as the integrated framework for environment regulation; linking planning fees to satisfactory performance of planning authorities; speeding up the process of resolving legal challenges to offshore marine energy projects; and introducing a transferable certificate of compliance for mobile food businesses applying for street traders’ licences. Incidentally, that matter was originally raised by a member of the CBI at a meeting that I had with it a couple of years ago. That shows, I hope, that this Government is ready to, and does in practice, consider and respond to appropriate matters raised by businesses and organisations such as the FSB, the CBI, the SCDI, the Scottish Chambers of Commerce, the Institute of Directors and, of course, the trade representative organisations. I thank those representatives of the STUC with whom I have engaged. It is fair to say that we have not reached total agreement on matters but, of course, we continue to engage regularly and very seriously with the STUC. I am determined that we will promote among all Scottish regulators a broad and deep alignment with the Government’s purpose of focusing government and public services on creating a more successful country, with opportunities for all of Scotland to flourish through increasing sustainable economic growth. I believe that Parliament shares that ambition, as indeed do regulators and business. We will therefore continue with a team Scotland approach, working with regulators, business and others to deliver sustainable economic growth for Scotland.

Planning for homecoming is progressing well and the year-long programme of events planned across the country will celebrate the very best of Scotland’s food and drink, our assets as a country of natural beauty and our rich creativity and cultural and ancestral heritage.

Yes, I do. I was delighted that Lonely Planet judged Scotland to be one of the top three places in the world to visit, along with Brazil and Antarctica—a mixed bag there, Presiding Officer. I agree entirely that the year of homecoming is an excellent opportunity for people throughout Scotland to celebrate our many attractions. I am delighted that there are funded or partner events planned for all local authority areas and that the homecoming Scotland 2014 programme currently includes 241 events. In 2014, Scotland will be on the world stage as never before, so we should all celebrate it together.

I welcome the opportunity to debate carbon capture and storage for the very first time in the Scottish Parliament, and to discuss the part that it can play as part of Scotland’s future energy mix and the economic opportunities that can be realised through development of a vibrant CCS industry. The Scottish Government has consistently expressed whole-hearted support for CCS over a long period of time, and we recognise the important role that the technology can play in reducing CO2 emissions and in driving economic growth and jobs. We were supportive of the original CCS project at Peterhead—BP’s decarbonised fuels project, known as DF1—and the subsequent commercial-scale project at Longannet, so we were disappointed that neither of those projects came to fruition. We do not dwell on the past, however—we must look to the future. CCS technology can transform how we generate power, can help to reduce carbon emissions and can support the security of our electricity supply. Here in Scotland and worldwide, it is a fact that hydrocarbons will remain a central element of the energy mix for many years to come; currently, more than 80 per cent of global primary energy use is fossil-fuel based. However, while we move towards an increasing share for renewables, we have a duty to minimise carbon emissions while ensuring sustainable economic growth. CCS is the only technology that is available to mitigate greenhouse-gas emissions from large-scale fossil-fuel usage in the industrial and power sectors, and it is entirely complementary to renewables because clean thermal base-load will still be required to balance the intermittency of wind power. CCS is part of the lowest-cost route to decarbonisation. When we talk about CCS, we must acknowledge the sobering reality of the cost of not doing it; the International Energy Agency has estimated that, by 2050, the cost of tackling climate change without CCS could be 40 per cent higher than it would be with CCS. This morning, many MSPs and their researchers attended an excellent briefing from two companies: Shell and the Summit Power Group. I am indebted to the representatives of both companies who attended, some of whom are here in the gallery to listen to the debate this afternoon. We heard from Eric Redman, who is the chief executive officer of the Summit Power Group, about the exciting opportunities that could arise from development of the captain clean energy project. I am grateful to Eric for travelling from Seattle to speak to us today. He told us about the potential impact of the captain clean energy project, which could deliver up to £3.4 billion gross value added to the Scottish economy, as well as approximately 2,000 jobs in the construction phase and 300 operational jobs as the project is implemented. We also heard from Belinda Perriman of Shell, who spoke about the Peterhead CCS project. It is clear that, although that project will have short-term economic benefits, it also represents a unique opportunity for Scotland to lead the way globally in this emerging industry. Peterhead CCS will be the first project in the world to demonstrate clean electricity from gas, thereby positioning Scotland to develop key competencies and supply-chain capabilities. However, economic impact and supply-chain opportunities are only part of the picture. Both projects could create a step change in emissions reductions in Scotland. Peterhead will produce 400MW of clean electricity from gas, and the captain clean energy project aims to produce 570MW of clean electricity from coal. The captain project also aims to capture and store 3.8 million tonnes of CO2 per annum, and the Peterhead power project aims to capture and store up to 1 million tonnes of CO2 per annum. The two projects mean clean electricity, new jobs and reduced emissions, which is an impressive triumvirate, and they tell us that global companies such as Shell and Summit Power are willing to invest in Scotland to develop commercial-scale CCS for a range of very positive reasons. Let me outline some of those reasons. First, Scotland has many skills and engineering experience that have been gained from the oil and gas industries and which are transferable to CCS. We have companies such as Doosan Babcock actively researching CCS technologies, and we have substantial academic expertise in many of our universities. It is hard to single out any project—I mean no disrespect to those that I cannot name this afternoon—but I make special mention of the Scottish carbon capture and storage collaboration between Heriot-Watt University, the University of Edinburgh and the British Geological Society. Few other United Kingdom bodies have done so much to promote, research and advocate CCS. I pay special tribute to Professor Stuart Haszeldine in that respect. Previous research has clearly highlighted Scotland’s massive CO2 storage capacity. We easily have sufficient capacity to store our industrial carbon emissions for the next 200 years and to receive and store as much as 100 million tonnes of CO2 a year by 2030. Indeed, the importance of the North Sea in European CO2 storage is recognised notably by the Zero Emissions Platform and the North Sea basin task force. They understand the importance of the central North Sea as a CO2 storage hub. Secondly, on the CCS regulatory framework, Scotland, in conjunction with the UK Government, was one of the first parts of the European Union to legislate for CCS; it implemented the EU CCS directive by the end of 2011. We then proactively developed a regulatory road map to allow the permitting and consenting of large-scale CCS projects. Our regulatory road map has since been shared with Governments all over the world and used by the UK Government, the European Commission, the International Energy Agency and the Global CCS Institute to promote regulatory best practice. Indeed, that was one of the reasons why the Global CCS Institute came to Scotland to celebrate and have its conference in May this year. I had the pleasure of inviting its CEO, Brad Page, who recognised the fact that Scotland has achieved a great deal in promoting, supporting and advocating CCS. Those ideals are at the very heart of that global institution. I think that that is a fairly positive endorsement of our efforts to date. Scotland is the natural place to develop a CCS industry, and the building blocks of that new industry could be the two CCS projects that have been proposed. The Peterhead power project was announced as a preferred bidder in the UK CCS competition in March, which was very good news for Scotland and places us in a very good position going forward. However, it is equally important, for a number of reasons, that we do not lose highly innovative CCS projects such as the captain clean energy project. The two projects that were selected for preferred bidder status in the Department of Energy and Climate Change’s competition—one coal and one gas project—were good news, and we support that. I welcome that support from DECC and obviously wish to make it clear to the UK Government parties here that we are working closely in partnership with the UK Government on all these matters. However, it also clear to me that we will, looking ahead, need more than two projects if we are to see the benefits for Scotland and the UK. Multiple CCS projects will provide the kind of learning that will be required in order to reduce rapidly the cost of CCS to make it commercially appealing and able to compete with other low-carbon technologies. As I mentioned earlier, massive economic benefits can be accrued from the development of a CCS project. The Scottish Government has already recognised the importance of delivering CCS in relation to power generation in our national planning framework, on which we are consulting. It will set the agenda for long-term spatial planning in Scotland. We do not wish to lose this once-in-a-generation opportunity to future proof clean thermal base-load capacity, increase our security of supply and reduce harmful emissions into the bargain, so I want to continue to work with UK Government ministers to ensure that projects that do not enjoy preferred-bidder status are incentivised through the electricity market reform process. I note that the sentiments of the Conservative amendment are very much in keeping with our thoughts on the matter; the differences are minor. We believe that the Summit Power project should be specifically supported as well as the Shell project, but these things are being progressed in a reasonable way with the UK Government. I want to make that clear for Mr Fraser’s benefit, and that of Mr McArthur. We want DECC’s contracts for difference process to move forward as swiftly as possible in order that we can ensure that projects outside the competition have every chance of succeeding. We note that there are also opportunities for enhanced oil recovery, which is being pursued in many other parts of the planet. I remain convinced that CCS is technically viable. The various components of the technology have been tried and tested throughout the world. Putting them all together is something that has not been attempted in Europe, but in response to Mr Harvie’s amendment, I point out that the various components of the technology have been tried and tested, according to the experts whom I have heard.

I am not an expert on these matters, but my understanding from those who are is that application of the CCS technology is such that we can have a high degree of confidence that there will be a very substantial reduction in carbon emissions. The technology has been tried and tested in various parts of the world. I may expand on that if I have the opportunity in my closing speech. We want to work with people in all parties on what seems to me to be a method of delivering green electricity from fossil fuels, both gas and coal. I hope that we can all unite around that. I have great pleasure in opening the debate, and I think that it will be constructive. I am pleased that representatives from all parties attended the briefing session and an informal event yesterday evening to hear more about the opportunities for Scotland from both the exciting projects, and from the possible further application of CCS throughout the world. I move, That the Parliament believes that carbon capture and storage (CCS) is a critical technology and component in the decarbonisation of Scotland’s energy supplies; recognises that Scotland has strong comparative advantages to develop a CCS industry; further recognises the potential for jobs and enhanced oil recovery that CCS can bring to the country; supports the UK Government’s CCS commercialisation competition but would like to see swifter progress through the next stages; considers that the announcement of the Peterhead Power Project as a preferred bidder is an important development of CCS on a commercial scale, but that, if a fully-developed CCS industry is to flourish, the UK’s CCS competition must have more than the two preferred bidders, and understands the importance of the UK Government continuing to encourage and incentivise other highly-innovative CCS projects such as the Captain Clean Energy Project.

Patrick Harvie mentioned the IPCC which, as I understand it, clearly stated in its 2013 report: “Limiting climate change will require substantial and sustained reductions of greenhouse gas emissions.” Earlier, I made the point that the International Energy Agency has calculated that the global carbon clean-up of energy will be faster and 40 per cent cheaper if CCS is used. Does Mr Harvie feel that that is a strong argument in favour of learning about and adopting CCS technology?

Does Iain Gray acknowledge that the Scottish Government has clearly and consistently stated that we welcome the extension of the life of the existing nuclear power stations? I attended the ceremony at Hunterston to recognise the extension of that station’s life. An extension is expected to apply to Torness, provided that that is safe. On the existing stations, we support the position that Mr Gray has adopted.

I appreciate Patrick Harvie’s method of debating, which is to address the topic in the debate and not to prepare a speech in advance. I put it to him that each of the components of carbon capture, storage and transportation are generally settled technologies and that what needs to be demonstrated is the application of all those technologies together.

I begin by pointing out that I omitted to mention earlier that Shell, too, was represented in the gallery today. Belinda Perriman, who provided an excellent briefing to MSPs earlier, was here for part of the debate. We greatly appreciate the support that she and her colleagues at Shell—a team of 56, I believe—are providing. I should also have made it clear that Shell is being supported by SSE in connection with this project. That should be placed on the record as I am not sure that it was mentioned earlier, which may have been my fault. This has been an interesting, informative and, at times, impassioned debate. Like Mr Fraser—though he may have put it slightly differently—I think that it has been one of the most constructive debates that I can remember taking place here in Parliament. That is very welcome. I cannot remember previously having led a debate in which Mr Harvie expressed the view that it was a balanced debate. We should accept that that is some form of progress, although I was surprised when Frankenstein made a somewhat unexpected appearance in the debate.

Even Frankenstein can be rehabilitated. The contributions from throughout the chamber have been extremely useful. I know that Angus MacDonald, as the local MSP, has been assiduous in pursuing the issue and acquainting himself with the facts by meeting the company that wishes to invest a huge amount of money in his constituency. I welcome that and his continuing strong interest in the matter. Joan McAlpine rightly put her finger on the importance of the academic side of the debate. It is not just pure research. Professor Haszeldine, who is in the gallery, and many others are working directly with companies and assisting them in presenting complex information to potential investors. That is an extremely useful combination of academe and industry working together, particularly in technologies that, as has been pointed out, have not yet proved themselves in economic terms. I was pleased that Mr Harvie emphasised that he has concerns not objections. In the spirit in which he made his contributions, I say that that is something that we should welcome. I want to address some of the main points of the debate, which is what I should be doing. First, there is the extent to which CCS is an untried, unviable or unproven technology, or one that has not yet been proven to be economically viable. It is always useful to set out a few facts in order that we can go on from those facts to come to conclusions. Capture by separation of CO2 gas has been undertaken since 1929. I am informed by Professor Haszeldine that the process is widely used worldwide and will be used by Shell at the Peterhead power plant. The Summit Power project at Grangemouth will use heating to gasify the coal—not burn it—to capture CO2 and then burn hydrogen. As one of the Labour members—I think that it was Margaret McDougall—mentioned, the overall percentage efficiency of the plant is expected to be in the high 30s and low 40s, even with capture operating. By contrast, Longannet, with no capture, has an efficiency of around 32 per cent. I am informed that the gasification process itself is very well established and used globally in refineries and chemical plant. In other words, the essential pre-combustion element of the process is not a nascent technology; it is an established technology. Indeed, when Summit Power and Shell were presenting this morning to MSPs, they were anxious to put across the message that we are dealing here not with new, untried technologies but with settled technologies. To do them justice—in the sense of being fair to them given their investment of time in seeking to educate us as non-experts—I stress that they put across the argument that we are dealing with a series of tested, settled technologies. Those technologies are not to be compared with tidal and wave energy, for example, which of course Mr Harvie and I support absolutely as playing an increasing and very important part in providing electricity for Scotland and indeed the world. However, tidal and wave energy are nascent technologies and CCS is not a nascent technology. It is important to get that on the record because, at times, I felt that we were veering off and moving backwards slightly—I am not making any individual criticisms here—to suggest that somehow CCS is at an earlier stage than in fact it is. Of course, transportation of CO2—

I think that I will move on, with respect to Mr Harvie—I will perhaps take an intervention from him later. Claudia Beamish made the point that we need to be absolutely sure that the transportation of the CO2 along the pipelines and into the depleted basins will be done correctly. She is absolutely right, but then again, transportation and storage are technologies that have been deployed all over the world with success and efficacy. Therefore my point again is that we are not leaping into the dark here. We are not travelling to the moon. We are doing things that have been done for a long time all over the world. I just wanted to make that point.

My understanding as a non-scientist is that both projects are absolutely confident that we have an existing pipeline structure that, with the appropriate analysis and checks, can be safely used; that the storage is a process that has been shown to work; that leakage is not an issue that they cannot deal with; and that these are—this is the point—fairly settled technologies, not new ones. I will move on to deal with the points that Mr Fraser raised. The fundamental point that we want to make about this is that we cannot really expect just to have two demonstration projects and that is it. We must all recognise that, if we are to see the benefits flow from CCS, there must be more than two projects. The motion does not prescribe that the third must be the Summit Power project. The motion refers to projects “such as the Captain Clean Energy Project”, so it does not commit the Conservatives and the Liberals, if they vote for the motion today—which I hope they will—to unconditional support. The motion says that we want to travel in that direction and that we want to do so in a practical manner. I understand that it is argued that, within the levy control framework, there may be the possibility of funding more than the two preferred bidders as a result of the competition, so we are not asking for the DECC competition to be widened. That would slow things down. It is possible that the reserve bidders, of which Summit Power is one, may move forward were either the white rose project or Shell to drop off. Were that to happen—we hope that it will not, because we want to see England succeed with this technology as well—I hope that, in that spirit, we can persuade the Conservatives that we are working together on this and that we can unite later on in Parliament towards that end. Plainly, this has been a debate that will disappoint some. It will disappoint those who relish confrontation. It will disappoint those who savour the gratuitous trading of casual insults. It will disappoint those who seek from their politicians a sort of peacetime warfare—a warfare of words or a barracking battle—or those who want harangue, hubris and hot air. I will not give people that. Not today, anyway. [Laughter.] I think that I just beat Mr Fraser to that comment. We want Scotland to give broad support today for carbon capture and storage technology, which has moved way beyond the talking stage to a situation in which the Shell and SSE Peterhead project will, it is hoped, be going ahead and there is a real possibility that a second project at Grangemouth—the Summit Power Group captain clean energy project—will also go ahead. In my view, that second project offers Scotland tremendous opportunities. We have world-leading decarbonisation targets; a large and mature hydrocarbon sector; a strong engineering sector; the pipeline infrastructure; extensive opportunities for geological CO2 storage; and academic excellence. I do not think that any other country in the world has all six of those extraordinary assets. Scotland is quite simply the best place in the world for carbon capture and storage.

The size of the offshore renewables market and its associated employment at present rests on the ambition of the United Kingdom Government to develop the market through the current electricity market reform. The Scottish Government continues to make the case for ambitious reforms to support the sector, and it looks forward to a positive conclusion to the UK Government’s current consultation.

I always try to be realistic. Just yesterday, I attended an event in Largs, at which Arriva announced its support of 16 young people to do a pre-apprenticeship wind technician training course at Fife College. Just last week I met Repsol; I also met SSE, which has 800 people employed in Scotland who are dependent on wind farms. In recent times I have met EDF Energy, EDPR and Scottish Power. All those companies—and many more—are supportive of onshore and offshore wind. I find it a bit difficult to understand the Conservative policy, since some members—such as Alex Johnstone and Murdo Fraser beside him—seem to be opposed to wind farms, some are in favour of them and, indeed, some have one of their own.

Decommissioning presents enormous opportunities. Estimates vary, but it is likely that decommissioning will be worth more than £30 billion by 2040, and that opportunity must be grasped by the Scottish supply chain. Moreover, that figure does not include the future international opportunities that Scotland’s enterprise agencies are considering.

Yes, I do. Maureen Watt is very knowledgeable about the industry, and she knows that our subsea sector is pre-eminent in the world, which should also be the case with decommissioning. I should add that we do not wish for the premature cessation of production: we want fields to continue to produce for as long as they can and to maximise their production. We want to get the maximum benefit that we can. However, it is plain that some installations need to be decommissioned, and that is quite simply an enormous opportunity for Scotland. There are concerns that, because of investments in vessels such as the Pieter Schelte and other investments by Norway, the United Kingdom Government may not be ready to grasp the thistle—as it were—and ensure that we do not lose those advantages. I attended a conference recently in St Andrews that was hosted by Decom North Sea, and it was plain that there is huge interest in the area at present. The Scottish Government will honour our decommissioning responsibilities fully in the event of a yes vote in the referendum, and that will provide us with the most stable environment to ensure that Scotland has the competitive advantage in decommissioning, as it will in the oil and gas industry as a whole.

Responsibility for the management, performance and monitoring of the delivery of the business gateway services across Lanarkshire rests with North Lanarkshire Council. North Lanarkshire Council works in partnership with South Lanarkshire Council to ensure that the service is addressing the needs of both local authority areas. The Scottish Government is a member of the business gateway management group, which receives reports on the performance of the service across Scotland.

I can look into the specific point that the member makes and report back to him but, plainly, it is the responsibility of local government to determine how best to deliver business gateway services, and rightly so. Sometimes, there are few tender responses or even only a single one. I suggest that that is not in any way unique. Lanarkshire Enterprise Services was the successful tenderer and it was also successful in winning bids for the service in Ayrshire and Renfrewshire. It is an enterprise trust—a private sector not-for-profit organisation—whose chief executive is Ronnie Smith, with whom I have had many dealings. He has always evinced strong leadership and support for business. I hope and have confidence that that will be the case in respect of his new duties in serving Lanarkshire.

I last formally met the previous managing director, Larraine Boorman, on 9 October 2012. The Scottish Government continues to be in close engagement with OPITO, and looks forward to engaging with the new managing director.

The member puts his question with panache and a certain je ne sais quoi. [Laughter.] We absolutely welcome the tremendous investment and support of French companies in Scotland, not least Total, with which I had a very useful meeting in May of this year. We are delighted that France is furthering and deepening its connections with the oil and gas industry. Just about every country in the world is investing in Scotland with confidence, effect and success. La France est magnifique. [Applause.]

In February, we set out our proposals for economic regulation of key markets, including energy. Individual regulators, including Ofcom, Ofgem, the Office of Rail Regulation and the Water Industry Commission for Scotland, could be replaced by a single economic regulator to oversee regulation of the water, rail, telecommunications and energy industries. Further, we have established an independent energy commission, with industry, academic and consumer experts, to provide evidence on how we could improve Scotland’s stewardship of electricity and gas regulation in an independent Scotland.

When one considers the regulation of banking, railways or payday loans, the record of regulators in the UK is not one to boast about. On Mr Gray’s specific question, I refer him to what the consumer experts have said: “before this freeze comes in the companies will whack the prices sky high”. They have also said that it “may put off decisions by energy companies or others to invest in new, cleaner generation capacity.” The industry—SSE and Scottish Power—has said: “Smaller companies would … face insolvency and bigger companies would have to consider reductions in investment and jobs.” Of course, an arbitrary price freeze has been tried before. It was tried in California in 2000. What happened? Blackouts and an 800 per cent increase in the wholesale price. [Interruption.]

As far as I can recall, never has a measure introduced by the leader of a major political party in the UK received such widespread, utter and total condemnation as being completely unworkable. Worst of all for Scotland—[Interruption.] I can see that the Labour members are listening now. They do not like it, but they are listening. Worst of all for Scotland, such an arbitrary measure threatens to impair the essential investment in renewable energy schemes that are so important for the country.

The Scottish Government welcomes that important consultation. The intergovernmental group that I called for last year has helped to establish a clear evidence base for additional support for island renewables. We must now deliver a solution that delivers for Orkney, Shetland and the Western Isles. I was therefore pleased that the Secretary of State for Energy and Climate Change, Ed Davey, committed to that at his party conference in Glasgow earlier this month. We are now working closely with the United Kingdom Government, our island partners and others towards an outcome that enables all the islands to harness their huge renewable energy potential.

I share the member’s concerns, particularly because DECC proposed a single contracts for difference uplift for island onshore wind at £115 per megawatt, whereas the Baringa islands renewables report recognised that each of the three island groups had different needs and circumstances. I am keen to continue to work with DECC on this matter, but we will also continue to press the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets on its review of transmission charging—project transmit—for outcomes that work for Scotland’s islands, including looking again at the costs of converter stations. In addition, I am writing to Ofgem to invite the Gas and Electricity Markets Authority to visit the Western Isles to meet local stakeholders and hear what they have to say. I want to work with everyone, across all parties, to deliver a good result for all three island groups. That is a top priority for me and for the Scottish Government.

For both Mr McArthur and me, the glass is always half full. In that spirit, I welcome the fact that the principle has been accepted. Had the principle not been accepted, where would we be? However, there is more work to be done. Since the evidence report, which Mr Davey and I called for, produced the conclusion that the three islands—not surprisingly—had different needs and required different levels of support, the rational, evidence-based case has already been established to some extent. Nevertheless, more work needs to be done and I welcome the co-operation of Ed Davey and his colleagues thus far in reaching the establishment and acceptance of the principle. Without that principle, the islands would be cut off from benefiting from their renewables potential, despite the fact that they are the best place in the world to develop our renewable energy. The matter could not be more serious, and I am delighted to carry on the work that we have been doing with Mr McArthur and his colleagues along with all other parties.

Our aim is to maximise the opportunities for community benefits from renewable energy developments, and we recognise that national guidance on good practice would be welcome. Guidance is currently being developed under our community and renewable energy scheme—CARES—in consultation with stakeholders. The aim is to publish that in the autumn.

We seek to work with all local authorities on these matters. I have not had specific discussions with Glasgow City Council on the issue, so it would probably not be correct for me to make any substantive comment thereon. Generally speaking, we seek to work with local authorities to ensure that communities can benefit from renewable energy developments in their own part of Scotland.

There is not now, nor has there ever been, any specific budgetary provision for restoration of opencast coal sites.

As Mr Pearson and members from across parties will know, I have been working closely with Professor Russel Griggs in chairing a task force, on which all parties representing coaling areas are represented. We work closely with all the local authorities, with which we have productive relations. We are taking a number of steps, not least of which is the establishment of the independent Scottish Mines Restoration Trust, under the chairmanship of Russel Griggs. We have also explored, in a letter that I wrote to Mr Michael Fallon recently, the possibility of restoration to Scotland of some of the millions of pounds that have been paid from the levy of 17p per tonne from coal mined in Scotland, so that the money can be used towards restoration of the coal mines that are left in our country.

I wrote to Michael Fallon only on 17 September, so it is probably unreasonable to expect to have received a detailed reply at this stage. I should make it clear that the total aggregate moneys involved would not be sufficient to solve the total problem by any means. Nonetheless, I think that the task force recognised that such a request is a reasonable thing for us to ask. The money was paid from the coal mined in Scottish communities. Surely there is a very strong case, given that most of the money went straight into the consolidated fund, for now using it to tackle the task of restoring Scotland’s opencast mines that are coaled out.

I thank Richard Baker for bringing this important debate to Parliament and thank all members across all parties who spoke for their speeches. The debate has been sombre, serious, considered and a useful contribution to the debate on a matter that is plainly of huge importance. I also express my sympathies and condolences to the families, friends and colleagues of all those who lost their lives in the tragic incident. They were Sarah Darnley, Duncan Munro, Gary McCrossan and George Allison. We must always remember that those people lost their lives. The bereaved who survive them will always remember them. Dennis Robertson set out that side of the matter powerfully. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth, John Swinney, made a statement to Parliament on Wednesday 4 September in which he outlined the facts of the incident, the tremendous response by the emergency services that resulted in the rescue of 14 survivors and the strong leadership provided by the helicopter safety steering group in taking some difficult and challenging decisions to ensure the safety and confidence of the workforce. I add my thanks to all those who were involved in a tremendous effort, as Tavish Scott—the member for the Shetlands, including Sumburgh—mentioned. We all thank them. I had some experience of this when, as a member of the Lomond mountain rescue team, I attended a call-out on 1 February 1987 and there was a fatality as a result of a helicopter crash; I note that the late Sergeant Harry Lawrie is still remembered from that day. On that occasion, a Wessex helicopter was involved. Such incidents are sombre occasions, and all those who attend will have the experience etched in their memories. It is understandable that huge concerns exist. They have been heightened because of the proximity in time of the helicopter incidents in the North Sea. The one in August was the fifth incident since 2009 and the second involving fatalities. The five incidents involved two specific types of aircraft: the L2 and the EC225. The EC225 has been subjected to stringent tests and analysis since it was grounded following the incident in October 2012. I understand that, at this point, the helicopter safety steering group regards the EC225 as the safest helicopter available for offshore operations anywhere in the world. We must give credence to that view, given the group’s expertise. It is clear that the helicopter safety steering group will need to work hard in the coming weeks and months to get that message across to the workforce and to help rebuild the confidence of the offshore community, as many members said in the debate. I understand that, in addition to lifting the suspension on the L1 and the EC225, the helicopter safety steering group has also launched a far-reaching communications campaign across the industry to engage with the workforce in an effort to rebuild confidence. On 5 September, the AAIB issued a special bulletin advising on the initial findings of the investigation in which it stated that, to date, it has uncovered no evidence of a “causal technical failure” in the helicopter. The special bulletin confirmed the earlier report that the preliminary investigation had found that the helicopter was intact when it struck the sea in, as I think Maureen Watt said, an upright position. In addition, analysis of the data recorders found that both engines were delivering power until impact. On Tuesday, the CAA, which is the UK’s specialist aviation regulator, announced a review of offshore helicopter operations in the North Sea. I think that it is relevant to point out that its work is a review, not an inquiry—the CAA does not investigate accidents; the Air Accidents Investigation Branch does that. Following the AAIB’s investigation, the CAA, as the regulatory body, would take action, if necessary. I have read the “Review of Offshore Helicopter Operations Terms of Reference”, which outlines the objective and scope of the review, its timescale and the membership of the review team. Lewis Macdonald asked whether specific practical matters, such as the maintenance regime and the rigorousness of it in respect of helicopters, and various other factors would be addressed. The CAA’s review will look at a number of issues, but I would be interested to know whether Mr Macdonald considers that all the serious issues that he raised will be covered. Perhaps that is something that we can come back to. Like Mark McDonald, I welcome the fact that the review will be undertaken jointly with the Norwegian Civil Aviation Authority and the European Aviation Safety Agency and that it will be advised by a panel of independent experts. It will study current operations as well as previous incidents and accidents. In other words, it will not look only at the most recent tragedy.

I will come on to that when I have finished my remarks about the CAA’s review. The point that I was seeking to make is that, from my reading of the review’s terms of reference, the background to it, its objective and scope, and its timescale, I think that it is a fairly substantial review. We should acknowledge that the people who will be involved include a number of experts and people with huge experience in the industry. If members have any particular suggestions to make about the review and how it could be improved, extended or altered, I would be keen to receive them after the debate. I turn to the issue of a fatal accident inquiry. Plainly, this is one of those debates in which I am responsible for some matters and the Cabinet Secretary for Justice is responsible for others. The justice secretary is responsible for taking forward the serious issues that have been raised in relation to fatal accident inquiries and the timescale for them. Quite properly, those are matters for the Crown and the Lord Advocate, and not for the Government. The Crown acts independently of the Government, and rightly so. Plainly, that is an important principle. In relation to the four-year time lapse between the 2009 incident and the FAI, which Mr Baker raised in his motion and which Patricia Ferguson mentioned, the cabinet secretary has made available to Parliament the timeline of the complex investigation involved. The Lord Advocate will publish that on the Crown Office website. It is essential that complex investigations are pursued methodically and are not rushed but are comprehensive and detailed. More than 600 witness statements have been taken and 2,000 documents gathered. I understand that the consultation on Patricia Ferguson’s proposed bill finishes on 22 November. The Scottish Government will consider the final proposals when they are available. Mr MacAskill has already given an undertaking to the Justice Committee that the bill to implement the Cullen recommendations will be introduced in this parliamentary session. I will pass on the Official Report of this debate to Mr MacAskill because I am conscious that, in the time available, I have not been able to answer all the questions that have been raised, and I would like to do that. I am keen to continue to ensure that the Scottish Government is fully engaged with the oil and gas industry and the trade unions. As it happens, I will meet a number of senior trade union representatives tomorrow—the meeting was arranged some time ago—and we will consider these matters very carefully. Rebuilding the confidence of the men and women who travel to and from our offshore installations on a daily basis must be a key priority for us all.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

On a point of order, can Mr Gray specify which companies he is referring to?

Will the member give way?

On our record and what we have done, does Mr Macintosh agree that the financial problems that many people in Scotland face have to an extent been ameliorated and lessened by the council tax freeze, which has protected a great many people, and the small business bonus, which has benefited 89,000 small businesses? Using the powers that we have, we have demonstrated a track record of trying to help people to tackle the undoubted economic problems that they face now and have faced over the years that we have been in power.

Does Richard Baker accept that what the oil and gas industry needs but has not had—I say with respect—under either of the two recent UK regimes, is tax stability over the lifetime of major projects? The industry has had three tax hikes, which has undermined confidence throughout the world.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I will do my best to be a worthy substitute for my friend and colleague Mr Swinney. As I have got older, I have become convinced that what those who elected us to Parliament want from us is to hear what we will do, what we are for, what we propose, and what we will do to address all society’s problems, and not so much to hear about why the other guy is wrong, how their promises were broken, and why their statistics do not stack up. My view now is that, by and large, not only are people not interested in those things, but that approach deters them and puts them off politics of whatever hue more than anything else.

No, I will not. I want to make a bit of progress. I will give way to Willie Rennie later. I want to reply to the debate, which is my role, and to mention some of the positive contributions that have been made. John Swinney started off by making a fundamental proposition that is absolutely sound: that there has never been a recession in which emerging therefrom has been achieved without a programme of capital investment to put people back to work in the construction sector. John Swinney argued that very clearly, and he has argued it clearly and consistently time and again since the recession began. It ill behoves members to challenge that, because it is a simple matter of fact. Therefore, when Mr Swinney pointed out to Murdo Fraser in an intervention that the UK Chancellor of the Exchequer has surely adopted an approach that, by definition, has not, sadly, been successful, he deserved to be listened to. Let me repeat the arguments in case they were not understood, because the matter is extremely serious to many thousands of people in Scotland. It is our job to get people back into employment and to restore hope to their lives. The chancellor is borrowing £244,000 million more than he said that he would. That is eight times more than our annual budget, which puts the figure into context, because who really understands what £244,000 million is? It is eight times the cost of all the public services in Scotland. If John Swinney had to borrow—if we were allowed to do that—£244 billion more than he said that he would borrow, Mr Fraser would quite rightly be the first person to criticise him. We are therefore entitled to say that our central suggestion about where the UK has perhaps gone wrong of late at the highest strategic level has a sound evidential basis. I hope that members will take on board that serious point. I will respond to what other members have said. Alison Johnstone’s contribution was extremely positive, very well received and exactly what the people of Scotland want to hear from politicians these days. Perhaps she set out a series of objectives rather than a series of costed policies—setting out those is, of course, the challenge and is a difficult thing—but she painted a vision that many of us instinctively feel was in sync with the people of Scotland. I admit that I say that as perhaps the person in Parliament who is not closest to the Green Party. Mr Harvie will acknowledge that: he is nodding sagely. It is therefore with regret that we cannot support the Green Party’s amendment, because we cannot agree with some of the matters that are referred to in the specific set of proposals in the document in question, although we certainly support the spirit of what Alison Johnstone said. She spoke out in a way that we all recognise is where Scotland wants to go. Joan McAlpine rightly devoted her speech to one of the most serious issues—one on which everybody in this country realises we must do better, no matter how we are governed. That issue is the appalling inequality between the genders in Scotland and in the UK as a whole. Kevin Stewart mentioned the offshore Europe conference that took place in Aberdeen a few weeks ago in the aftermath of the tragic loss of life in a helicopter accident. At that event, I was privileged to hear and take part in a debate in which Princess Anne spoke powerfully and persuasively about how we should persuade, attract and inspire more young females to come into engineering jobs, particularly in the oil and gas industry. A serious set of actions, policies and moves from businesses and Government are now in place to address some of the problems on which Dr McAlpine rightly focused. Again, I put it to members that, whatever their view about independence or the union, Dr McAlpine spoke on principle about something that concerns people, and she was not involved in trading insults, sniping, snidery and that sort of thing.

I do not favour zero-hours contracts. I hope that Jenny Marra will acknowledge that—contrary to what she said—I made it clear in the last debate that she and I had that regional selective assistance will not be granted to companies that espouse the use of zero-hours contracts. That is a policy that we have; what could be clearer? What is the point of Jenny Marra stating that we have not covered the issue, when I addressed it in the very last exchange that we had in this place? I do not know. How does it help either her or me with the public if we spend our time trading insults in that way? Margo MacDonald rose—

I am sorry, but Mr McNeil was not here for the debate. I am happy to take an intervention from Mr Rennie, whom I think wanted to intervene.

Well, Margo MacDonald wanted one.

There it is: Margo MacDonald shows us all how to raise our game. She is exactly right. Ultimately, the people of Scotland will help us to succeed and prosper as a nation and to become a more equal, fairer, healthier and wealthier nation. I will use my remaining time to run through some of the achievements and successes of the people of Scotland, who make us a country that has underlying strength in its economy and potential that could be maximised with the full powers of a normal nation. Take Highlands and Islands Enterprise, which might be the first economic development agency in history that is so successful in attracting jobs—most recently from Daktari Diagnostics and Capgemini, not to mention Global Energy, which Kevin Stewart mentioned—that it is going to have to vacate its office because an inward investor needs it. HIE is moving out of its office to make way for a company that is creating hundreds of jobs in the city that I represent. Is that not the ultimate accolade and sign of success? What about VisitScotland? On 1 January this year, I was woken at 8 am—if members can believe that—by CNN announcing that Scotland is the top country in the world to visit. Why is that? It is because our people—Mike Cantlay, Malcolm Roughead and all the other staff of VisitScotland—have played a blinder in promoting Scotland throughout the world. Ernst & Young has recognised the enterprise network as delivering the most successful results in the whole of the UK outside London. We should look at the success of not just the high chiefs, but of all the workers across the enterprise network, whom I meet day and daily.

Indeed, Presiding Officer. If only we had the full taxation powers that are absolutely crucial to giving Scotland competitive advantage, we would deliver a wealthier, fairer and more equal society.

This is a significant milestone for the marine industry in Scotland and sends a positive message to the wider supply chain. MeyGen is working closely with Highland Council and Highlands and Islands Enterprise to maximise the local content of the project, having committed to investing in local businesses and skills. We are already seeing benefits as a result of MeyGen’s activities. The company has spent £1 million in the Highlands since 2010, recruited staff locally, and taken part in a successful supply chain networking event in Thurso, which was attended by 40 businesses.

Mike MacKenzie is absolutely correct that if all the islands—the Western Isles and the Orkney and Shetland islands—are to achieve their enormous potential, there must be the right support for them, and the evidence suggests that that means three island CFDs. In addition, it is essential that we properly incentivise the wave and tidal sector, as Mike MacKenzie rightly argues. That is at the very top of my priorities. I welcome the Department of Energy and Climate Change consultation that will be published on 18 September, but we believe that the proposals need to be improved if we are to realise the enormous potential that the islands have to offer for renewable energy.

I understand that the first stage in the MeyGen project will be to assemble the offices that it requires onshore in Caithness. Possibly next year or the year after that—depending on things such as the weather and the rate of progress—there will be an initial phase in which up to six turbines will be placed in the water. On the nature of those schemes, the important thing is to demonstrate their efficacy and to learn from the real-life experience of trying them in the extremely testing conditions of the Pentland Firth and Orkney waters. However, we expect that, as Scotland is currently in the lead and there are several other projects, with due encouragement and support from the Scottish Government, the local authorities, the Crown Estate and the United Kingdom Government, many other projects should follow apace. To respond to the question, I confirm that we expect that the technologies that are developed in Scotland can be exported throughout the world in due course.

I acknowledge Rob Gibson’s campaigning on the issue. Indeed, he has probably been campaigning since before some members of the Parliament were born—although not Alex Johnstone, I have to say. Rob Gibson has made a serious point. The project is huge: it is the biggest tidal project in Europe. It has been consented in Scotland, and it has enormous potential to generate jobs and opportunities in Caithness, in particular in Scrabster, where the Scottish Government has invested approximately £20 million in a new deepwater quay. The port of Scrabster has now signed a memorandum of understanding with MeyGen to ensure that Scrabster is the location for the deployment and maintenance of the project’s initial phase. Highlands and Islands Enterprise has estimated that the project will create up to 100 jobs for the assembly, deployment and maintenance of the six turbines, the bulk of which will be in the Highlands and Caithness. I will be happy to meet Mr Gibson to discuss with him the data centre idea.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I will keep your advice very much in mind. As members know, the coal industry in Scotland has been experiencing a very tough time. Coal prices are low and operating costs are high, and two of Scotland’s largest producers have folded in the past 12 months, which resulted in the loss of 732 jobs, which the communities in which they were located could ill afford to lose. I am determined to work to find a solution that will take the sector through this difficult time, and I have set up a cross-party national task force to tackle the issues. The task force is chaired by me and by Professor Russel Griggs, who has for the past year been working hard behind the scenes with all interested parties in the coal sector. The task force brings together many interested stakeholders: the local authorities that are affected; Scottish Government energy and planning officials; operators; trade unions; the Scottish Mines Restoration Trust; the Coal Authority; and United Kingdom Government departments such as the Department of Energy and Climate Change and the Scotland Office. There is also representation from many of the parliamentarians who represent affected areas. The task force’s remit is simple and straightforward, with two objectives: first, to secure employment and protect what jobs we can for our rural communities in a more secure and sustainable way than has happened before; and, secondly, to help ensure that appropriate restoration takes place. With regard to some of the progress that the task force has made thus far, on employment, I am pleased to report to the chamber that 153 former Scottish Resources Group employees have now gone into work; 117 of them are from East Ayrshire, the council area most affected by redundancies, and 36 are from Lanarkshire. I am also pleased to report that Hargreaves has restated its plans to employ around 300 people in Scotland in its first six months of full operation and that that estimate might rise to around 500 people in the next 12 months. Secondly, on training, the task force set up a short-term working group to look specifically at training and qualifications. Thanks to the pile of joint working that the partnership action for continuing employment—or PACE—team, the operators Hargreaves, the Department for Work and Pensions and Skills Development Scotland have done together, 184 former employees have started training through the Scottish Government employability fund, which has resulted in the awarding of 97 qualifications. I am pleased to report that Hargreaves has now set up a driver training centre at its site at Broken Cross in South Lanarkshire with the capability to train 50 drivers per week. Thirdly, on Office of Rail Regulation track access charges, members will appreciate the key importance of ensuring the industry’s commercial viability, but that viability was put in doubt by the ORR’s proposal to hugely increase track access charges to, I believe, £4.04 per 1,000 gross tonnes per mile. Those charges have now been reduced to £1.04 and will not be fully implemented until 2018. I thank all the parties that played a part in that. Had the task force not existed, I do not think that it would have happened, but I also recognise that the UK Government and the transport minister Keith Brown played their part. There was cross-party recognition of this threat and, to be fair, there was a commensurate response, for which we are grateful.

Not just yet. Fourthly, the task force is focused not just on jobs but on restoration, which is part of the legacy left behind with the demise of ATH Resources and SRG and is causing concern to all the affected councils. Earlier this year, I announced the creation of the Scottish Mines Restoration Trust, an independent body that has been created specifically to assist councils and other parties in the restoration of opencast sites across Scotland. Its primary role will be that of facilitator, not funder, and it will seek to bring together all the relevant parties to tackle restoration issues. Indeed, I am pleased that councils are already coming forward and receiving practical assistance from the SMRT in their restoration plans. Restoration is a complex problem that did not arise only yesterday and will not be solved tomorrow, but I am pleased that the councils in Scotland, notably East Ayrshire, Fife, South Lanarkshire, Dumfries and Galloway and Midlothian, are working through each case on a site-by-site basis. In Fife, for example, a restoration plan has been worked out at the ex-ATH site at Muir Dean and the restoration task is out to tender. That will also help to create jobs, and is a good example of partnership involving the council, the UK Coal Authority, the Scottish Environment Protection Agency, local landowners and the bond provider, all of whom came together to ensure maintenance of the site while the restoration plan was developed. In Dumfries and Galloway, restoration of the Glenmuckloch site has been made possible only by the coaling of an extension site. Continued coaling can secure employment while allowing restoration to happen; as excavation goes forward, the soils and overburden that are uncovered are used to restore that which is left behind. It took a great degree of innovative and pragmatic thinking to get to that position with the Glenmuckloch site. None of this is easy, but that example shows that solutions can be found if all the parties are prepared to work together. There are productive ways of carrying out restoration and we have to look at each site on its own. In addition to the restoration measures that I have mentioned, we are exploring whether the levy that is paid to the Coal Authority could be applied for restoration. That is the levy per tonne of coal that is mined, which is currently 17p per tonne. I understand, from information that was provided to the most recent meeting of the coal task force by, I believe, the Coal Authority, that only 1p out of that 17p goes to the Coal Authority and that 16p goes to the consolidated fund. We are talking about several million pounds. Therefore, I have written to UK energy minister Michael Fallon to ask whether that money can be made available to restore the opencast sites in Scotland, as it comes from the coal that has been mined in Scotland.

I do not know what Mr Rennie is referring to. We do not apply taxpayers’ money. I was referring to a levy that is paid by the industry to the UK Government. It has absolutely nothing to do with taxpayers’ money. Unless Mr Rennie can enlighten us about where that alleged subsidy comes from in the opening speech that he is about to make—and I invite him to do so—that will be one of the many far from robust arguments that we will hear from him this afternoon. I am happy to take an intervention from Mr Harvie now, if he wants to intervene.

Mr Harvie makes several assertions, but I do not think that they stack up because the coal industry is not subsidised. If Mr Harvie wants to argue otherwise, we will hear from him in his closing remarks. I put it to him—

Well, hang on. I am answering this chap, first. I hope that Mr Harvie and Mr Rennie will address the issue squarely. It seems to me that the amendment that they have co-signed would inevitably have the effect of destroying the opencast industry in Scotland, which would lead to the almost immediate redundancy of several thousand people and the total destruction of the opencast industry in Scotland. Who is going to invest in Scotland’s coal industry if there is a moratorium? Nobody is. Moreover, if that were to happen, what would the effect be? The coal-fired power stations would still need coal, but it would come from Colombia and Russia. How would that be good for the environment? I look forward to the explanation of those issues this afternoon. Let me return to more effective regulation. Every site is different. There are rules in place to ensure compliance, monitoring, enforcement and financial assurance but they need to be made to work more effectively and must be tailored to each site. More effective regulation is the principal way of improving confidence in the sector. Therefore, the time is now right to consult on the options that are available to secure a more effective approach to restoration. There is a role for the Scottish Futures Trust to advise on the financial aspects, and there may also be a role for an independent compliance monitoring unit or for a local authority shared service. I shall ensure that the forthcoming consultation reaches out to all those with a genuine, productive and positive interest in sustaining the industry in Scotland and the communities that are dependent on it. The story of the Scottish opencast sector over the past year demonstrates what can be achieved in difficult circumstances when we work together and all relevant stakeholders, including political parties, pull together. That we still have an opencast industry is testament to those efforts, although substantial challenges remain—no one can doubt that. Not least of those challenges is to ensure that we get the best restoration solution possible for every site. However, I believe that, with the trust that has been built up in the task force and the joint working across parties in the chamber—especially the Labour Party and the Conservative Party—we can work together to find a better future for the opencast industry. I hope that the Labour amendment, which we will support, will also be supported by the Conservatives so that we send out a very clear message that the three parties are almost unanimous in seeing a future for the industry rather than its destruction. I move, That the Parliament acknowledges the substantial contribution made by the open cast coal mining industry to the Scottish economy; supports the work of the Scottish Coal Industry Taskforce, carried out in partnership by the Scottish Government, representatives of the UK Government, local authorities, parliamentarians from across the parties representing all of the affected areas, and the industry itself, to preserve employment in open cast coal mining and address challenges of restoration, and welcomes moves to identify improvements in the regulatory regime of the industry.

Surely the point is that Hargreaves is investing a substantial amount of its money in coaling in Scotland. To avoid doubt, do Mr Rennie and Mr Harvie accept that their amendment, which calls on the Scottish Government to put an immediate halt to new opencast coal development, would terminate the opencast coal sector in Scotland?

I can answer that.

Scottish Enterprise deals with things independently and looks at every company in the same way without fear, favour or discrimination. Any other approach would be illegal. How can Willie Rennie say that, if there is no more coaling, there can still be an opencast industry? If there is to be a halt on further opencast mines getting permissions, how can he argue that that is anything other than a mass P45 for the 4,500 people who are employed directly or indirectly in the sector?

I start by welcoming to the public gallery Councillor Jim Roberts, a member of the task force, together with his colleague Councillor Stephanie Primrose. They have sat through the whole debate this afternoon. I also pay tribute to their colleagues on the task force, including council members from various parties and trade union officials. Without their contributions, rooted in the community and experienced in the industry, we would not be where we are now and we would not have achieved the successes that we have achieved. There have been four or five meetings of the task force. Derek Mackay and I were grateful for the invitation extended by the chief executive and convener of East Ayrshire Council to see for ourselves some of the impacts that they have in the opencast mines. We spent the best part of a day doing that, contrary to what Mr Rennie, who is not here, implied in his statement. I welcome and thank all those members of the task force across the parties in this chamber for their contribution. I do not think that I have ever chaired a bigger task force—at one point, there were nearly 60 people on it. I do not know whether I can prune the numbers, if there are any volunteers. Looking forward, I have planned a number of strands of work with all parties in this chamber in an open and co-operative fashion. First, I am due to meet bondholders to discuss some of the difficulties that have arisen. I will be working closely with the councils in that regard. Secondly, the litigation is sub judice but I will continue to engage with the liquidators as is appropriate. Thirdly, I will continue to explore with the UK Government whether any of the substantial contribution that the industry pays to the Coal Authority, which amounts to a great number of millions of pounds—I believe from recent figures that the levy is 17p a tonne, although only 1p of that is in fact funded to the Coal Authority—can be used in part to meet the restoration costs. Many members have rightly said that the industry has responsibility. The industry has made a contribution but, at the moment, I am not sure exactly what the contribution has done, where it has gone or what it is for. The vast majority of it has gone straight into the consolidated fund. I am not making any political points, but I think that the Parliament would expect me to pursue that issue—and pursue it I will. Lastly, in respect of the work going forward, we will hold at least two further meetings of the task force, and possibly more, as required—we will see. In addition to that, I confirm that we have asked Scottish Enterprise, in a letter from me to Lena Wilson at the outset of these problems, following the administration of the two companies, to look particularly at the predicament facing East Ayrshire. Adam Ingram, who has worked tirelessly in the task force, asked for that assurance and I have given it to him. I will personally attend meetings, the detail of which Mr Ingram and I have already had some discussions about. Willie Coffey was right to highlight that the Ayrshire communities have already been affected severely by the aftermath of the Diageo closures. Mr Swinney, who is here in the chamber, and I recognise the severe predicaments faced in East Ayrshire and, at a strategic level, the need not only to diversify into other areas but to work with the existing employers. On Claire Baker’s remarks and the comments in the Labour amendment about planning, we believe that the current policy is quite clear. We have consulted over the summer on slight amendments, and we feel that the issue is the operation of the policy locally, which would benefit from further advice and guidance. Following the debate, Mr Mackay will write to Claire Baker with as much detail as we have at the moment. We will explore that issue further during the consultation process. In August, despite the issues of redundancies in the sector, Scottish opencast mines produced 448,000 tonnes of coal. By contrast, only 332,000 tonnes were produced last month in England. The industry sustains 1,500 direct full-time jobs and 3,000 indirect full-time jobs. It contributes around £0.5 billion to the economy per annum. Last year, Scotland produced 4.8 million tonnes of coal. At least 12 million tonnes of reserves remain, and possibly much more. The industry provides average salaries of £42,000, which is well above the Scottish average of £22,000. One wonders where on earth jobs offering such salaries would be found were the industry to be closed, as the Liberals and the Greens would have it if their amendment were approved—which, fortunately, it will not be. In the winter, coal regularly generates around 45 per cent of the UK’s electricity—a point that was made by Conservative, Labour and SNP members—and more than half our coal is exported to England, contributing to the UK’s electricity generation system.

Well, I am an optimist. Contrary to what Mr Harvie said, Longannet coal power station is expected to keep generating electricity until 2023. Mr Harvie is also wrong to say that there will not be a community representative on the SMRT—it is recruiting one at the moment, as I thought he was aware.

No. I will give way to Mr Harvie in a minute. I ask him to hang on for a second. When CCS becomes commercially proven, that will allow clean coal thermal generation to continue for many years to come. When I attended the EU Council of Ministers meeting with the UK delegation in November 2011, there was a presentation by the lady who heads up the International Energy Agency. Her analysis pointed out—and I have never seen any information from anyone that contradicts this—that unless CCS as a technology is applied to power stations throughout Europe, it is extremely difficult to see how the EU emissions targets can be achieved. If one thinks about it, the proposition is straightforward. A substantial proportion of carbon emissions derives from generation electricity from gas and coal. If emissions from that generation are abated, that will make an enormous contribution to reducing our emissions target. If they cannot be reduced, either fossil fuels must cease to be used—as Mr Harvie wants but which is not possible in the short term as we transition to a low-carbon economy—or we must have CCS technology. I find it difficult to understand the position that Mr Rennie and Mr Harvie have adopted. Since CCS is a sine qua non of achieving reductions in carbon emissions, why are they opposed to it? My quandary is even more acute given that I found out, when the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute came to this country in the summer and I hosted a reception for it, that the equivalent of the WWF in the USA supports carbon capture and storage. As that is the route for reducing carbon emissions, why are Mr Harvie and Mr Rennie opposed to it? It would allow their objectives to be achieved—in fact, it is the only way in which their objectives will be achieved.

I suppose that I will give way, as I am a good sport.

I cannot give that assurance to Patrick Harvie, because it is not up to me to constrain people’s individual contributions—I would not attempt to limit liberty of expression. Anyway, the SMRT is independent of the Government, so it is within neither my power nor my desire to prevent it from speaking out as it sees fit. What a ludicrous suggestion. It is plain and absolutely clear to all those who have contributed from the SNP, Labour and Conservative benches that we see in Parliament today something that I cannot remember ever having come across before in 14 years of membership of the Parliament. Not just Mr Harvie but one of the putative major parties, the Liberal Democrats, have proposed in their amendment a measure—the halting of further coaling—that would have the effect of closing down a whole industry in Scotland. I cannot remember any putative major party putting forward an argument that anyone who is capable of logic can see would have the inevitable consequence of redundancy notices being handed out to thousands of people in our country. It is a matter of profound regret that the Liberal Democrats should adopt such a policy, and I wonder whether their UK colleagues would agree with it. I close by paying respect to all the workers in the industry and assuring them that, on my watch, there will continue to be surface coal mining in Scotland.

It is a key part of my job as energy minister to routinely meet representatives of companies to discuss their plans for potential employment and investment as they relate to Scotland. Along with Scottish Government energy officials, I met representatives of Cluff Natural Resources on 27 August 2013. We discussed the company’s plans and we understand them to be at an early stage of development. We understand that no applications for planning permission have been lodged in Scotland by the company. As is routine in such meetings, I made it clear to the company that applications for development of any energy sources in Scotland will be determined on their merits. Each proposal will be considered through the normal planning process and the appropriate regulatory regimes.

I make it clear that environmental issues are of extreme importance. I informed the company that, on these matters, we take an evidence-based approach, appropriately considering environmental matters and encouraging any such companies to engage in appropriate community engagement.

I warmly welcome the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth’s announcement on the budget. As he outlined, the Government continues to make sound financial investments in Scotland’s future despite the on-going and unprecedented tight budget settlements that are being handed to us by the Westminster Parliament. We can see positive signs of global economic recovery gaining traction, such as growth in emerging markets. We have also had recent positive developments in the Scottish economy. For example, youth unemployment has fallen by 2 per cent over the year and there have been positive business surveys, such as the Ernst and Young 2013 United Kingdom attractiveness survey, which showed that, in two of the past three years, Scotland has been the top-ranked country or region outside London for securing foreign direct investment—FDI—projects. In 2012, Scotland’s FDI projects were up by nearly a half compared to 2011 to 76 projects, which is the highest number in 15 years, whereas the number of FDI projects that most English regions, excluding London, secured declined in 2012. Investments in England outside London were 24 per cent below their 2010 level, a decline that has coincided with the closure of the regional development agencies and the switch to local enterprise partnerships. In contrast, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland recorded large rises. Our performance and economic recovery can be clearly linked to the actions that we have taken. We are investing decisively in Scotland’s economic growth. We are working through our enterprise and skills agencies and closely with our partners in local government to support businesses to help them grow, internationalise and export, while helping our people to take advantage of the opportunities that will follow. For example, a Ross-shire business that began life in a garden shed has signed a deal with China’s largest online training provider. The directors and founders of Dingwall-based TEFL Scotland, Joe and Jennifer Hallwood, who now employ 13 staff, will be working with the Zhi Bo Hong Yuan Co Ltd—I hope that I have pronounced that correctly—to develop and promote distance and classroom training as well as international cultural exchanges for English teachers across China. The role of our enterprise agencies is a key element of the distinctive approach that we take in Scotland. Their work in supporting Scottish businesses aims to increase exports and productivity and to ensure that Scotland continues to have sustainable economic growth. A comparison with recent developments south of the border, where the coalition Government has abolished the regional development agencies, shows that our approach is the right one. Further, we understand that the return on investment for every £1 spent by the enterprise network is approximately £6. Scottish Enterprise anticipates that, over the next decade, the net additional return on gross value added from its proposals will be about £5.75 billion. Some of those statistics are estimates, so they might be right and they might be wrong, but it is clear that, overall, the performance thus far has been strong, and we are reasonably entitled to assume that the agencies remain on the right track and that their performance will be equally good in future.

Tavish Scott raises a significant point that takes up a lot of time and consideration. I recently met with the Highlands and Islands Enterprise team that is involved in the broadband exercise and with representatives of BT. The issue is close to the heart of all HIE officials, as they are all citizens, too. As Tavish Scott well knows, particularly in tourism, it is difficult for a business to be successful if it is not on broadband. Ten years ago, broadband might have been a luxury or add-on, but now it is a sine qua non of success, if I may use a Latin phrase, so we will certainly be pursuing those matters. Our success has been recognised in not altogether likely places. The Financial Times ran an editorial that said: “The ‘Team Scotland’ approach adopted by the devolved Holyrood government and its enterprise agencies has helped to attract high-profile investments over the past year in spite of the tough economic environment ... While parts of England are still struggling to adjust to the abolition of the regional development agencies, Scotland has benefited from stability and continuity offered by Scottish Enterprise”. In October 2012, following a regional analysis report into UK public expenditure, one of the report’s authors said: “An investor looking at the North East” —the north-east of England, that is— “has to traipse round the whole of the North East knocking on a variety of doors. They go up to Scotland, they go and see Scottish Enterprise, it sorts out grants for the land, it sorts out grants for training, it sorts out all of the support that they require and that obviously makes it a whole lot easier for them.” Scottish business supports our approach, too. Iain Pitman, the chairman of Arran Aromatics, said that his company has “enjoyed fantastic support from Highland & Islands Enterprise, Scottish Enterprise and Scottish Development International over the past years and we hope these positive working relationships will continue to support further international growth and help take Arran Aromatics from a £5.2m business to a truly global brand.” The role of account management is important, and I want to showcase that in the debate, with—I hope—support from colleagues across the political spectrum. Scottish Enterprise works with approximately 10,000 Scottish businesses, providing support to help them to grow through innovation, access to finance, exporting, leadership and other key business support areas. More than 2,000 of those companies are account managed, which ensures an approach that is focused on and targeted at those that can deliver the greatest growth. It makes sense to focus the greatest attention—and taxpayers’ cash—on those companies that have been identified as having the greatest growth capacity. Plainly, we cannot support every company with grants, so we have used that method of prioritisation, and I hope that we can, together, endorse that methodology once again today. Over the period from 2008-09 to 2011-12, it is estimated that 1,120 companies took part in the evaluation. They achieved a net additional increase in turnover of £1.45 billion, contributing net additional gross value added of £575 million to the Scottish economy. Multiplier effects through supply chains and spending by employees are estimated to have contributed an additional £535 million GVA. The total net additional GVA over the period is therefore estimated at £1.1 billion—£1,100 million—which was generated as a result of account management activity. That is pretty significant.

That is a perfectly valid point, and I am keen—or at least willing—to look at the process again. Plainly, any gatekeeper process must be fixed and certain; if it is too vague, it is not much use. On the one hand, fixing an amount of turnover is open to criticism for being arbitrary—which it is; on the other hand, that gives an element of certainty and clarity, so that endless arguments do not arise about who is entitled to be in and who is not. That said, turnover is not the only yardstick. Some companies with no record of profits and growth in turnover—in the area of life sciences, for example—are accepted for account management where they plainly have a potentially world-beating product. There is, therefore, an element of flexibility. This is perhaps not the time to go into all the details, but I am happy to work with members in all parties to look at the issue. My feeling is that we have got the process right, but if there has been criticism from business in committee this morning, my officials will look at that evidence. I am happy to come back to members if they have any specific suggestions in that respect. Over the period of the evaluation, 6,800 net additional direct jobs were created, with 8,330 created through multiplier effects. The total net extra jobs was therefore 15,130—the fact that more than 15,000 people have a job at least in part because of SE’s account-management services merits mention in the debate—which suggests a GVA return of around £5 for every £1 of SE spend over the four-year period. Account-managed companies currently employ 300,000 people. In the first quarter of 2013, 43 per cent of those companies reported that they had recruited more people, including young people. Regarding the employers’ views of account management, the evaluation found: 90 per cent of the employers were satisfied or very satisfied with the support that they received; 80 per cent did not think that they could find that support elsewhere; 80 per cent said that the support had increased their level of turnover; 40 per cent said that SE support had helped them to increase international sales; 50 per cent said that the support had helped them to enter new international markets; 75 per cent said that their innovation spend had increased as a result of SE support; and 70 per cent reported that their productivity had improved. Those are good results.

Sorry, I have oodles—to use a non-ministerial technical expression—of my speech left.

Looking north, I should point out that, over the past five years, Highlands and Islands Enterprise has built a portfolio of accounts comprising 596 business and social enterprises in 50 communities. HIE has also achieved great success, as has VisitScotland, to which I will perhaps return in my closing speech. To conclude, let me pay tribute to every single person who works in our enterprise agencies. I have met a great many of them in my visits with them to companies in all parts of the country—just about—and they do a great job for Scotland. Today is an opportunity for us to thank them, to pay tribute to them and to see how, through positive suggestions, we can perhaps do even better in future. I move, That the Parliament notes the challenging economic conditions of recent years, the emerging signs of the global economic recovery and the vital role that Scotland’s enterprise agencies play in ensuring that its economy responds to these challenges and opportunities; supports the enterprise agencies in their role of delivering the Scottish Government’s purpose of sustainable economic growth, and recognises the importance of the account management and other direct support that they provide to businesses and key sectors across the country to help them grow, create employment, increase exports, boost innovation and help Scotland become more globally competitive.

I have been aware of Mr Fraser’s concerns about the matter since yesterday, when his amendment was lodged. I would be more than happy to facilitate a meeting with Paul Lewis of Scottish Enterprise, at which Mr Fraser would have the opportunity to discuss his concerns and the detail of them at some length. Of course, the Auditor General is independent of the Scottish Government and will make her own decision on how to pursue the matter.

Mr Chisholm has made many good points and I am happy to pursue some of them, but I suggest to him and other members that, if they come across any company that they think should have account-managed services and they write to me, I will ensure that the matter is fully investigated.

I reassure Ken Macintosh that all emoluments that are paid from taxpayers’ money to any company are based on the strict application of laws and are especially directed towards job creation. In other words, the money is paid only when the jobs are created. In essence, that is the principle that applies, and it is one that I believe has created a great deal of employment. Unless Mr Macintosh can say which grants should not have been made, I wonder what the purpose of his criticism is.

I thank everyone who has contributed to the debate and welcome Jenny Marra and Murdo Fraser—a new face and an old hand—to the enterprise portfolio. I found the debate useful at times, and I would like to respond to some of the specific points that were made, which is what I always try to do. I will do so in no particular order. In his speech, Ken Macintosh focused on whether grant payments should be made to some of the largest companies. I say to Ken Macintosh and other members of the chamber that regional selective assistance is not paid for zero-hours contracts. Let us get that clear. No one should leave the chamber with the belief, or should draw from Ken Macintosh’s speech the inference, that RSA is paid for zero hours contracts. That is not the case, nor should it be the case.

No, as I have a lot of ground to cover. I just wanted to make that point.

No—I want to move on. That is the rule on RSA. [Interruption.]

Tavish Scott mentioned the work that is being done at Heriot-Watt University and the memorandum of understanding with Atkins. I will contact Heriot-Watt’s Steve Chapman. I have had good relations with him, and we played a little part in helping with the university’s tremendously successful establishing of a campus at Putrajaya in my early days in the portfolio. I praise the efforts of Heriot-Watt and I will, of course, continue to work with it in that regard. Chic Brodie quite rightly mentioned the important role that the third sector and social enterprises play. Companies from those areas are among the account-managed companies.

Please let me get through what other members said. I do not have a lot of time and I want to show respect to the members who took part in the debate, one of whom was Margaret McDougall. She mentioned access to finance, and Jenny Marra repeated the request that I respond on that issue. That is perfectly correct—that is what debates are for. My response is that we and the enterprise networks do a fairly substantial amount of work to encourage banks to lend, to ascertain their policies and to help them engage with businesses. This year, Scottish Enterprise intends to help 350 to 400 companies secure growth finance by improving their financial readiness. Mr Swinney, the First Minister and I have had regular meetings with bank representatives. That will, of course, continue, and I will write to Margaret McDougall with a more comprehensive statement of the help that we seek to provide. Access to finance is very important, but we should remember that, at the end of the day, banks—not Governments—make the decisions. Frankly, I do not think that Governments should make the decisions, although we want banks to take better decisions. I remind members that appeals against decisions of banks to reject lending have had an extremely high success rate. I drew that to MSPs’ attention fairly recently, in a letter. Jenny Marra and the other Labour Party members who spoke in the debate suggested that there should be a review. I was not persuaded before the debate that there was a case for a review. I listened with interest to the debate, in which a number of good points were made. I appreciated the spirit in which Jenny Marra made her contribution. I do not have a closed mind on the issue or on any other topics that relate to how we can help people in Scotland tackle the problems that we face. I want to run through a number of points that indicate to me that now is not the right time for a review, after which I will be happy to give way to Jenny Marra. Incidentally, according to Jenny Marra’s amendment, the review is to be conducted by the Government, but towards the end of her speech she suggested that the review could be carried out by a Scottish Parliament committee. It would be up to the committee, not the Government, to decide whether to hold a review. There seemed to be a shift in the approach that Jenny Marra advocated. Be that as it may, I will run through six or seven arguments. First, I do not think that there are significant systemic failures in the system of delivering enterprise support. Were Jenny Marra able to point to any such failures, there might be a case for a review. One would expect a call for a major review to be accompanied by a forensic analysis of failures that show that the system is wrong and is not working. That is normally why one has a review, but I do not think that that applies in this case. Nor do I think, with respect, that any such failings have been identified by members in the debate. Secondly, the business gateway delivery arrangements came into effect on 1 October last year, so they have not yet been in place for a year. Surely, we do not want to disrupt the work that people have been doing when the first year of the operation has not yet been completed, far less any evaluation of that work. Thirdly, the new arrangements include a local development forum that is chaired jointly by me and Stephen Hagan. We have met once and will meet every six months or thereabouts, and that is a welcome form of scrutiny. Fourthly, there is a regular review of the business gateway pipeline companies, involving an analysis by the business gateway, working with Scottish Enterprise and the companies themselves. It is fair to recognise that that review should do its work. Also, companies in the pipeline do not necessarily become account managed companies, as not all companies will achieve the level of success and growth appropriate for account management. Not all companies will go through the end of the pipeline in that way. Fifthly, to have a review would cause an element of diversion and disruption of staff time. This is not the moment for us to divert the time and attention of those who work in the enterprise network to the conduct of a Government-instructed review. There is so much work to be done now—work on task forces such as those involved with Vion and Freshlink Foods, work on Buckie Shipyard, work in the opencast coal mining sector, work in relation to many administration and solvency positions, the partnership action for continuing employment team’s work throughout the country and work relating to positive opportunities. If we diverted the time of the leadership and staff—in local authorities, Scottish Enterprise, Scottish Development International, HIE or VisitScotland—to a major review, I do not think that they would thank us. I believe that not as a matter of politics, but as a practicality born out of the experience of working with those excellent public servants every day of the week. Jenny Marra rose— I am happy to take an intervention from Jenny Marra, but I do not think that the case for a fundamental review of the enterprise delivery system has been made.

I assure Jenny Marra that all the enterprise agencies review, consider, analyse and examine their own performance all the time internally and together with ministers. However, with respect, that is different from having a fundamental review of the whole system. I do not believe that this is the time for that, but I am happy to continue to engage on the topic with Jenny Marra and all members in a co-operative fashion. In drawing my remarks to a close, I pay tribute to all those who work in the enterprise agencies more widely. VisitScotland, which is playing a blinder for Scotland and winning international accolades, is headed up by Malcolm Roughead and Mike Cantley. I also pay tribute to Lena Wilson, Crawford Gillies, Alec Paterson and Lorne Crerar as well as people whom we do not hear so much about, such as David Rennie, who heads up the oil and gas team in Aberdeen. I work daily with all those people and we recognise today, perhaps for the first time in detail, the work that they have done. We have had an opportunity to learn about that and we thank them for their contributions. Nevertheless, we are not complacent. As long as there are any young people who wake up in the morning without a job and without a place in training, apprenticeship or education, we will continue to do our utmost to put that right. Today, John Swinney’s budget has made sure that we will be able to do that as best we can under the devolved settlement.

I welcome the debate, which John Wilson instituted. I pay tribute to him and other members of the cross-party group, which he chairs excellently. It is one of the most active cross-party groups, as I know from my previous engagement with it. I look forward to continuing that engagement and I welcome the fact that many of the non-MSP members of that group have taken the time to join us in the public gallery for this important debate. I welcome the announcement that the Association of British Credit Unions Ltd has won the contract to deliver the DWP’s credit union expansion project. There is significant unmet demand for banking products among low-income consumers. Credit unions exist, in part, to fill that gap and do that extremely well. We are determined to assist credit unions to do even better. All members have said that. Mary Scanlon pointed to the fact that we need to improve our act in comparison with other countries, such as Ireland. She is absolutely right. Labour members made that point, too. There is no dispute as to the objectives, which are largely shared across the parties in the Parliament. It does no harm to acknowledge that, because we hope that, as far as possible, the matter can be pursued without political emphasis. The DWP’s aim in providing the investment of £38 million—to which, of course, Scotland contributes its share—is to help “the sector to provide financial services for up to one million more consumers on lower incomes, and do so in a way that enables credit unions to modernise, expand and become financially sustainable.” It should not be forgotten that the burden of responding to and complying with the regulations that apply to the financial sector is particularly onerous, exacting and demanding. That burden is imposed on all financial institutions, including credit unions. That merits careful consideration of what more can be done on regulation. Sadly, that is outwith our power. Scottish credit unions are set to benefit from the expansion project. Two Scottish credit unions—Pollok Credit Union and 1st Alliance (Ayrshire) Credit Union, which John Wilson mentioned—are involved in the first wave of the project and a further seven have signed up for the second and third phases. That is to be welcomed. The Scottish Government has been consistently supportive of credit unions and enjoys good relationships with their leaders and representative bodies, including ABCUL. We are determined to consider carefully the recommendations that ABCUL has made, most recently in its briefing to members, on issues such as boosting membership across a wide variety of areas in the public and private sectors. We are actively considering measures to assist to that end. Since 2009, credit unions have benefited from significant Scottish Government investment to develop and expand their business. Thirty-two credit unions received a total of £1.3 million from the third sector enterprise fund, and the Scottish investment fund’s investment of £1 million in a partnership between Capital Credit Union and Scotwest Credit Union has enabled them to develop efficiencies as well as new products and to increase their membership. I was pleased but not surprised to see that a distinguished leader in the credit union movement has gone on to head the Airdrie Savings Bank, which shows that credit unions should not be considered as the poor man’s banks; they are there for everyone and they provide services of a high professional standard, as all members across the chamber have acknowledged. We actively encourage credit unions to apply for business support training, such as the just enterprise programme, and we make sure that they are aware of funding programmes that are available to third sector organisations. Kezia Dugdale and I had a cordial meeting, as she mentioned, and I was grateful to have the opportunity to engage with her. We will reply to her about the undertaking, although I must confess that I do not have the precise nature of that undertaking in front of me. I will do what I promised to do, and I welcome her engagement. I have asked my officials to explore a number of ideas on how we can do more to support the movement, encourage more people to become members and increase awareness. As Sandra White rightly suggested, there is always more that we can do and there is no dispute or quarrel about it. We all want to do everything practical and sensible that we can, and that is what we set out to do. Neil Findlay mentioned funding. We are establishing a new fund that will distribute £6 million between 2013 and 2015 to help to maintain, develop and grow Scotland’s enterprising third sector. That fund will be open to applications later this year and we will encourage eligible credit unions to apply. Many members have referred to specific initiatives by credit unions and, without repeating their points, I should say that credit unions are engaged in an incredible variety of imaginative and innovative solutions.

We are always happy to work in a positive way with the credit unions and I have mentioned the funding that we have provided in the past and which will be available later this year. We will always work closely with credit unions in all practical ways to assist them in every way possible. In relation to other areas, such as debt, we work closely with the credit unions and value their advice. Just this morning, I successfully moved a motion on regulations on the debt arrangement scheme and their approval was recommended. They will extend assistance from the date of application instead of the date of approval. That will help those who suffer the iniquities of the extortionate interest rates on payday loans. I wish that we had the power to tackle that here. I have not the time to address in full the points about welfare reform, but the Scottish Government is doing everything that it can to mitigate the effects of the reforms.

No, I am afraid that we are running out of time and I have given way already. It is reasonable to point out to Mr Findlay that we have committed a total of £40 million to ensure that 560,000 people who were receiving council tax benefit are protected from the UK Government’s 10 per cent cut in successor arrangement funding. We are providing £9.2 million for the Scottish welfare fund. We are assisting local authorities and the third sector in various ways. I say to Mr Findlay: oh that we had the power in this Parliament to deal with these things—

Mr Findlay might be raising his voice, but I think that he realises that the powers over welfare reform, the bedroom tax and the other issues that he raised are being exercised over us from the Westminster Parliament. Working with the credit unions and the excellent people who work for them all around the country, we are doing everything that we can to do what we think is right for this country. We very much look forward to the day when we can exercise decision making over all such matters in this place. Meeting closed at 18:14.

The content of the VisitScotland website is a matter for VisitScotland.

I have rarely heard a more spurious and ridiculous accusation than the one that I have heard this afternoon and seen in publicity that was drawn to my attention today. I say that because the purpose of VisitScotland is to provide information about significant dates, events and matters of interest in Scotland. Let me retell for members some of the information that VisitScotland displays on its website. “1901 Queen Victoria dies”— not an event associated particularly with Scottish nationalist propaganda— “1914-18 Scotland plays a significant role in the First World War ... 1919 The German High Seas Fleet is interned at Scapa Flow in Orkney”. I could go on to list all the other years and events that are important to our history. The idea that merely displaying factual information on a website is somehow party political is ludicrous. Had the website gone on to give some other dates—1970: the interests of Scottish fishermen are expendable for the purposes of joining the European Union; or 1975: Gavin McCrone’s advice to the United Kingdom cabinet that the oil wealth in Scotland would be of enormous proportions; or 2011: the most humiliating defeat in the history of the Labour Party in Scotland—we might have the beginnings of some scintilla of evidence.

There is still an unfortunate tendency in the ranks of the political classes to assume that conspiracies abound in public life; that Watergate is an omnipresent event in political actions. That is ludicrous. The facts are that the VisitScotland website contains excellent information for those who wish to holiday in Scotland. It contains a huge variety of information, and the reasons why people holiday in Scotland are wide and varied. I point out to Patricia Ferguson that, at the beginning of this year, CNN—one of the world’s leading media organisations—gave Scotland the accolade of number 1 country to visit in the world. Why did it do that? It did that—this is a matter of factual evidence, not assertion—because VisitScotland is playing a blinder. So it is, and it deserves support from all parties, not the kind of approach that we have seen from Opposition politicians. I very much hope that they will join those who recognise that VisitScotland is indeed doing an excellent job on behalf of Scotland.

I totally and fundamentally disagree with the assertion that any act, utterance or content on the VisitScotland website can be said to amount in any way to any display of any bias whatsoever. That is simply not true. It is a fact that the website set out a number of historical dates. The member was correct to say that VisitScotland subsequently added a number of other dates. That shows how responsive it is; it shows how willing it is to respond immediately to people in Scotland. I know that that is true because, as the tourism minister, I have seen first hand how responsive it is when complaints have been made. I know that, in one particular case in which a small business in the south of Scotland raised an issue, its chief executive, Malcolm Roughead, went to visit the lady for a number of hours. He got out of his quango office and went out to speak to the public. That is the sort of leadership that VisitScotland has displayed. I am proud to be served by the leadership and staff of VisitScotland. It is playing a blinder for Scotland, and I am astonished that Patricia Ferguson’s question has been asked of us today.

VisitScotland did not express any view on the importance or otherwise of any of the events. The information is not meant to be an extensive history lesson—giving that is not the role of VisitScotland or its website. The attempt by Opposition politicians to infer from a series of facts that are set out on a website that there is party-political bias just does not stack up. Were we in a court of law, Mr Fraser would be prevented from making any submission to that effect. Oh that we were in a court of law but, sadly, that is not to be. There are serious matters that currently affect tourism. There is the level of tax that is imposed in Scotland. Fuel duty is about 40p higher than in Mediterranean countries, and there is the air passenger duty that is imposed by the Conservative-Liberal coalition, which has a very damaging impact on tourism. There is also the level of VAT, which is the second or third highest in Europe. If Mr Fraser wanted to ask about those issues, he would at least be expressing concerns that I heard about yesterday evening from members of the Federation of Small Businesses in Inverness who work in tourism. Nobody outside the chamber has mentioned this matter to me. I have not had a letter from Patricia Ferguson about it or any correspondence, emails or even tweets about it. I have had nothing whatsoever, except from members of the Opposition parties in the chamber. That says it all.

I think that I have listened to Mr Stevenson over a period of around 12 or 13 years, and I confess that I have often concluded that my education has not been sufficiently developed but that Mr Stevenson was helping me to put that right. I agree that his points are well made. The main conclusion about all this is that VisitScotland is there to serve the public and to promote tourism. It is doing that by setting out some interesting dates and some interesting points in history. The information that it provides is not meant to imply any judgment or any view, and it does not. That is the point, and it is a point that a first-year law student could grasp in a nanosecond.

There has been no toadying whatever. I think that that answers the question. I say to Liam McArthur, with whom I have always had cordial and serious dealings, that his leader was reported in the press as suggesting that Scottish ministers—presumably, me—directed VisitScotland to include the material in question on its website. I make it clear that I became aware of the issue at around 10 or 11 o’clock this morning. I had not been aware of it, because I was too busy looking at serious matters to do with the creation of jobs in Scotland, bringing investment to Scotland and promoting tourism in Scotland. That is what I do with my time. Mr Rennie’s charge that Scottish Government ministers somehow exerted pressure on VisitScotland to put the material on the website is one of the most ludicrous charges that I have heard, and I hope that he will take the opportunity to withdraw that ludicrous and utterly unsubstantiated assertion.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I will revert from fortissimo to pianoforte in my tone. I very much welcome the opportunity to discuss the development of hydro power in Scotland and its importance for the future, and to celebrate the 70th anniversary of the Hydro-Electric Development (Scotland) Act 1943, which enabled large-scale renewable energy development in this country. Last month, the First Minister delivered the inaugural Tom Johnston memorial lecture at an event organised by Scottish Renewables to celebrate the 70th anniversary of the 1943 act, and I think that it is fitting to start by acknowledging the role that Tom Johnston played in Scotland’s hydro story. Many members will be aware that Tom Johnston’s greatest legacy was the creation of the North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board. He was a keen proponent of hydro power and saw its potential role in the reconstruction of post-war Scotland from early on. He established an inquiry to investigate the potential for hydroelectricity in the north of Scotland, which resulted in the Hydro-Electric Development (Scotland) Act 1943 being passed into law 70 years ago. In effect, the act nationalised the further development of Highland water resources and recommended the creation of a board to manage hydro generation in the north. I want to reflect on the consequences of that legislation, the effect that it had on Scotland’s Highlands and Islands, and the example that it sets of Scotland’s natural resources being used to improve the wellbeing of our people. In 1945, fewer than half of the homes in the Highlands had access to electricity; by 1960—15 years later, when Tom Johnston stepped down as chair of the hydro board—that number had increased to more than 90 per cent. The scale of the construction work was impressive: between 1945 and 1965, 78 dams were built, 2,000 miles of tunnels were excavated and more than 20,000 miles of electricity network were established. The workers who built the infrastructure—they were known as the hydro boys—had to work in remote locations; sometimes they had to work in dangerous conditions. Their achievement transformed the quality of life people in the north of Scotland and, as a result, more than 200,000 households had access to modern comforts for the first time. The electricity meant greater economic sustainability, which resulted in new opportunities for communities in the north of Scotland. The effect is still evident today and can be seen through the continued economic investment and population increases. Companies based in the Highlands and Islands are competing for major investment and they are being successful. Companies across the globe recognise that the Highlands and Islands are great places in which to live, work and invest. Highlands and Islands Enterprise has become so successful that it is vacating its office premises to make way for Capgemini, which is one of the inward investor companies that it has attracted. That success is one of the important legacies of the Hydro-Electric Development (Scotland) Act 1943. Seventy years on, Scotland is at the start of a new renewable energy revolution. Scotland’s renewables sector goes from strength to strength. Last year, it produced the equivalent of 39 per cent of our total electricity demand. That is significant progress towards our 100 per cent target. As I have highlighted with regard to Tom Johnston’s vision, the issue is not just one of energy generation but one of wealth creation and benefits to our communities. To put the figure in context and show what it means today, Scotland’s renewable sector saw more than £1,000 million invested in 2012 and it supports more than 11,000 jobs. A £7,000 million programme to upgrade Scotland’s transmission networks proceeds apace. Up to 3,000 jobs will be created through investment by Scottish Power and SSE. That means high-quality employment for the graduates, engineers and apprentices building the infrastructure that will, incidentally, enable us to quadruple our electricity export to England, which will surely need it. Hydroelectric power has an important role in Scotland’s transition to a low-carbon economy. It accounts for a large percentage of renewable energy produced in Scotland. Although most of the large-scale hydro power schemes in Scotland have been built, the Scottish Government is determined to encourage new conventional hydro power schemes where possible. Since 2007, we have consented 19 hydro power applications and have taken a number of actions to enable development. I will highlight a few of them. First, we have streamlined the consents process for hydro projects by raising the section 36 threshold for consent to 50MW. That will unlock further renewables capacity by encouraging schemes over 1MW. Secondly, we have published online planning advice for hydro schemes, which encourages planning authorities to include hydro power in their spatial plans. Thirdly, last year, we recognised that there are particular influences on costs affecting projects in Scotland. We therefore maintained the level of support for large-scale hydroelectric schemes at 1 renewables obligation certificate per megawatt hour. At the same time, the United Kingdom Government was reducing its support by 30 per cent to 0.7 ROCs. As a result of the Scottish Government’s policy, SSE announced last month that it is to start construction on the 7.5MW Glasa hydro scheme. Glasa will be the largest hydro scheme to be built in the UK in the past five years and the second largest conventional hydro scheme of the past 50 years. It will employ more than 100 people at the peak of construction. When it is built, it will supply enough electricity to meet the needs of around 10,000 households. SSE has confirmed that the project would not have gone ahead without the Scottish Government’s continuing support for hydro power. I hope that shows that clear political support and leadership can lead to significant new investment. The Scottish Government’s support is also making a difference at the small community scale. Projects that started out as ideas from local volunteers are becoming a reality. Under our community and renewable energy scheme—CARES—we are supporting 15 community hydro projects. An example of a project that CARES helped at an early stage is the Harlaw hydro project, which is being developed by Balerno Village Trust. CARES provided free independent advice and grant support for the feasibility and technical work that is crucial in assessing a project’s viability. The project has now been offered a CARES loan to help with construction. Without the CARES support, the project would not have happened. The approach shows our commitment to all communities across Scotland sharing in the rich rewards of our renewable resource, at all scales. The Scottish Government is leading the way across the UK on how we support local ownership of renewable energy. It is reasonable to say that the UK Government’s position, in particular on electricity market reform, is causing uncertainty and that that is affecting hydro power. A good example in that regard relates to pumped storage. In appropriate locations, pumped-storage schemes have huge potential to ensure that electricity supply remains reliable, even as we move to variable energy sources such as wind. However, SSE has indicated that, before it can make investment decisions on pumped-storage hydroelectric schemes, it requires greater clarity about future UK Government policy. I suspect that members will debate concerns that Scottish Renewables, among others, expressed about how new arrangements in relation to the feed-in tariff and tariff degression will be applied. I will listen with interest to all comments; I know that there are many members, in all parties, who take a close interest in the matter. Hydroelectricity is one of the great industrial and economic success stories of post-war Scotland.

I agree that environmental issues are important and must be more seriously taken into account. Mary Scanlon has somewhat spoiled my peroration, such as it was, but that need not trouble anyone unduly. I will revert to my conclusion—perhaps a bit less levity from me would help. Hydroelectricity has transformed the living standards of people who live in remote areas of the Highlands and Islands. Tom Johnston was pivotal to that. It was cross-party consensual effort, when he was appointed Secretary of State for Scotland by Winston Churchill, that enabled that transformation, and no doubt Tom Johnston was not hindered by the lack of parliamentary scrutiny during the second world war. Be that as it may, Tom Johnston’s work and the work of other people, particularly those who built the hydro schemes, sometimes in dangerous circumstances, led to huge opportunities for economic regeneration, the benefits of which we reap—and perhaps take for granted—today. The Highlands and Islands are again at the forefront of opportunities in the renewable energy world. This is an exciting time. It is fitting to remember the days, 70 years ago, when another Scot was leading the charge and leading it well, with marvellous results. I hope that history will repeat itself in the context of renewable energy over the next 70 years. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the continuing commitment of the Scottish Government to developing hydropower; acknowledges the proud tradition that Scotland has in generating hydroelectricity, as championed by the former secretary of state, Tom Johnston MP, and the many homes and businesses that this has benefitted; notes that 2013 is a celebration of the 70th anniversary of the Hydro-Electric Development (Scotland) Act 1943, which enabled large-scale renewable energy development in Scotland; recognises the potential for and value of further pump storage hydro-projects in Scotland; further notes the importance of harnessing new hydropower in bringing economic benefits while reducing emissions; further recognises the importance of micro-hydropower in terms of community ownership, which can create opportunities to empower and enrich communities; recognises that developing as a hydro-nation is a huge opportunity for Scotland, and acknowledges the valuable contribution that hydropower generation makes to Scotland’s renewable targets.

I agree with much of what the member has said. She said that she would like the Scottish Government to do more to strengthen the grid. Given that there are planned projects totalling in cumulo £7 billion to upgrade the grid in Scotland, will she or one of her colleagues later in the debate perhaps give a little more detail about exactly what more they think we should do? I would be keen to know.

I entirely agree that we want to do everything practical and sensible that we can to encourage communities to develop their own schemes and, when possible, to own a proportion or all of those schemes. We are in total agreement about the objectives. If there are specific things that the Labour Party thinks that we should do, my door is open and we want to hear about them. We are doing a lot, but we are always ready to listen to practical, constructive suggestions about what more we can do.

I reassure the member that currently in the national forest estate there are 16 schemes, with an installed capacity of 14MW, with another being commissioned and six with planning consent. Seven more are in planning and a further 100 sites are under investigation in the forest estate.

Will the member give way?

This has been an excellent debate. I thought that it would be a useful demonstration—and we have seen it this afternoon—of cross-party support for hydro power and pumped storage. That support in itself is of value. The debate has also shown that we in the Scottish Government are propounding a solution of varied sources of electricity generation. Since this is a day for cross-party consensus, I will again quote Winston Churchill. On the policy approach to electricity generation, he said that the solution is “variety and variety alone”. How electricity is generated may be different in the future from what it has been in the past. The debate has been interesting. We have had anecdotes, personal reminiscences and scholarship. The debate has been variable and intermittent. [Laughter.] It has been variably illuminating and intermittently entertaining. We have with us today a distinguished guest who is a significant figure in the world of hydro power: David Williams, who heads up the British Hydropower Association. I hope that he has enjoyed the debate and the demonstration of support from all parties for the work of the BHA’s members. I have had the pleasure of learning more about that good work at reasonably frequent outings with the BHA in one form or another. I will move on to address some of the topics that were raised in the debate, starting with the problems highlighted most recently by Scottish Renewables and the rising concerns over the future of small hydro power in Scotland. To be fair, Ken Macintosh set out the issue well, so I do not need to repeat the nature of the problem. I do not want to make it a party-political issue, but the problem is one that—for the reasons that Scottish Renewables set out in its press releases of 18 June—very much needs to be addressed. We want to see small hydro power schemes go ahead—virtually every member of every party has said that—but how the FIT tariff and degression operate and interrelate is damaging. As the senior policy manager of Scottish Renewables rightly said, that is because the degression has been applied not to built hydro schemes but to potential hydro schemes. Therefore, a scheme that was intended to avoid boom and boost, and what Mr Fraser referred to as the excessive risk of an overinflated cost to the public purse, might inhibit the development of more small-scale hydro schemes. I understand that the UK Government is considering the information provided by the British Hydropower Association. The BHA surveyed 38 developers who, between them, planned to pre-accredit 195 schemes with a combined installed capacity of more than 98 MW. The two solutions—I am primarily interested in solutions rather than simply intoning the nature of the problems—are, first, to have a one-year hiatus on degression and, secondly, to base degression on deployment per year. I was going to ask Mr Fraser—not in a polemic way—whether the Scottish Conservatives would support that. I think that they probably would. Mr Fraser may wish to nod at this point if the Scottish Conservatives support a solution to the unexpected consequences of how the degression rules are being applied to small-scale hydro schemes. There is a steadfast lack of nodding, so I will move on. We live in hope of clarification. Many members, including Ken Macintosh, Claudia Beamish and Malcolm Chisholm, asked what forestry and Scottish Water are doing. That is a perfectly reasonable question. Scottish Water has 10 hydro schemes in operation, and 23 other sites host hydro or Difgen technologies—Difgen is a new way of controlling pressure of water running through pipes to generate green energy. The Deputy First Minister launched the UK’s first Difgen hydro turbine on a strategic water main near Denny. As I said in an intervention during Dr Elaine Murray’s speech, in the national forestry estate there are 16 schemes, with installed capacity of 14MW. Another scheme is being commissioned, six schemes have planning consent, seven more are in planning and there are investigations into 100 more sites. SSE is proceeding with its scheme at Glasa, in Ross-shire, which is a major scheme and will bring great benefits. Rob Gibson and many other members spoke about that. RWE npower renewables and Green Highland Renewables are also taking forward a number of schemes. A number of members, quite rightly, mentioned community projects. We are determined to have as many community schemes in Scotland as possible and to provide the advice and assistance that are required for such schemes. That brings me to the Scottish Highland renewable energy conference—SHREC, as opposed to Shrek, the lovable monster in the children’s cartoon—where I had the opportunity to meet communities from throughout Scotland who are successfully creating their own schemes or are about to do so. Mr Macintosh asked about finance. The issue is serious and is being looked at. In Aberdeen recently I met local leaders of NFU Scotland. There is a proposal to aggregate schemes, to make them more attractive to lenders.

I wanted to respond to Mr Fraser, who asked whether we would look carefully at the 100kW dividing line, because I understand that schemes with capacity above that are likely to cost in excess of £500,000, so farmers, crofters and other individuals might be priced out of the over-100kW market. We will need to look carefully at the issue—I have detected from Mr MacKenzie, too, a desire to do so—to see how the rules have operated, because I understand that SEPA maintains that a number of schemes have gone ahead. I will come back to members on that in due course. A great many members mentioned pumped storage. The benefits of the technology are obvious, particularly in combination with stochastic wind energy sources, so we want more pumped storage. I should say that the lead time is between six and 10 years, and the key thing about pumped storage is that it needs investor certainty, which we do not currently have, given EMR. That is the key point, which I hope will be answered shortly. Liam McArthur made a number of points about the islands. As he knows, the desire to get a solution on connections to the islands is close to my heart. With the positive approach of Ed Davey, I hope that the Treasury can be persuaded to find a solution. I continue to work with Mr McArthur on the issue, as well as with colleagues from Shetland and the Western Isles. It is unthinkable that the best place for generating renewable electricity in the UK would be shut out from opportunities to do so. I hope that that will never happen. I have sought to leave politics outside the room and argue the case, which is extremely strong, on its merits. I very much hope that when it looks at the CFDs the UK Government will follow the Scottish model of 1 ROC for hydro power and not the 0.7 ROC model. As a result of the Scottish model, SSE is taking forward the biggest project for five years. Scottish Renewables has estimated that £150 million-worth of projects could go ahead if our approach were followed. In that regard, as always, we will seek to use our weapon of reasoned argument with the UK Government. It will be interesting to find out how fruitful and successful that approach will be.

Yes, it will. Between new jobs from sector growth and replacement of existing personnel who will retire, I expect around 95,000 job opportunities to arise over the next seven years in the energy sector in Scotland. Energy Skills Scotland will work with industry, schools, colleges, universities and others to meet the energy sector’s needs.

Yes, I am hopeful that, throughout Scotland, we will encourage more females to enter the oil and gas, renewables and, indeed, chemical engineering sectors. As John Swinney said in reply to an earlier question, the issue applies across all sectors. The Irish poet William Butler Yeats said that education is not about filling a bucket; it is about lighting a fire. Therefore, we want our inspiration, particularly for girls in Scotland, to be truly infernal.

I thank John Mason for lodging his motion. I am aware that he raised the issue with John Swinney in March. I understand the concerns about the impact of branch closures in communities throughout Scotland that have been raised by John Mason and all the colleagues who have taken part in the debate. Banks play a key role in our society and local economies; members have underscored many ways in which they do so. We rely on banks in order to conduct our daily lives. The Scottish Government is absolutely clear that customers must be at the heart of what banks do and the decisions that they make. We have been very explicit about that in our banking strategy, about which I will say more later. I want to emphasise a point that John Mason made very clearly. My experience of meeting bank staff—recently, I had the pleasure of meeting staff in a branch in Inverness—is that they are unfailingly courteous, helpful, positive and devoted to doing their very best in their work. I make that point quite deliberately, because although all of us here are debating problems that have arisen, we all recognise that ordinary bank staff, who are at the front line and are the face of the bank, do an excellent job for this country. Perhaps sometimes the brunt of criticisms and public disquiet about decisions that are taken by banks’ leadership falls on front-line staff, who have had nothing whatever to do with the decisions. It behoves me, as minister, to thank all the bank staff who do a great job around the country, and who are committed to helping ordinary customers, whether they are individuals or businesses. It was mentioned by Stuart McMillan that following the financial crisis that the banks have been facing, they have to address their long-term financial sustainability. There is no two ways about that; that task needs to be tackled. We must accept the reality that that task needs to be done. It is not an easy task or one that anyone wished would be necessary, but necessary it is and it involves reducing costs and making difficult decisions. That has been alluded to by some members in the debate. I am acutely aware of John Mason’s point that not everybody has access to the internet and mobile banking. It is undoubtedly true that some people prefer to bank in a branch. Other people are perhaps not comfortable with or are unable to use the internet either because of unwillingness to break the habits of a lifetime or through age and physical impairments or difficulties that make it impossible to use those facilities. Nonetheless, it must be recognised that banking is changing dramatically. In preparation for the debate, I asked the Royal Bank of Scotland for information about how it is changing. As John Mason said, internet banking is now such that 50 per cent of the bank’s customers bank online. However, that is not the case in Mr Mason’s constituency, as he said. Therefore, the point that he made about local facilities is relevant. More than 1 billion transactions were carried out on mobile apps, and RBS Group’s customer services handled more than 2 million phone calls in 2012. Increasingly, banks are looking at different ways of serving the public. We are now used to ATMs; branches, mobile banks and points of presence in railway stations and so on may become more popular as people seek convenient solutions in busy lives. The nature and practice of banking are changing, and there is less demand for the traditional format of banking services that—if I may say so—the Deputy Presiding Officer and I grew up with, when none of those other forms of banking were possible. When the world changes, the nature of policy solutions must change accordingly. Nevertheless, we recognise the concerns that Mr Mason has expressed and which will be felt by some of his constituents. Therefore, I asked the Royal Bank of Scotland to respond specifically to the issues about the location of the branch in Shettleston that has closed. The bank has advised me that there are several alternative Royal Bank of Scotland branches within 3 miles of the Shettleston branch. Mr Mason also referred to a post office that is located relatively nearby, and Mr McMillan said that there is a post office in Gourock that is fairly close to the Gourock branch that has closed. I appreciate that those alternatives will not suit everybody and will still leave constituents of Mr McMillan, Mr Mason and other members inconvenienced. The problems are, therefore, not to be dismissed. They are real concerns and I recognise them. Therefore, I would be happy to raise any individual case or specific difficulties that have been caused in Shettleston and Gourock directly with RBS, if either member wishes me to do so. Mr Mason asked me to say what engagement we have had with the Royal Bank of Scotland. I met RBS on 8 January, the First Minister met RBS on 9 January, Angela Constance met RBS on 7 February, John Swinney and the First Minister met RBS on 13 February, John Swinney met RBS on 28 March, and the First Minister met Ross McEwan, the chief executive officer for UK retail, on both 18 April and 14 May 2013. At those meetings, a huge number of things were discussed, including an undertaking by the Royal Bank of Scotland to invest £26 million in its branches over the next three years. That refurbishment will bring a lot of work to tradesmen throughout the country. I appreciate and acknowledge that as a good thing. In total, the bank is investing £175 million in improving services, branch refurbishments, ATMs and cash-and-deposit machines, and it is investing £50 million in information technology. It is also investing £450 million in IT hardware in its Edinburgh data centres. I appreciate that none of those things will address—perhaps in any way—the problems that Mr Mason has raised; nonetheless, they are part of the wider picture and it is appropriate to mention them for that reason. I am grateful to members for highlighting one of the issues that affect banking matters in Scotland. It is right that they do so; it is right that they stand up for constituents who are inconvenienced. However, we must not only recognise the difficulties that face the banks; we must also recognise that they are doing good things in the country. We must be willing to acknowledge that and thank them for doing that. One member mentioned bonuses. It is my opinion that bonuses are perfectly legitimate when they reward success. However, in the absence of success, the award of bonuses to top directors and a tiny minority of senior employees of financial and other institutions causes extreme public disquiet perhaps more than anything else. Meeting closed at 17:40.

Scottish Development International met Capita in London following the announcement, and another meeting will take place this week. In addition, a further meeting in Scotland between the company and officials is planned in the near future to understand the long-term implications for the Glasgow operation. O2 has confirmed that the employment of affected staff and their contractual terms and conditions of employment will be guaranteed for two years. My ministerial colleagues and I have asked to be kept fully informed of developments; we stand ready to intervene on this matter and will meet senior Capita officials as necessary.

On 21 May, Capita announced that Telefónica—that is, O2—had selected it as its preferred bidder to form a 10-year strategic partnership for customer management services. As a result of that deal, Capita will run and manage O2’s customer service centres and support O2 as it enhances and expands its digital service offering to customers. The contract is expected to be worth £1,200 million and is due to commence on 1 July. The majority of the 950 staff at the Glasgow site, who work in customer sales and service, will transfer to Capita under the Transfer of Undertakings (Protection of Employment) Regulations 2006, and O2 will retain approximately 70 staff at the site who are employed in the technical areas of network infrastructure and so on. Capita has not made a formal statement about its plans for the Glasgow facility beyond 2015. I do not want to comment on press speculation. However, as I have indicated, my ministerial colleagues and I will keep a very close watch on what is happening and we will certainly wish to be sure that the interests of the staff are fully taken into account by the company going forward.

I have looked into that matter already. Telefónica has received a total of £6.1 million in regional selective assistance from Scottish Enterprise since 2006. That grant led to the creation of 1,300 jobs and capital expenditure of £14 million. It was anticipated that the company would also spend around £48 million in salaries over the first two years of the project. Telefónica has fulfilled all of its obligations with regard to the grant and is not now subject to recovery. I should say—I think that most members are aware of this—that regional selective assistance is a key economic tool, which has provided considerable value for money to the taxpayer and created thousands of jobs in Scotland.

I thank the member for that question on what is an extremely important issue, because RSA makes a substantial contribution to the Scottish economy. The work that Scottish Development International, Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise do in that respect is exemplary. During 2011-12, 87 offers of RSA totalling more than £35 million were accepted, the majority of which were made to Scottish-based companies. The offers relate to projects with planned capital expenditure of more than £214 million and the expected creation or safeguarding of more than 3,500 jobs. In effect, every £1 of RSA grant levers in £6 of private investment. I think that that is a pretty good deal overall for the taxpayer. We will continue to ensure that RSA is fully utilised in future.

Scottish Enterprise estimates that 15.5 per cent of Scotland’s high-growth oil and gas companies have operations in the west of Scotland; that is one in six. Those companies range in size from the Wood Group to small and medium-sized enterprises. Scotland’s oil and gas strategy, which the First Minister announced last year and which has been developed in conjunction with the industry, lays out a plan to help the industry to go from strength to strength. Through the strategy, we aim to secure investment and maximise jobs.

I know that Stuart McMillan lobbies very hard for and has close engagement with the companies in his area, and that he wants even more companies to join the successful ones in his part of Scotland. He is quite right, because a huge number of oil and gas companies operate in the west of Scotland and we would like to see even more join them. I was happy to visit James Walker Devol in Greenock to see the excellent work that it does. Members from all sides of the chamber will want to see this work progressing. Scottish Enterprise and SDI can help companies in a great many ways, particularly in those areas in the west of Scotland where regional selective assistance is available to encourage employment creation. That is a good tool. It has been used very well in the past, and I fully intend that it should be maximised in future.

The Scottish Government has helped to establish leading centres of excellence, such as the Pure Energy Centre in Unst and the Hydrogen Office in Methil. Scottish universities are at the cutting edge of research and development in hydrogen and fuel cells. We are also supporting the Aberdeen hydrogen project, which will deepen our understanding of the role that hydrogen could play and enhance our reputation for energy innovation.

We are making progress, and we want to make more progress. To take one example that I mentioned, the Aberdeen hydrogen project will help to deliver a fleet of 10 hydrogen buses for the city. Those will be very welcome, not least when this Scottish National Party Government delivers the new Aberdeen peripheral road, which will tackle a long-standing problem that—as I know from my frequent visits to Aberdeen—has caused serious problems for the people in that city. I am pleased to say that we are making progress, but more remains to be done.

The Scottish Government has regular discussions with banking sector representatives on a range of issues, including access to finance for small and medium-sized enterprises. We actively encourage the banks to return to acceptable levels of lending and to improve the supply of finance for viable small and growing businesses. The recently published banking strategy sets a framework to work closely with the banks and others to restore the traditional principles of Scottish banking, which are based on probity, prudence and stewardship. It also encourages the banks to work with public agencies to enhance the quality of business loan proposals and so maximise the potential number of successful applications for finance.

I make it clear that I do not adopt the terminology that the member uses but, nonetheless, there is a serious point about the alteration of terms of business for existing customers. That is a serious matter that my colleagues and I have raised regularly and repeatedly with banks, as all members will be aware. The issue arises for a number of reasons, including the revaluation of assets on a conservative basis, which causes banks to review their lending policies. I will say a couple of things. First, we are absolutely clear that we want banks to treat their customers fairly and decently. Secondly, if a decision is made with which a customer disagrees, there is a right of appeal. From having seen the statistics, I am aware that those who appeal against decisions of banks, whether to decline lending or to change the terms, enjoy a pretty high success rate in their appeals. Therefore, the right of appeal is not a paper, nominal or negligible one—it is serious. I am happy to write to Mr Findlay with the details and precise statistics, so that the constituents who have raised those matters with him can be sure that they have access to appeal if so advised.

That is an extremely important measure. As Mr Maxwell will know, particularly in the construction sector, subcontractors—or subcontractors to subcontractors—often find that it takes far too long for them to receive payment. In too many cases, that has led or contributed to insolvency situations. Project bank accounts are a way in which trusts can be used to administer payments so that small businesses are paid on time for the work that they do and a larger business does not just sit with their money in its bank account. That is why I am delighted that the Deputy First Minister has, on the recommendation of banking experts, taken forward a trial of project bank accounts, which are a very good measure. I pay tribute to the small businesses that lobbied us hard and whose views we have listened to by introducing the trialling of project bank accounts.

The Scottish Government is working closely with a wide range of organisations, including Western Isles Council and Highlands and Islands Enterprise, to support businesses and promote sustainable economic growth in the Western Isles. HIE’s investment of £1.4 million to create a site in Tarbert on Harris has attracted a multimillion pound private sector investment by Isle of Harris Distillers Ltd. The construction of the distillery is being supported by the Scottish Government through a £1.9 million grant under the food processing, marketing and co-operation grant scheme. The development of the creative industries and media centre in Stornoway has been supported by more than £1 million of European regional development funding and £750,000 from HIE, in recognition of the employment opportunities offered by the creative sector in the Western Isles.

Due to cuts imposed on the Scottish Government’s budget by the United Kingdom Government, it is correct to say that we have had to take difficult decisions to ensure that existing ferry routes and services are maintained. We therefore took the difficult decision to remove RET for large commercial vehicles from spring 2012. The results of the RET pilot showed that the major impact of RET was in fact on the tourism industry, as perhaps one might expect. I understand, however, that concessions have been introduced so that lorries carrying hay, livestock and live shellfish make the return empty journey for free, other than the charges to cover pier duties. The member will know that those matters are primarily dealt with by my colleague Keith Brown. I am perfectly sure that if she wishes to make any specific proposal about additional expenditure—where it would be made and how it would be funded—he will be happy to give it full consideration.

Presiding Officer, I understand that copies of the statement should have been made available to you very recently. I would have far preferred that far more notice had been given; I apologise for that. I felt that it was correct to say that to you and to members to whom I have not been able to provide a copy of the statement because of other matters. Over the past year, my officials and I have had extensive engagement with the opencast mining sector in Scotland. The sector employs 3,000 people directly and 4,500 people indirectly, contributes £450 million to the Scottish economy, and provides well-remunerated jobs—average wages are around £42,000 a year. It is vital to the economies of Ayrshire, Lanarkshire, Dumfries and Galloway and Fife and other parts of Scotland. It is part of the social fabric of Scotland, and mining communities are proud, strong and resilient. Since around last autumn, it became increasingly clear that the sector faced very difficult financial challenges as a result of the continuing low world coal prices. As members will be aware, the Scottish Resources Group called in the liquidators on 19 April 2013. That led to an announcement of 604 job losses on that day. I set up a task force to look at the issues that the coal sector faces. I chair the Scottish opencast coal industry task force, and I am very pleased to have had cross-party MSP and MP representation as part of the group. The task force is equally well represented, with, as members, stakeholders that include trade union officials, the local authorities most affected, landowners and the Scottish Environment Protection Agency, and there is representation from the United Kingdom Department of Energy and Climate Change, the Coal Authority and the Scotland Office. The task force met most recently on Monday 20 May, in Cumnock in Ayrshire. That area is no stranger to the devastating effects that the loss of work in the coal industry can bring to communities. The task force’s remit covers the immediate employment challenges, and the main focus is on securing the re-employment of as many of the SRG workforce as possible. The task force is also to consider the restoration of opencast sites and the issues that threaten the longer-term viability of the coal sector as a whole. Through our partnership action for continuing employment—PACE—initiative, we took immediate action to support employees who had been made redundant. We held four redundancy support events—on Tuesday 30 April in Lanarkshire, 1 May in Ayrshire and Alloa, and 2 May in Fife. On 17 May, we invited all 604 redundant employees to make an appointment with a PACE adviser to identify their training needs or other opportunities to assist them if they wished to remain in the mining sector or to retrain to work in another sector. An important part of the reskilling efforts is the provision of driver training for large plant machinery. The certification of that training and its transferability to other sectors, such as the construction sector, is a key enabler in job market mobility for coal sector employees. The possibility of using some of the current SRG sites for that training is being explored as an option. To aid that process, additional funds of over £1 million have been made available through the Scottish Government’s employability fund, which is administered by Skills Development Scotland. It was agreed on Monday that a short-life working group to address the issue of training and certification ticketing be set up, and that group will meet shortly. I am pleased to update members that Hargreaves plc, a prospective buyer of the former SRG company, has been selected by KPMG, the liquidators, as preferred bidder for the former SRG business. Discussions between KPMG and Hargreaves are on-going, so I stress that it is not a signed or sealed deal as yet. However, the interest shown by Hargreaves is encouraging and it is a serious bid. Hargreaves was invited to, and attended, the most recent task force meeting. It was very encouraging to hear from Hargreaves that its plans for the former SRG business include the intention to re-employ up to 300 people in Scotland in the first six months, which estimate may rise to around 500 people in the first 12 months of the new operation. More details of the negotiation between Hargreaves and KPMG may be expected in the coming weeks as talks progress. However, councils were encouraged to open dialogue with Hargreaves at the earliest opportunity regarding sites located in the relevant council areas, and that is under way. Members may be aware that Hargreaves is currently finalising the purchase of ATH Resources plc, another coal operator and major employer in the Scottish opencast coal sector. Hargreaves’s intervention in ATH has managed to maintain 230 jobs or thereabouts in Scotland by keeping ATH operating throughout a very difficult period for that company. We welcome that intervention by Hargreaves. East Ayrshire Council is one of the largest affected authorities, with the loss of 350 jobs in the area, so the council has set up a local task force to run in tandem with the national task force. Douglas Reid, council leader, and Fiona Lees, the chief executive, provided an update to the task force on the East Ayrshire Council local task force. The issue of state aid has been discussed at length within the task force, and although it is clear that state aid support for the coal industry is extremely restrictive, we are continuing to explore fully whether any avenues are open to us. That work is being done jointly by the Scottish Government and the United Kingdom Government through DECC. The Coalfields Regeneration Trust has provided an update to the task force on its work. The Coalfields Regeneration Trust was established to provide support to Scotland’s former coal mining communities. From 2011 to 2014, the CRT will have received £2.5 million in grants from the Scottish Government to carry out its activities in former coalfield communities. I am pleased to say that the CRT is considering what more it can do and what role it can play going forward. By far the biggest threat facing the future of the opencast coal industry in Scotland is the proposed increase in track access charges for coal freight. The Office of Rail Regulation proposal has been out to consultation since March last year and is of grave concern as a result of the distance-travelled element of the charge. The proposed charge will be levied on a per-kilometre-travelled basis, which will mean that operators in Scotland, who have the furthest distance to travel to the main markets in the south of England, will be disproportionately affected, drastically undermining the competitiveness of the Scottish coal sector. Scottish operators and Scottish ministers, including me and Mr Brown, who is with me in the chamber, have responded to the consultation strongly, stating the case that the charges have the potential to destroy the Scottish opencast coal sector. The Scottish Government continues to respect the statutory independence of the ORR in this matter, but it is vital that in reaching a decision on a charging regime it ensures that the wider impacts of the charges on the Scottish coal industry are fully considered. That was clear in the formal guidance that my colleague Mr Brown issued to the ORR last summer and in the representations that were made during our most recent discussions. The ORR attended the task force meeting on Monday, and I thank it for its attendance at what was clearly a very difficult forum for it but one in which it received very direct feedback from the industry. The ORR determination will be available on 12 June this year. At that point, the ORR will take further comments, with the final documentation expected later this year. The restoration of opencast coal sites is a subject of great importance to the task force. Members might be aware that my officials and I have been working closely with key stakeholders over the past six months to address the issues that the Scottish coal industry faces. We share the concerns that local communities have expressed about the responsible restoration of opencast coal sites. I am therefore pleased to make members aware of the newly created Scottish Mines Restoration Trust, which will facilitate the restoration of old opencast coal mines across Scotland. Although the task force’s main concern is to retain as many of the existing coal jobs as possible, I ask that members note that the restoration process itself will potentially, over time, create hundreds of jobs across the country, as well as restoring the local environment. The SMRT will be independent of the Scottish Government and its board will be made up of representatives of local authorities and other stakeholders. The SMRT will not directly fund restoration; it is right that coal operators will still be responsible for the restoration of their respective opencast sites. However, such tasks are often complex, and the trust will work with coal operators, local councils, landowners, communities and other bodies to facilitate the responsible and appropriate restoration of opencast sites. I am sure that all members agree that community engagement is a critical factor in the creation and deployment of restoration plans for opencast sites. I assure members that community participation and engagement will be a prerequisite of SMRT involvement in the facilitation of restoration schemes. Task force members are working well together. We are doing all that we can do to ensure continued employment in the coal industry in Scotland, and we are paying particular attention to the areas that are most affected by the recent redundancies. We are assessing the threats and issues that affect the long-term viability of the coal sector—principally, the ORR charging proposals—and we are working hard to ensure that the responsible and appropriate restoration of opencast sites in Scotland takes place. I thank all members who have taken part in the various pieces of work that I described, principally the task force, and all members who will speak in response to my statement. These have been trying times for the Scottish opencast coal sector and I pay tribute to the efforts that have been made by all parties, working together, to find the best way forward. I will be happy to answer members’ questions.

I will try to answer the questions raised. Of course I can confirm that my absolute concern is to ensure that, of the people who are presently redundant, as many as is practically possible will have the offer of re-engagement. I have made that abundantly clear at both the task force meetings that I have chaired thus far. That is a matter of resolute determination on my part and, I believe, on the part of all members of the task force and all parties represented therein that have constituency interests. On training, I do not believe that there is a threshold or ceiling of £200 per person, but I will check that and write to the member on that specific issue. A substantial sum has been allocated to training; that money has been allocated in light of the gravity of the situation that we face. Perhaps I can suggest to members that at present the problem is not really how much money might be available per person. The main challenge is to find a way to enable the assessment to be conducted. The assessment is necessary in some cases for drivers to receive ticketing. The matter is complex; it is one on which the National Union of Mineworkers has been actively working for a long period. That is precisely why we agreed at the task force meeting that was held in Cumnock on Monday this week that a sub-group will be set up that will involve all related parties, including Hargreaves, Kier Construction, the NUM and Professor Russel Griggs—who has an extraordinarily prominent role in all these matters—as well as other relevant people. The objective is to find a practical way forward. Let me reassure members that, as energy minister, I will ensure that money will not be a problem in sorting out those issues. The problems are practical and logistical, primarily. If people are to get training, we need a place for that training; that means a mine that is registered and licensed to operate safely. I will ensure that it will not be for the lack of money that we fail to solve the problems. There is a clear will to do so and I am grateful to be able to clarify that. The CRT plays a prominent role, working with communities from the bottom up, as it were, and it will continue to do that. Finally, on the thorny issue of ownership, I believe that the Scottish Government is party to the legal proceedings to which Mr Macintosh referred. Therefore it may well be that they are sub judice to some extent and I would prefer—rather than inadvertently fall foul of parliamentary procedure—to write to the member to set out with clarity my response. I am not seeking to avoid his question, but I must respect the procedures that may apply, given that we have entered proceedings relatively recently and that it may be inappropriate or unhelpful for me to comment further on that matter. However, I undertake that every member will be informed, as soon as possible, of the precise position in relation to those matters, given that they are of legitimate public concern.

Murdo Fraser is correct in saying that, following the first meeting, I wrote to the liquidators to express the general view of the task force. At that time there had been no announcements by the liquidator as to any preferred bidder. That matter was not by any means clear, so at the request of the task force, and all the people there, including members from parties in this chamber, I indicated that the task force’s preference was twofold: first, that a well-capitalised company should come in to take over coal operations, and secondly, that cherry picking should be avoided. I do not think that it was ever suggested that there would be a solution that answered every problem in relation to coaled-out mines. The letter is a matter of record and I can pass Murdo Fraser a copy of it. I believe, and I should state for the record, that it is clear that Hargreaves is a well-capitalised company. That is beyond dispute; information has been provided to that effect. Therefore, we welcome the intervention of Hargreaves in ATH, and that view should receive the full support of all members in this chamber. The welcome of the status of Hargreaves as preferred bidder for SRG seems to be entirely consistent with what the task force wants. At the meeting on Monday, which Murdo Fraser was unable to attend, the mood was to welcome the commitment that Hargreaves is making. That commitment extends to acknowledging its on-going responsibility for environmental matters—for restoring the mines that it will be working—as well as carrying out coaling operations.

Restoration is not a simple issue; it is a thorny one. It is an issue with considerable challenges, as all members will recognise. Traditionally, restoration bonds have been used. They can come in many shapes and forms, as financial instruments. Their essential common element is that they provide an element of insurance cover to meet the costs of restoring the environment of a mine that has been coaled, in the same way that any insurance policy provides an amount of cover against specified events. Problems have arisen in two respects. First, the level of cover may be insufficient to meet the total cost of restoration, and there may therefore be a shortfall. That will undoubtedly be the case in some instances. Secondly, it is becoming increasingly difficult to obtain restoration bonds. For both those reasons, we have been looking at the issue with a group since, I think, last October, before the task force was formed. We believe that we need to look at solutions for the future. For example, I understand that another company that operates coaling provides a parent company guarantee, which, because of the extensive and robust financial standing of that company, is accepted as sufficient cover. Those are matters in which the judgment of financial experts obviously has a role to play. I inform Willie Rennie that the next meeting of the task force is due to take place on 1 July at Cumnock, courtesy of East Ayrshire Council once again. At the meeting that took place on Monday it was agreed that we will look extensively at the issue of restoration at the meeting on 1 July. Mr Rennie knows that, in politics, there are often no easy answers. However, if we work together, using the new vehicle of the Scottish Mines Restoration Trust, we are far more likely to come up with solutions to a problem that is undoubtedly of concern—and rightly so—to many communities throughout Scotland. No one is suggesting that the responsibility should be shifted from the coal operators. The coal operators have responsibility—responsible coal operators in Scotland acknowledge that fact—and the responsibility will continue. The question is how that can be made to work in practice in the future, and the matter is being looked into extremely seriously.

I will obviously work with all relevant stakeholders who have a contribution to make. I understand that the SMRT fully intends to work with the communities that are most affected. As I said in my statement, community engagement is imperative and an essential part of all the work that is done on a particular coaled-out mine. It is beyond question that one should work with the local community, although quite who speaks for the local community is an issue that has exercised many people from time to time, and I suggest that the matter should be looked at on a pragmatic basis. As Mr Harvie will know, the SMRT is, rightly, a body that is independent of the Scottish Government. Therefore, it will be for the SMRT to decide how it will engage. My understanding is that it intends to engage fully with appropriate representatives of the communities that are most affected.

I thank Mr Coffey for that question. I have been in frequent contact with Mr Ingram, who, although still on sick leave, is working hard for his constituents in these matters, as his area is one of the most affected in Scotland. Mr Coffey asks about the impact of the ORR’s proposals on the sector. The data available from the industry in Scotland shows that the average total freight charge to transport coal from Ayrshire to the Aire valley power stations in Yorkshire is about £8 to £10 per tonne. By comparison, the equivalent charge to transport coal from Immingham, a Lincolnshire port, to the Aire valley is £3 to £5 per tonne. The charge to transport coal from a typical English mine closer to the Aire valley may be £1.50 to £3 per tonne. Those figures show that, before any increases, the mines and businesses in Scotland bear a material cost disadvantage ranging from between £3 and £8 per tonne delivered. Therefore, the introduction of distance-related charging on a per-kilometre-travelled basis will lead to higher than average cost increases for Scottish coal supplied to English power stations. Were the ORR’s proposals to be implemented, there is a serious risk that they would destroy the opencast coal sector in Scotland. I was grateful, therefore, that the ORR appeared at the task force meeting on Monday, as well as at the previous meeting. I thank it for its attendance. Dr Murray was there, too. It was not a happy experience for the ORR, as strong points were made, but we had a dignified discussion. The point was put—by me, as it happens—that, if the charges were introduced, they could kill the industry in Scotland. I am very hopeful, because there is a reasonable case based on evidence—some of which I have read out to members to show that it is serious evidence—and any regulator must and, I believe, will consider the evidence carefully in coming to a decision. One of the reasons that I felt that it was appropriate to bring the statement to the chamber today was to underscore the gravity of the predicament that the industry currently faces. I believe that I have been able to do so.

I thank Dr Elaine Murray for her attendance at the task force and for her work on the issue as a constituency MSP over a fairly long period of not inconsiderable dialogue between us. The purpose of the Scottish opencast coal task force is to consider issues relating to the opencast coal sector. That is quite a wide range of topics. There are, I think, nearly 50 people on the task force and, I must say, they have been pretty well behaved. That has made my chairmanship role pleasant and not challenging. It would be wrong to extend the remit of the group to an extremely wide omnibus economic development role, especially as East Ayrshire Council has its own local task force. We really should continue to focus on the opencast coal sector. As Mr Rennie said, we must focus on bonding and restoration. If we do that and move that issue forward—I am confident that we will do that, incidentally—we will have done a good thing for Scotland. It might impair the chances of us focusing on that important task if our remit were extended and radically changed. However, I say to Dr Elaine Murray that I have personally asked Dr Lena Wilson to ensure that every possible attention is given to the areas that are most affected. I believe that that service will be received through Scottish Enterprise and all other relevant personnel, including SDS and the PACE team. I absolutely accept the general point that it is imperative that we consider what other options can be explored for diversifying the economy from the coal sector.

I am pleased that we have representatives from Fife Council involved in the task force. Alex Rowley attended the last meeting, as did Keith Winter, who is one of the senior officials. I also believe that Claire Baker attended the previous task force meeting. The work of the task force is to consider all parts of Scotland that are affected. There are particular issues in Fife in relation to restoration. Those are being considered in great detail by the local authority, the Coal Authority, Russel Griggs, SEPA and other relevant stakeholders to determine whether we can make progress regarding the restoration of mines in Fife—in particular Muir Dean, which presents particular challenges. Those are not easy matters. The point of a task force is to bring people together to work together in a swift and focused fashion. That is happening. I am confident that that work will deliver fruitful results.

Mr MacKenzie is absolutely right. The regulator, Ofgem, warned last October that the spare generating capacity in the UK was considerably lower than it should be. In respect of England, I believe that the figure for spare generating capacity was around 4 per cent, which is far below a safe and prudent level. I believe that, since last October, there has been a further closure of coal-fired power stations. The figure from last October can therefore only have worsened. That is one of the most serious issues facing Scotland and the UK today. Scotland has a spare margin of around 25 per cent of generating capacity. Our grid capacity to export our electricity to England is being quadrupled, at the agreement of the regulators, so as to allow our electricity to be exported down south to keep the lights on for our good friends in England. Mr MacKenzie is quite right to point out that, were the threatened charges of the ORR to be implemented and were the expectations of industry to be realised—if it was not possible to continue to operate because to do so would be loss making—there would be a severe potential consequence for electricity supply in the UK at a time when the picture is, as I have painted it, pretty bleak.

Those are serious matters, but they are not new. The general issue of restoration has been around for a long time. What is new, however, is that we have put in place a mechanism in the form of the Scottish Mines Restoration Trust, which seeks to facilitate solutions. The SMRT provides a focus and a purpose that hitherto did not exist. That is a good thing, and I hope that other members welcome it. It is a very good idea, when there is a complex problem involving multiple parties, to bring them together to find a solution. That is what the SMRT will do. Moreover, it was announced at the task force meeting in Cumnock on Monday that the sum of £1.1 million has been provided to the SMRT, which will assist it in performing various functions, such as obtaining any necessary technical, consultants’ or environmental reports, obtaining information or engaging people whose advice is a sine qua non of finding successful solutions. The SMRT’s role will not be a panacea, nor is it primarily a funding body—it is a facilitating body. I believe, however, that its existence will help us to tackle challenges such as those at Muir Dean far more readily. The local authority, together with the stakeholders that I mentioned in my answer to Annabelle Ewing, is working extremely hard in relation to Muir Dean. I can assure the Parliament that the matter is receiving full, thorough and comprehensive attention. I cannot and will not undertake that there will be outcomes that I cannot guarantee—that would be utterly irresponsible—but I am confident that everything that can be done is being done.

I thank Joan McAlpine for her question. She has also played a substantial role in these matters, over a long period, in relation to her constituents. As it happens, I met John Glen of Buccleuch Estates earlier today, and we are in regular contact with him as Russel Griggs has had massive involvement in the issue of late. I am hopeful that progress can be made at Glenmuckloch, which may allow a restoration project to proceed. I think that other members are aware of the work that is being done and the good will with which all parties involved are pursuing the objective of restoration at that site. Were it to happen, it would be a fillip and give succour to all those throughout Scotland who want to see other mines being restored.

In respect of Fife, Hargreaves is in discussions with Fife Council about the sites concerned. It is too soon to make an announcement as discussions continue on various solutions, but I assure David Torrance that work is continuing and councils have been invited by Hargreaves to continue the dialogue on a site-by-site basis.

Yes—I think that I can give the assurance that the member seeks. The purpose of the task force is to look at the issue strategically and comprehensively. That is why, at the next meeting of the task force on 1 July, I expect that we will receive a number of presentations from all those who have a material interest and a contribution to make. I hope that, thereafter, we will see progress being made.

The workers are highly skilled, and to some extent the skills can be transferred to other sectors, most obviously the construction sector. In order to enable those workers’ skills to be recognised in other sectors, the short-life working group will be looking precisely at what certification might be required to secure that objective and to ensure that those people who wish to pursue a different career, in construction for example, are enabled to do so by having access to the necessary assessment to secure that certification. It is the access to the assessment—for example, carrying out the driving under supervision—that is important. It is expected that many jobs, possibly hundreds, will be created in the restoration of mines. We will also explore the possibility that training and assessment can be carried out in relation to sites that are being restored in such a way that people can take part and complete some of the restoration work in the course of completing their training. That would be an imaginative way in which to seek to constrain the restoration costs, and it could therefore be part of the imaginative solutions that we are seeking to solve what is a thorny problem of, I suspect, several decades’ duration.

A wide range of topics were raised there. I inform Mr Brodie that I am expecting a report—which was commissioned some time ago—to be provided to me on the potential benefits that Scotland may derive from our untapped geothermal resource. In looking at that, we will certainly consider whether that potential includes any opportunities in relation to disused mines.

The United Kingdom Government’s proposals for electricity market reform are at an important stage in their development. I therefore welcome the opportunity to bring the issues back to Parliament. We have debated the reforms twice before—back in January 2011, when they were first introduced, and again in September 2012. There was consensus among members that EMR must build on Scotland’s strengths and there was support for us continuing to work closely with the UK Government, for which we were grateful. The UK Energy Bill was introduced in the UK Parliament in November last year, and the fundamental changes that it will deliver make it vital that the Scottish Parliament is given an opportunity to debate the latest information and proposals. Scottish ministers share the UK Government’s high-level ambitions to move to a low-carbon electricity-generating mix, to maintain security of energy supply, and to support the interests of consumers. I therefore accept the Conservatives’ amendment. I have some sympathy with much of the Labour Party’s amendment, but we do not feel that it sufficiently explains some of the propositions contained therein. I say that out of courtesy to members at the outset. However, I hope that there will be more agreement than discord in the debate. We share the reality that the scale of generation and transmission investment that is needed is significant. The EMR proposals aim to deliver large-scale investment in low-carbon generation, while ensuring security of supply in a cost-effective way. We have said from the outset that the reforms, if they are done correctly, can provide the necessary regulatory and price certainty for low-carbon technologies. We need to provide certainty for low-carbon technologies quickly. Unfortunately, thus far the reform has been too slow and the proposals have been too complex. I will come on to some examples later, but will first set out where we want to be. At the core of its reforms, the Energy Bill introduces contracts for difference, which will replace the renewables obligation, to support investment in low-carbon generation. That will provide long-term price certainty by stabilising returns for generators at a fixed level and thereby incentivise the necessary investment. The renewables obligation has worked very well for Scotland. After a record year for deployment in 2012, we now have 5.8GW of renewable capacity in Scotland, which is almost 40 per cent of the UK total. Our introduction of higher support levels for wave and tidal generation in 2007 has helped to attract investment and establish Scotland as a marine renewables hub. Indeed, in 2012, more than £1,000 million was invested in renewable schemes in Scotland. That is a substantial figure by any yardstick. Six years after 2007, the UK Government followed our lead and introduced higher support for wave and tidal generation in England and Wales. We believe that our agreement to support the UK’s transition to contracts for difference will achieve that track record of attracting investment and maintaining investor confidence. The levels of support that are available under contracts for difference—the strike price—will be published by the UK Government for consultation in July. We welcome that. We have a key role in that process and are already working with the UK on both the analytical and decision-making aspects. Over the coming weeks, I understand that we will get more detail on the levels of support that are likely to be offered. That may give us enough of the confidence that we need, but we are not there yet. The on-going uncertainty about EMR is the challenge that we face. Industry leaders have made it clear that, to make investment decisions, they urgently need clarity and certainty on support from Government. At present, and for the past couple of years, since EMR was announced, there has been an interruption in what should have been a steady flow of investment in generating capacity. In June last year, Keith Anderson of Scottish Power said: “the questions I will get asked is how does the mechanism work? The answer, right now, I do not know. What is the strike price? I do not know. What is the rate of return? I do not know. Do I know when the mechanism will be in place? I am not too sure.” Despite the introduction of the Energy Bill in November, we still do not know the answers to those fundamental questions. That is the case not only for strike prices for renewables. The bill introduces proposals for a capacity market that are crucial to the future investment decisions in gas plant in Scotland and the UK. However, again there is no detail. The UK Government recognises that we need significant investment in new gas plant. Back in December, Ed Davey said that “up to 26 GW of new gas plant could be required by 2030”, yet here we are with projects that have planning consent but in which investment decisions cannot be taken because there are no rules for such decisions to be taken. On 14 February, Ignacio Galán, Iberdrola’s chairman said: “If the decision is not taken in a hurry, the decisions of investment will be delayed, and if the decisions of investments are delayed, the country can suffer blackouts during the decade. That is particularly shocking. We require numbers.” We believe that there should be more focus on carbon capture and storage and perhaps less focus on nuclear. I refer to the negotiations with EDF Energy on the project in Somerset. We need only look at the media to see what a guddle EDF is in. Only this week, Sam Laidlaw of Centrica, who, in February—for good reason—pulled out of the partnership to build Hinkley Point C, said: “Not only had the cost increased but also the schedule had lengthened very considerably. So instead of taking four to five years to build, EDF were telling us that it was going to take nine to 10 years to build. That is a long time to be writing out a cheque for this project.” Meanwhile, two carbon capture and storage projects are proposed in Scotland, subject to their obtaining the appropriate permissions. That offers us the real opportunity to reduce the impact of coal and gas generation on our carbon emissions. I am pleased that the Peterhead project has made it on to the preferred bidders list of the UK CCS commercialisation competition; I indicated that when I met Michael Fallon a couple of weeks ago. I am pleased that it will go forward to the next stage. Beyond that, we have no clarity or framework for how CCS projects will be incentivised. I chaired the thermal generation and carbon capture and storage industry leadership group meeting earlier this week, and the industry experts tell me that the UK Government must outline a clear investment signal for coal and CCS as part of the future energy mix. However, that cannot be done in isolation from other generation technologies. The UK Government must look at modelling work throughout the energy sector to determine the mix required. If it is left to the markets to decide, we may find ourselves in a situation whereby, by the time that those decisions have been reached, it is simply too late to do anything about it. Most important, investors need to know the price that they will get for that CCS coal-fired generation. That must be the clearest signal. If we do not have that clarity and urgency of purpose, we risk losing the infrastructure that is necessary to keep the UK coal industry alive, and we will lose it forever. We must ensure that we retain the sites of existing coal-fired power stations that are least likely to give any rise to local objections to their use. Here is the potential prize. Projects such as the Captain clean energy project—CCEP—which is currently on the Department of Energy and Climate Change’s CCS competition reserve list, has potential benefits of up to 8,000 jobs during the construction phase, with potential gross value added of £3,400 million. During the operational phase, the jobs created could total 3,000, with annual GVA of up to £130 million per year—those are huge benefits.

I am not sure that Mr McArthur meant to ask about the coal price because that is determined by market forces; rather, he perhaps meant to ask about the contracts for difference strike price, which is a perfectly fair question. We are working closely with Department of Energy and Climate Change officials, whom my officials are meeting next week. We will look carefully at the level of support required. Plainly, we want the right level of support that is neither too high to overly reward the developers, nor too low so that it inhibits development. That is not an easy task. Carbon capture and storage has been the Cinderella of the energy world, and we must increase its status. I hope that that argument will win support in the Parliament today. The benefits to the supply chain in Scotland are simply enormous. In fact, although I am not an expert in these areas, that seems to me to be a sine qua non of Europe achieving its emissions targets. The uncertainties and challenges are exactly why we are working closely with the UK Government on the reforms—and we are determined to continue to do so. We have secured a statutory role for Scottish ministers in key aspects of the reforms, including the design and delivery of the contracts for difference framework. I am pleased to announce that the two Governments have agreed to develop an intergovernmental concordat to deliver continuing and enduring joint working between the Scottish and UK Governments. Only by doing so can we ensure that EMR is delivered in a way that is fair, open and transparent, in which the interests of the Scottish sector are represented, and which, above all, has the confidence of consumers, generators, developers and investors. That intergovernmental co-operation led to yesterday’s publication of the “Scottish Islands Renewable Project: Final Report”; as members are aware, that was in response to a question from my good friend, Mr McArthur. Led by the First Minister, we have been arguing for a change to the transmission charging regime for the past four years. There is an urgent need to find a solution for unleashing the massive renewables potential of the Western Isles, Orkney and Shetland, which is hindered by an unfair charging regime. Quite simply, how can it be fair for the charge for access to the grid to be around £10 per kWh in the mainland and up to £130 per kWh for the Western Isles? No matter what knowledge they have about the energy world, everyone can see that that is unfair and must be tackled. I was therefore delighted that Ed Davey took up my suggestion to establish the intergovernmental steering group and commission a report to assess the barriers that face island renewable generators. The report—which, as I said, was published yesterday—is a major step forward. I am pleased that the industry views it as positive, too. For example, the chief executive of Aquamarine Power said: “We have not definitively solved the issue of island grids just yet—but it looks very much like the willingness to tackle the problem head-on has, at very long last, arrived.” The report makes absolutely clear that the islands can make a cost-effective contribution to 2020 renewables and decarb targets, if issues relating to grid access and high transmission charging can be addressed. According to the report, the islands can supply up to 5 per cent of the UK’s total electricity needs by 2030. There is much still to be done. On the basis of the report, I will propose to the UK Government an islands CFD uplift, to provide the appropriate investment signals to renewables developers and also to SSE—Scottish Hydro Electric Transmission Ltd—as network provider. I urge the UK Government to work with us to develop new approaches to manage the significant costs of underwriting the first phase of large subsea cable projects. The proposals need to represent good value for money for consumers. The report provides compelling evidence that onshore wind on the islands can make a significant contribution to UK and Scottish renewable energy and carbon reduction targets.

I certainly will. I welcome that the report shows that island wind can be a cheaper option than offshore wind, and is comparable with nuclear power, biomass and imported wind. In conclusion, I am very pleased that we are near to the start of the beginning of electricity market reform. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the continuing commitment of the Scottish Government to work within an integrated UK market framework; notes the importance of the electricity market reform proposals in maintaining investor confidence in Scotland in both renewable and carbon capture and storage technologies and supports the Scottish Government’s working to secure the best possible outcome for Scotland’s electricity supply industry and consumers; also welcomes the role of the Scottish Government in the Energy Bill, including setting the level of the UK decarbonisation target range and in the design and delivery of the contracts for difference in the Electricity Market Reform Delivery Plan, which the UK Government will publish in draft for consultation in July 2013; supports agreement of a joint concordat to embed the principles of working together; notes Ofgem’s report, Electricity Capacity Assessment 2012, which strengthens the rationale for investment in Scotland’s electricity grid, and further welcomes the commitment of both the UK and Scottish governments to working together to consider and agree solutions to mitigate the barriers facing developers on the Scottish islands.

Will the member take an intervention?

The member said that the referendum is creating uncertainty among investors. Can she name any renewable energy scheme that has been cancelled or delayed as a result of that matter?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the close relationship between the Scottish Government and Ed Davey and the Department of Energy and Climate Change be matched by the close relationship between Ed Davey and DECC and Mr Davey’s colleagues in the Treasury?

I do not doubt Murdo Fraser’s biblical authority, but is he able to provide an example of any renewables project in Scotland that has been deferred or cancelled because of concerns about the referendum or independence?

Does Alex Johnstone accept that the success of onshore wind has provided the rationale to allow the National Grid and Ofgem to approve upgrades of the grid on a massive scale, without which there cannot be any offshore wind, tidal or wave energy? Does he agree that the success of onshore wind is a stepping stone to other forms or renewable energy?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I will do my best to oblige. The debate has been useful. There have been a number of excellent speeches and, by and large, the tone has been positive. I will start off by trying to answer some of the questions that have been asked. One of my duties is to provide answers, and there has certainly been no shortage of questions. Therefore, I do not propose to write to every member whose questions I cannot answer but, if members wish to persist with any of those questions, I ask them to let me know and I will ensure that they get answers in writing later on. I make that absolutely clear. Rhoda Grant asked a number of questions that were followed by other Labour members quite consistently. I will address some of the questions that she raised and will, in doing so, answer points that were made or echoed by a number of her colleagues. She raised the important matter of demand reduction. Of course we all want less energy to be used; a great number of policy measures are being put in place to that end. There is a general desire across all parties to reduce demand—it is not a political point. Although it is not for me to defend DECC, I know that it will lodge amendments to the Energy Bill to incentivise electricity demand reduction and to help to address fuel poverty. We will work with DECC to develop such measures in Scotland’s interests and to ensure that they go as far as they can. Many members rightly raised the issue of the effect on consumers. Dave Thompson made a solid contribution, in which he analysed bills in the Highlands and compared them with bills in other parts of Scotland and south of the border. His speech merits close reading and further consideration. The Energy Bill will provide a power for the UK Government to force energy companies to simplify tariffs, if Ofgem’s work to do so is not enough. Regardless of our political standpoints, I think that we all agree that that is a good power. The question is whether, how and in what circumstances it should be exercised. Forcing energy companies to provide simple tariffs has been a theme of many members, so I welcome the provision in question. The bill will also introduce consumer redress orders, whereby energy companies will be forced to pay compensation to consumers who are mistreated. Again, I think that that is an extremely useful—and long overdue—provision. Historically in Britain, complaints by consumers have been seen, more or less, as a futile exercise, because of a sense that one’s complaint was dealt with in a call centre somewhere, went into the ether and nothing happened. Therefore, the prospect of consumer redress orders is a good idea and one to which, in principle, we can all subscribe. Malcolm Chisholm raised a number of specific points. The closure of the Scottish RO was not an issue that other members dwelt on at length. We have always made it clear that matching the wider UK timetable for closing down the RO to new generation will depend on a number of factors, including detail on CFD strike prices, a resolution of the issue of a fair deal for our islands on transmission charging, which I will come on to, the back-up that we will need—at some stage, we will probably need another gas power station in Scotland as back up—and various other technical matters. We are not there yet, and we have made it clear that we would proceed to CFDs only once all those matters have been dealt with. Malcolm Chisholm also mentioned fixed ROC mechanisms. Fixed ROCs are a bit of a technical beast, but basically the ROCs will be closed for good in 2037. As time goes on, there will be less of a market for them, the market will become less liquid and there will be more risk of price fluctuations. The fixed ROC system, details of which are still to be consulted on, is designed to come into play in 2027. It will guarantee generators a fixed payment for all their ROCs. I want to turn to some of the more controversial and less technical points that have been raised. I turn first to the issue of renewables in an independent Scotland. It is not the purpose of today’s debate to go into that topic in detail; that great day will come. I see that on that there is a great deal of barely suppressed anticipation on the part of our opponents. Of course, the sensible thing to do is to maintain the cross-border electricity market. When electricity goes along a transmission line, it does not realise when the line ceases to be Scottish and becomes English. Therefore, it makes sense for the grid system, which has been developed as it has for practical reasons, to continue to operate on that basis. Energy is an area in which Scotland makes a huge and necessary contribution to keeping the lights on south of the border. Several SNP members mentioned the recent contribution to the debate by Alistair Buchanan of Ofgem. Whatever we might think about other parties’ views, I think that we can all agree that Alistair Buchanan is in a position of some authority to opine on such matters. After all, he has been the head of the regulator in the UK. His opinion was issued to the UK Government last October: it is that neglect of the electricity system in the UK has been so serious that we are now reaching a point at which there is a real risk of the lights going out, at least south of the border, around 2015.

I was going to come on to deal with those matters. Murdo Fraser quoted from the Bible in his opening speech, so let me do likewise: “seek, and ye shall find”. I suggest that, if Murdo Fraser seeks the answer, he will find it in the DECC EMR technical annex A, at paragraph 63—which I am sure the member has read but has temporarily omitted to bring to his frontal lobe. It points out the truth. In its Energy Bill, the UK has formulated plans to purchase electricity from outwith the UK. It plans to provide subsidies to other countries and to co-operate with other countries such as Ireland and Norway. It is planning to give itself the powers to grant CFDs—to grant subsidies—to all those other countries. That is perfectly reasonable. The SNP is a party with an international outlook. Not only will England be our greatest friend, but we will have friendly relations with Norway, Ireland and all those other countries. We therefore welcome that approach being adopted by the UK Government. What a strange thing it is that that approach is not matched in this Parliament, where the assumption is that the only country that will not receive the benefit of that friendly international co-operative approach will be Scotland. Scotland will apparently be cut out from that approach. Here we reach some other inconvenient facts for our colleagues on the Opposition benches. The first of those inconvenient facts is that the spare generation capacity in England will drop to 4 per cent in 2015-16. That means that there is a huge risk that the lights will go out. How is that going to be averted? Some members have said that we will import French nuclear energy. Unfortunately, the Germans and Belgians have already more or less got that tied up. In any event, even if that were not the case, what is the maximum capacity that could be imported using that interconnector? It is 4 per cent, which is not enough. There is another point, which was made by Alistair Buchanan—and Mike MacKenzie was right to mention it: if England, after Scotland winning the referendum and becoming independent, decided that it would cease all fraternal relations and trade, and that it would stop companies from England from participating in renewable energy schemes in Scotland, that would come as very bad news to some of the members of RenewableUK with which I deal. If that is to be part of a new policy of non-co-operation, non-engagement and non-trade, what will happen? What will happen is that either England will be left with regular power cuts, or it will pay very high prices for electricity. That is because the law of supply and demand comes in, you see? If supply and demand are matched, or if supply is outstripped by demand, the prices goes up. The Scottish Conservatives’ policy would have English consumers paying through the roof for their energy bills, were their ridiculous policy ever to be pursued.

I have perhaps dwelt over long on that area, but I wanted to try and do it justice. I hope that I have. We are close to decision time. Let me return to the immediate and pressing priority. For me as energy minister, the biggest priority is to get a fair deal for our islands. I am delighted that we have had a very good, positive and constructive relationship with Ed Davey—so much so that we put out a joint press release. There we are: Ed Davey and myself are on the same page, as it were. We want jointly to persuade the Treasury that there must be a fair deal for the islands that does not disconnect their renewable energy potential from the UK grid. That will mean power from Scotland to avoid power cuts in England.

It is estimated that 24,000 million barrels of oil are still to be recovered, with a potential wholesale value of up to £1.5 trillion—that is £1.5 million million. However, some industry estimates suggest that the figure could be substantially higher. Despite numerous predictions from London that the oil was running out in the 1980s, the 1990s and the noughties, today we still have an industry that continues to thrive and expand. Indeed, the industry itself predicts that capital investment will rise to more than £13,000 million this year—with £100 billion of investment in companies’ plans. The Government believes that if we create the right conditions for innovation and increased investment, we can increase the recovery rate of our oil and gas reserves, increasing the return and extending the life of the sector to most of this century. Our oil and gas strategy lays the ground for a thriving oil and gas sector. We are committed to creating a supportive business environment, which encourages innovation and the development of new technology. We are committed to working with the industry to boost asset integrity and extend the lifespan of critical infrastructure. With the right policies, we can realise the full potential of the resource; with access to all the policy levers that independence will bring, we can do even more to enhance the conditions in which the industry is operating. We will be able to create the fiscal incentives that will enable not only the industry to realise its potential but all Scotland’s people to benefit.

Let us stick to the facts. Let us stick to the fact of BP’s announcement on the Clair Ridge field. The Clair field was discovered in 1977—three years after oil was first brought ashore from the Argyll field. Who then would have predicted that BP would expect and indeed announce that fossil fuels would still be being produced from the Clair Ridge field in 2055? Not many people, and certainly not people in the Labour Party, whose negativity has for years been the only consistent element of their approach to the oil and gas industry. It is clear that Scotland is at the leading edge of technological advance in areas such as seismic 3D and 4D imaging of reservoirs, which can clearly identify where fossil fuels are. Ten years ago, that was not possible. That is why companies such as Apache, which acquired the BP Forties field in 2003, when it was predicted that 144 million barrels of proven reserves of oil were left, has announced that it has already had 190 million barrels—way more than the 2003 estimate—with another 130 million barrels of proven reserves of oil remaining. The history of oil and gas extraction is that there is more than we think there is. That will prove to be the case in Scotland’s waters, provided that we pursue the right policies.

Let us take the honest appraisal of Oil & Gas UK. If the member reads the report that Oil & Gas UK has produced, she will see that Malcolm Webb prefaced it by pointing out that over the next three years 130 wells will be drilled, that this year there will be more investment than ever before—£13 billion—and that investment in the industry has been at a higher level than ever before. If the member wants evidence, she should go to Oil & Gas UK, the body that represents the industry, with which we have close relations. The member said that I gave only one example. On 21 December last year, Statoil announced a £4.3 billion investment in the North Sea, which will create 700 jobs. That is something about which the Scottish National Party is extremely positive. The Mariner field, which is one of Statoil’s fields—the other is Bressay—is expected to produce for 30 years from the date of commencement. If the member has a good read of journals such as The Press and Journal, which provides excellent coverage of the day-to-day developments in oil and gas, she will see that a large number of developments have been announced in the past 18 months and that she is alone if she thinks that there will be no more discoveries than those that have already been made.

Well, no, I must admit that I was not thinking of the member when I used the word “liberal”. The fact is that we should all be rejoicing in the success of the oil and gas industry, not talking it down. Let us consider the people who talked it down in the past. Remember Tony Benn? He was a minister once. He said that North Sea oil would run out within the next two decades. Jack Straw said in 1983 that North Sea revenues would be running out before the end of the decade. Labour, the Liberals and the Tories predicted that oil and gas would run out in Scotland in the 1980s, and then they said that it would run out in the 1990s. Then they said that it would run out in the noughties. They might be right in one respect. Perhaps the oil and gas will run out in the 80s or the 90s, but they were certainly wrong about one thing: the century.

I think that the member is referring to the warning that was issued by the head of Ofgem, Alistair Buchanan, last October, and repeated in February. That prediction was that the spare capacity margin in the UK’s electricity supply will fall to around 4 per cent, or next to nothing. Therefore, the product of the energy policy pursued in the UK over decades of a lack of investment in the grid and a lack of consideration to ensuring a diverse and sufficient range of capacity is that there is now a real risk that the lights will go out south of the border. North of the border, we have a 25 per cent margin, which is much more as it should be. From time to time, people in the Scottish National Party have felt that the Government in England was in the dark, but we do not want the people of England to spend time in the dark. To avoid that, they will need the increasing electricity supply that will be transmitted south of the border, and to enable that to happen, Ofgem has approved the investment of £7,000 million to upgrade our grid, which will allow our export capacity to be quadrupled. Mr MacKenzie is entirely right to raise that question. Conservative and Liberal members who seem to think the lights going out in England amusing do not seem to be showing the fellow feeling that SNP members are evincing to our good friends and neighbours south of the border.

We believe that oil and gas production should last for most of the rest of this century. The question is very serious, and I will say why it is not possible to make a prediction with absolute certainty. At the PILOT meeting that I attended with Michael Fallon recently, one of the industry presentations was from an industry leader who pointed out that the southern North Sea may close for oil and gas production circa 2035 because of the ageing infrastructure. Unless the right policies are pursued to address the challenges that we face in the southern North Sea, the potential consequences will be fiscally catastrophic. The right policies include collaboration between companies; consideration of whether further exploration must be incentivised; and consideration of further fiscal incentives. Those are the policies that industry has identified for several years; are they going to be implemented? The consequences of failure have been estimated by one industry source to be the loss in tax revenue of £85,000 million. That is what is at stake. I am delighted to have the opportunity to highlight the massive contribution that companies in Aberdeen—small and medium-sized enterprises as well as big companies—are making in innovation, in technology and in leading the industry throughout the world. I saw that in Houston last week, when I led a delegation of around 50 Scottish companies. Scotland has a top-class reputation in the world and our SMEs are at the top of the field, leading innovation across a range of industries. Surely we should be uniting to celebrate that success and congratulate them on it, not decrying or seeking to belittle it.

One of the exciting opportunities of the innovation in technology that is taking place in Scotland among individuals and companies is in the field of carbon capture and storage. This morning, I co-chaired the carbon capture and storage and thermal generation industry leadership group. One of the potential benefits of carbon capture and storage is that it can be used to reduce the emissions from fossil fuel—coal or gas—generation and to store them and use them to enhance oil recovery. I would have thought that the Greens would welcome that, but apparently they do not. Our strategy is based on maximising recovery. Surely it makes sense from a green point of view that, when we take out any deposit of oil and gas—whether in the North Sea or anywhere else—we should take out more than we leave behind. How does it make sense to leave more than 50 per cent of oil or gas behind before going on to exploit the next field? I commend our policy to Patrick Harvie. I suspect that he may not see entirely eye to eye with me on the details of it, but I hope that he will come to support carbon capture and storage. It is reported that the contribution that it could make through enhanced recovery, by unlocking 3 billion barrels of hard-to-reach oil from the North Sea, could be worth £190,000 million. I can tell Mr Harvie, who is laughing, that the technique is being actively pursued by many leading companies as we speak.

I was pleased to be in Aberdeen last Friday. I did not quite get to Aberdeenshire, but I will put that right very soon. On Friday, the First Minister announced that an additional £6.5 million will be made available to allow our excellent universities and colleges to equip their students with the certification and degrees that they require to take up the opportunities in the energy sector as a whole. We estimate that, by 2020, Scotland will need an extra 95,000 people for the energy sector as a whole. In addition to the funding for the University of Aberdeen, Robert Gordon University, Aberdeen College and Banff and Buchan College, along with other universities and colleges that provide oil and gas courses in Scotland, there will be 1,000 conversion training places for those who want to enter the oil and gas industry or other industries in the energy sector from other fields. I would have thought that that is another piece of good news. To answer Mr Robertson’s question, it was very much welcomed at Robert Gordon University, where the announcement was made. I pay tribute to all the staff and other people who work extremely hard—as the First Minister and I saw on Friday—in equipping young people to acquire the skills that they need to take part in those exciting industries.

I am not sure whether that is a serious question, because Scotland more than pays its way already, as has been demonstrated by documents that have been published. The Conservative Party should not be lecturing us on tax. The tax hike that was imposed in 2011 sent shock waves around the world. When I visited companies in Houston and Canada, confidence in the UK was shaken. Following representations by the First Minister, Oil & Gas UK and others, field allowances were introduced in 2012. That has undone some of the damage. What we know that the Conservatives and the Labour Party—which had two hikes of its own during the disastrous Gordon Brown years—do not is that what the industry requires is extremely simple: fiscal stability and fiscal predictability over the lifetime of the fields. [Interruption.] The Conservatives are laughing, but do they honestly think that the unheralded introduction—a few days before the budget, by the Chief Secretary to the Treasury—of a 12 per cent increase in the rate of tax is any way to run a country? The industry does not think so. The Conservatives might laugh, but the industry believes that those changes were extremely damaging. That is its view, and if the Conservatives go up to Aberdeen or Aberdeenshire, they will find that out for themselves.

I begin by thanking John Mason, as all other members have done this evening, for introducing this important topic to the Scottish Parliament. To wait 14 years after the Parliament was reconvened before we raised the issue has perhaps been too long, so we are grateful to John Mason for lodging an important motion for debate. As a breed, MSPs and MPs—perhaps contrary to public perception—tend to be, at least from my observance, work obsessed, driven, occasionally fanatical, and connected almost surgically to their iPads, so I am not sure that we are the best advert for the pursuit of holiday taking in general. However, perhaps we are wrong and the rest of society is correct. I see one member brandishing her iPad; I do not know whether that is a legal possession in the chamber, so I will not tell on her. More seriously, the matter of providing what we take for granted to people on low incomes, who cannot afford what we take for granted, is at the kernel of the debate. As John Mason presented with typical clarity, that really is the objective of social tourism, although it also boosts tourism. Nigel Don focused on exactly how that can be done in practice. Many members, including Mary Scanlon, gave examples of the magnificent effort that is made by a huge range of companies, organisations, charities, third sector bodies and individuals, who do a tremendous amount. Regarding Badaguish, which Mary Scanlon mentioned, I well know that Andrew and Silvie MacKenzie have devoted their lives to the issue. I remember their telling me once how a blind child heard running water for the first time when he was able to put his ear to the water in a burn near Badaguish in Strathspey, which is a beautiful part of Scotland close to my home. I could give many more examples of the largely unsung effort that is, and always has been, carried out in Scotland by a huge range of bodies. I have a list here of charities and organisations that are involved in the better breaks fund for disabled children and young people. They include the Scottish Spina Bifida Association, Enable Scotland, the MEAD—minority ethnic access development—project and the Aberlour Child Care Trust. It is perhaps invidious to mention just a few, because the list includes about 40 organisations. That goes to show what a tremendous amount of work is being done for children, as Margaret McCulloch mentioned. That work is extremely important, and we thank all those bodies and organisations for the huge amount of work that they do. It is easy to forget how isolating it is for a parent who needs—24 hours a day, seven days a week—to look after a child who has a severe disability. That sense of isolation is acute, as we all know from the work that we do. Therefore, the importance of a holiday—a chance to get away from that routine, which can be the cause of depression and difficulty—is even greater for them than it is for others. As others have pointed out, that is not simply a luxury. Of course, a terrific amount has been done with the support of charities. The Scottish Government has provided a reasonable amount of financial investment—£13 million between 2010 and 2015—for the short breaks fund. A large part of that is to support short breaks for disabled children and young people up to the age of 20 and their families. The investment is divided between two grant-making programmes: Shared Care Scotland’s better breaks programme and the Family Fund’s take a break programme. To date, more than 9,000 children and their families have benefited from that resource and from the work of the many charities to which I have alluded. We have provided core funding to Shared Care Scotland, which works to improve the quality, choice and availability of short-break provision across Scotland for the benefit of carers and the people for whom they care. I had the pleasure of meeting John McDonald and Tom Pilgrim, who I think are in the public gallery, and who with others have taken the trouble to come to Parliament today to educate members and explain their work. The Family Holiday Association, which arranges holidays for people who cannot afford them, believes that 7 million people in the UK miss out on a basic holiday through poverty and that 2.5 million children live in families that are too poor to afford a day trip. The FHA strongly believes that even short breaks can contribute to stronger, healthier and happier families. Many members alluded to that and expanded on it in their speeches. We want to build on that work. Reference has also been made to the work that is done in other countries, which to an extent puts us to shame, although they operate in different ways. France has the chèque-vacances, which can be used towards the cost of rail, sea and air travel as well as more than 135,000 leisure facilities. The holiday voucher system, to which Dick Lyle referred, involved €1.4 billion in 2012. In Spain, 1.2 million Spanish senior citizens have access to an off-peak break at a Spanish seaside resort. In Flanders, it is a condition of registering with the tourist board that holiday businesses provide free or discounted holiday nights, which are then made available to social organisations to help disadvantaged families to access a break from their home. We in Scotland want to learn from what other countries do, and we can do more. Sandra White asked what we are doing in relation to specific events. I am pleased to say that, for the year of natural Scotland, we have had the big April adventures scheme, through which 15,000 people enjoyed free travel during April, enabling them to travel around Scotland courtesy of Caledonian MacBrayne and ScotRail. Stagecoach has offered £5,000 of money-off vouchers. I also refer to the free bus travel scheme for the over-60s, which enables many people to travel throughout Scotland. The extent to which the scheme enables people to do things that they would otherwise not do is perhaps not widely appreciated. It allows people to get out and about, to travel to other parts of Scotland, to visit friends or to have a short break. I do not think that the benefits of the scheme have been computed. Equally, free visits to visitor attractions in Scotland outnumber paid visits by a factor of about three to one, with 34 million free admissions in 2012 compared to 13.6 million paid visits. We are doing some things, although perhaps we can do more. I conclude by returning to John Mason’s central tenet that the “more” that we should be doing should be directed specifically towards families on low incomes, children, people who have disabilities, and especially towards those who have not had a chance in life to have a holiday or a break and to have what the rest of us take for granted. We therefore look forward to working with the Family Fund, the Family Holiday Association, all the charities that I mentioned and others to do more in Scotland for social tourism. Meeting closed at 17:39.

The Scottish Government recognises the strategic importance of Daktari to the Scottish medtech industry and welcomes the company’s decision to open a new manufacturing operation in Inverness—its first overseas operation—which will lead to the creation of 126 new jobs.

Daktari is a company that manufactures diagnostic cartridges that will be used to carry out blood tests to detect the presence of HIV in potentially millions of people in Africa where there is no access to laboratory equipment. We have the drugs for HIV but not the ability to diagnose those who have it. The Daktari company therefore has a world-leading product that can make a huge contribution to solving one of the world’s most serious health problems, which takes many lives. Therefore, I am delighted that the First Minister’s efforts in his trade missions to the United States have helped to secure a marvellous investment for Scotland and, in particular, Inverness.

Yes, I do. I am also pleased that so many of the companies are coming to the city of Inverness, which I represent. That is not just because of something in the water; it is because we are establishing a reputation worldwide as a centre of excellence for the life sciences sector. These things happen not by accident but because of excellent concerted work by many public servants, especially those in the enterprise networks, in this particular case in Highlands and Islands Enterprise. In that regard, I would like to give recognition to Alex Paterson and Lorne Crerar and their team, who are playing a blinder for Scotland. I am delighted that, substantially because of their efforts, we have attracted so many of the top life sciences companies in the world.

The Scottish Government invested £181,500 in events in the Stirling area connected with our first year of homecoming in 2009. The level of confirmed financial support for such events for 2013-14 at present stands at £310,000 and that may increase yet further. My officials, EventScotland and Creative Scotland are in on-going discussion with event organisers, who are all working hard to ensure that Stirling and the rest of Scotland have a fantastic events offering in 2014. In addition to the financial support for events, Historic Scotland is investing £5 million to complete the site upgrade and new visitor facilities at Bannockburn, which will be truly superb.

The member kept us guessing there as to what was to follow the epithet “bloody”. All those events offer a terrific opportunity for people to enjoy a day out in Stirling. I have met the leadership of Stirling Council on four or five occasions over the past year and am due to meet it again on 15 May. We want to work with Stirling Council to make the year of homecoming truly remarkable and memorable—a marvellous occasion for us all to enjoy and to celebrate the outcome of the battle of Bannockburn.

We were saddened to hear of the difficulties faced by Ortak and the impact that its decision to go into voluntary administration has had on its staff. Our thoughts are with them and their families at this difficult time. Our initial discussions with the administrator BDO have been to ensure that, through our partnership action for continuing employment—PACE—initiative, all available support is provided to the 29 staff who have been made redundant. Discussions now continue with Orkney Islands Council, Highlands and Islands Enterprise and BDO. We remain hopeful that BDO is able to find a buyer for Ortak, and we believe that the company has a viable future that will secure employment in Orkney and elsewhere.

I am entirely in agreement with Liam McArthur on that. We will, as always, work closely with him on all these matters in so far as we can, and we will give every assistance to the 29 individuals and their families who are affected. Of course, the primary objective is to secure a successful outcome from the administration. On the reputation that Orkney enjoys for jewellery and jewellery businesses, Orkney has many other jewellery firms of renown, including Sheila Fleet Jewellery and many smaller firms that have made their mark and are regarded throughout the world for high-quality and attractive jewellery. I do not think that that reputation is in any doubt whatsoever. We will make every effort to assist the individuals affected and their families in every way possible to find other opportunities. There are many other opportunities in Orkney, which is succeeding to a huge extent in other areas such as—to name but two—tourism and renewable energy, although it is of course up to the individuals involved as to what they wish to do. I will be happy to engage further with the member to follow through on the issue over the next weeks and months.

The Scottish Government regularly meets Scottish councils and discusses a range of issues with them.

We are happy to confirm that everything possible will be done to assist the generation of jobs in East Kilbride. Of course, Linda Fabiani regularly advocates that cause in Parliament. We understand that the Scottish Government is represented on the East Kilbride task force by officials from Scottish Enterprise and Skills Development Scotland, which are contributing to the development of an action plan that is aimed at encouraging future business opportunities. South Lanarkshire Council’s East Kilbride task force is due to meet tomorrow to discuss the draft action plan and the local area economic review. We will continue to work closely with it and with Linda Fabiani to do everything within our power to create new jobs in East Kilbride.

I can provide the member with an assurance that we will do everything that we possibly can to assist the task force in every way that is practical. Of course, we have to work through any proposal to assess how viable, affordable and practical it is, how it can be financed and whether it will sustain jobs, and we do so on the basis of our economic strategy, which is to encourage growth and focus our efforts on growth sectors, growth markets and growth companies. I think that that is the correct strategy, and we will make decisions based on the application of that strategy. On a personal level, I met the leader of South Lanarkshire Council not so long ago to discuss different matters. We are keen to build up relations with all council leaders, and we—Mr Mackay, principally, but also other ministers, including myself—have such meetings regularly. The objective is to do everything that we can to help workers who face redundancy to deal with the difficult economic conditions in Scotland and the United Kingdom at this time.

We share the concerns of local communities around the responsible restoration of opencast coal sites, and we are setting up the Scottish Mines Restoration Trust—SMRT—to help to facilitate the restoration of old opencast coal mines throughout Scotland. Although our main concern is to ensure responsible restoration of opencast sites, the restoration process itself is expected, over time, to create potentially hundreds of jobs throughout the country. The new Scottish Mines Restoration Trust will engage with local councils, landowners, and coal operators, undertaking a facilitation role to pull all relevant parties together to ensure the best possible outcome for local communities and the effective restoration of old opencast mines.

A short-life working group on restoration bonds was initiated in September 2012. I make that point to emphasise to members that the work did not begin in the past couple of weeks following the announcement of the liquidation of Scottish Resources Group; it has been going on for a long time. It is a very complex topic. As I made clear yesterday, prime responsibility rests with industry. The SMRT’s role will be to facilitate the complex and difficult task of enabling restoration to take place. There are many practical difficulties, but I am confident that, working together, we can secure a good outcome. Indeed, the Scottish opencast mining task force—the formation of which I announced yesterday—will meet on Monday morning, I believe, and take those matters forward with members of each of the three main Opposition parties represented. The matters are not easy, but we are determined to find the appropriate solutions and to work together. I am confident that we will be able to make good progress on a number of opencast sites.

Community businesses may access support from Scottish Government third sector organisational development programmes, such as just enterprise. Individuals who wish to set up social enterprises are also eligible for support from just enterprise and the social entrepreneurs fund. Co-operative development Scotland provides specialist advice to new and growing co-operative enterprises, including existing businesses that wish to change ownership to adopt a co-operative model.

There are many ways in which small and start-up businesses can obtain support. The primary source of advice is business gateway, which is administered through local authorities. From memory—which is always a challenge—I believe that the number of businesses that were contacted and that received advice last year was about 11,000. Of course, advice can also be obtained from the legal profession, from accountancy, from mentors, from business organisations such as the Federation of Small Businesses, the Scottish Council for Development and Industry and the Institute of Directors, from chambers of commerce and from other sources. There is a willingness in team Scotland to provide every help to start-up businesses. We praise the efforts that have been made, for example, through the Entrepreneurial Spark, which has had financial assistance, and by the Prince’s Trust Youth Business Scotland, as well as the efforts of individuals in business of seniority and experience who offer their time to young people, almost always without question of any charge being made, because they want young people to have the best business start in life. We are beginning to see the fruits of their labours coming through.

Following the publication of the skills investment plan for the energy sector in March 2011, there has been extensive careers promotion activity to attract a new workforce to the energy sector in Scotland. That includes 10,000 “Working in the energy sector” leaflets, which were produced by Education Scotland, being distributed in Scottish schools, and more than 5,000 hits on the energy section of the “My World of Work” website. There has been a 13 per cent increase in the number of engineering and energy-related modern apprenticeship starts over the past two years, with fabrication and welding starts increasing by 25 per cent in the same period. We have also supported 890 training opportunities through the energy skills challenge fund in 2012-13 in areas such as oil and gas, marine renewables, wind power, the grid and commercial diving in order to help the sector to recruit experienced people.

Mr Robertson has identified one of the areas in which most can potentially be done to help the oil and gas sector to achieve delivery of the tremendous oil and gas projects that have been announced of late, of which there are now £100 billion-worth in the pipeline in Scotland. The scale is immense. Over the next couple of years, we will see more investment than has ever been seen in the history of oil extraction in Scotland and the United Kingdom. If we can persuade more females to enter professions in the oil and gas sector, that will perhaps be the most obvious way of rising to the challenge. An interesting but counterintuitive point is that most jobs in the oil and gas sector are not offshore. I am not suggesting that females cannot work offshore—of course they can—but I think that there is a false perception that working in the oil and gas industry means working offshore. Increasingly, it means working onshore—for example, in project management or designing projects such as the Gorgon project in Australia, which has been designed in Aberdeen because the people there are the best in the world at that. Dennis Robertson has highlighted one of the key opportunities for the industry. It is up to the industry to deal with it, but we will provide every assistance that we can provide in order for it to rise to ensure that more females are encouraged to enter the industry and to contribute to its huge worldwide success.

I congratulate Jamie Hepburn on securing this important debate on an issue that affects many parts of Scotland, as we have heard. The motion that he has brought before Parliament refers to the serious impact that the changes could have on Cumbernauld, East Kilbride, Stornoway, Perth and Alloa. We have heard from across the chamber evidence to back up the proposition that the impact is likely to be considerable should the proposals go ahead. The fact that there will be a consultation means that the debate can form part of the consultation. We have heard from many members in that regard—Linda Fabiani, for example, noted that there will be a public meeting in East Kilbride, which is expected to be well attended. We heard from Keith Brown and Annabelle Ewing that the same will apply in Alloa for the reasons that they stated. I recognise the assistance, information and support that the CWU provides to elected representatives here and in Westminster on the matter. There has been a debate in Westminster as well. The debate seems to be characterised by the questionable nature of many of the statistics and figures that the UK Government has put forward. I noted from the text of the Hansard report of the Westminster debate that that was a feature that Jo Swinson answered. There seems to be substantial doubt about the figures. As a minister, the first thing that one must do is get the facts right. If the facts are wrong, the solutions will necessarily be wrong. Therefore, I urge the UK Government to listen carefully to the detailed criticism that we have received in this debate and others about the facts on which it is proceeding because there is serious questioning about the level of the losses. I think that it was Linda Fabiani who said that, originally, the claim was made that the losses of the Crown post offices were £70 million, but that has now gone down to £46 million. What happened to the £70 million? What is the breakdown of the £70 million and of the £46 million?

I am grateful for Mary Scanlon’s intervention. I make it clear that my remarks were not addressed towards her—I accept that her record on speaking on post offices is beyond question—and that my question was to the UK Government. It came up with the figures. If it comes up with a figure for the losses, it needs to explain them. It needs to set them out and provide a computation. I would like to see that, and so would a lot of people who work in the five Crown post offices that are affected, because it concerns their jobs. Are we really going to place such uncertainty over the people who have had so many centuries of experience between them? I thought that it was rather ungallant of Mr Brown to have pointed that out. I hope that he does not lose favour with some of the ladies who work in Alloa post office. Are their jobs really to be put under threat on the basis of figures in which we have little confidence? I suggest not. I will make two general points about the overall issue of losses and how they can be dealt with in a difficult situation—I recognise that the situation is difficult. Unlike the UK Government, we balance our budget and live within our means. We cannot print money. It would be nice to be able to print money in life, as we could then say, “Let’s go out and print a few tenners. We can go on the town tonight.” We cannot do that and we cannot borrow money either.

No, it certainly was not an offer. To be serious, I will make a couple of points. First, has the UK Government made any analysis of the head office costs? I make that point because it has been put to me by postmasters of small rural post offices that, if the Post Office Ltd wants to consider where savings could be made, it could make an analysis of those costs, which has never been done. Perhaps it should be. I am told that Peter Mandelson described the Post Office Ltd as a Government department. I know from running Government departments that it is possible to make savings, so perhaps POL should consider possibilities in the head office. I make that point in all seriousness. It must be done. Secondly, the network transformation figure of £1.34 billion is a huge amount of money. I met Ed Davey in his former role in 2012—incidentally, nobody mentioned the franchise proposal then; I think that it was dreamed up sometime later. I hesitate to say that it was dreamed up on the back of an envelope, but it has that appearance to it, does it not? At my meeting with Ed Davey, the network transformation proposals were described. According to POL, only 3,700 of 11,500 outlets make a profit. Scotland has approximately 1,200 post offices and a significantly higher proportion of them are loss making. Network transformation proposes that only 400 of the 1,200 offices would be converted to the mains model and the rest would be converted to the local model. The proposals indicate that, under the local model, income would drop from about £30,000 to about £10,000 a year. I have obtained those figures from some local postmasters, and I cannot comment on their absolute accuracy, but they indicate that there would be a serious threat to local post offices as well. If two thirds of their income is taken away, how on earth can they be expected to survive? The network transformation proposal needs to be examined in the light of using some of the resource to tackle the problem of preserving the Crown post offices, analysing more properly and rationally, stepping back from the franchise proposal, going back to the drawing board and thinking the matter through. I pay tribute to all the staff who work in post offices. All of us here deal with the public, and we know that people can get very upset. Sometimes, that is not easy to deal with. Post office staff do not have an easy job. The experience that they have accumulated over a long period should not be cast aside so lightly. Scotland deserves more. The workers in our Crown post offices most certainly deserve more. Meeting closed at 18:16.

News of the liquidation of Scottish Resources Group will be a hammer blow to many rural areas in Scotland. The Scottish Government will give every support possible to families and communities that are affected by the events at SRG and to the sustainable operation of the coal industry in Scotland. Building on the work that has been carried out with the coal industry over the past months, a task force is being assembled, which I will chair and which will pull together all relevant parties who are concerned with maintaining a sustainable Scottish coal industry. I wish that task force to include MSPs from all the main Opposition parties and have already had informal conversations with the three party leaders to that effect. I have spoken with KPMG and I welcome its initial view that it is still possible that mining operations will continue. I am continuing the dialogue with KPMG, my officials have spoken with affected councils and I will meet East Ayrshire Council after this session and the trade unions on 24 April, which is tomorrow, to ascertain what further assistance may be provided. Our main goal in our discussions with all the relevant parties is to retain as many Scottish coal jobs as possible. On 8 March, at the beginning of the consultation process, we offered support through our partnership action for continuing employment—PACE—initiative to the Scottish Resources Group for employees who might be facing redundancy. The SRG declined that offer, as it felt that it was too early in the consultation process for PACE support to be accepted. On 19 April, which was last Friday—the date of the liquidation—we again offered support through the administrators, KPMG, for employees who had been made redundant then, and we are continuing to work very closely with KPMG to provide support for those affected employees. My officials spoke with it this morning, and I can confirm that plans are under way for four events to assist employees who have been made redundant. Skills Development Scotland is co-ordinating those events, which will take place in Ayrshire, Lanarkshire, Alloa and Fife. PACE partnership organisations will be present to offer help to affected employees, who will each receive an invitation to the events, two of which are scheduled provisionally for next week. We aim to hold the other events as soon as possible, of course. We will also provide support on-site for employees who have been retained. We share the concerns of local communities around the responsible restoration of opencast coal sites, and we are setting up the Scottish Mines Restoration Trust—the SMRT—to facilitate the restoration of old opencast coal mines across Scotland. Our main concern is to ensure the responsible restoration of opencast sites, but it is expected that, over time, the restoration process will potentially create hundreds of jobs across the country. The new SMRT will engage with local councils, landowners and coal operators, and will pull all relevant parties together to ensure the best possible outcome for local communities and the effective restoration of old opencast mines. Finally, we have provided £2.5 million in funding from 2011 to 2014 to assist the Coalfield Regeneration Trust to deliver its services within former coalfield communities. We are continuing to support the CRT to become a self-sustaining organisation so that it can continue to meet the needs of former coalfield communities.

I acknowledge that Willie Coffey has advocated the interests of people in communities in his part of Scotland whose livelihoods rely on opencast coal mining, and I acknowledge Aileen Campbell’s active engagement in her Clydesdale constituency and the engagement of members across parties who have made strong representations to me, irrespective of party politics. The jobs in the coal-mining sector in Scotland are good. They provide very good salaries; indeed, I have been told that the average salary is £42,000. There are 4,500 jobs in the sector in Scotland, and it contributes £450 million a year to the economy. The sector is therefore vibrant, and it is professionally run to the highest standards of operation. I set up the task force and Professor Russel Griggs will continue to play a major part in the work going forward, because we are determined to do everything possible to preserve opencast coal mining in Scotland. As we work together on a cross-party basis, as we will do in the task force, there will be many opportunities to do good for Scotland and to help to sustain many jobs in the areas that Mr Coffey and others represent.

I acknowledge Claire Baker’s interest in the issue and I agree with her remarks on the Kelty scheme, which is an exciting renovation, involving as it does the construction of a map of Scotland on the land. The discussions have been taking place over a long period, with Scottish Government officials and Professor Russel Griggs dealing directly with all of the councils affected. That work will continue, now that the SMRT has been established. I make it clear that the new body will largely be a facilitating body and not a funding body; it is not designed to remove, elide or extinguish the companies’ obligations. Plainly, they have primary responsibilities to fulfil, which will remain the case—and rightly so, for obvious reasons. However, I am convinced that we need to work better and more closely together and not simply leave each instance to an individual local authority. There are matters involving the Scottish Environment Protection Agency, Scottish Natural Heritage, non-governmental organisations and, above all, communities that require an element of co-ordination and joint working, which I am satisfied will derive from the efforts of the SMRT going forward. I am therefore keen that the task force should have on it representatives from all the three main Opposition parties, as well as MSPs from the Government party, to assist in that work.

As I think Mr Fraser will know, the main problem affecting the coal industry has been the world price of coal, in particular the fall in coal prices over the past three years. That has been the result of a number of factors that, with respect, I think are outwith Mr Fraser’s and my control. That problem was the cause of Scottish Coal’s financial difficulties. We seek to provide every possible means of support for the sector. That is why we have been doing several things over the past 12 months, and two in particular. First, after representations from SRG directors, I was satisfied that the carbon reduction commitment was an unreasonable burden on the industry. After a long series of protracted negotiations with the Department of Energy and Climate Change, which were successful—I thank Greg Barker for his constructive input—we were able to extinguish that liability, which should never have arisen in the first place. Several million pounds were involved, so to that extent we were able to be of practical assistance through the pretty detailed and concerted joint working that has gone on over the past 12 months. However, another threat faces the sector at this time—and here, I would be grateful of Mr Fraser’s support and perhaps that of the United Kingdom Government. The Office of Rail Regulation has proposed that freight charges for the coal sector be increased in just a few years’ time to £4.04 per kgtm. If it is not possible or is extremely difficult to trade profitably at the moment, how on earth will the opencast sector be able to face that imposition of additional costs at the very time when it needs concerted support? Keith Brown met the ORR last week and we will continue to make strong representations to it to tackle that problem and be of every possible support to the opencast sector in Scotland.

I have always found input from trade union representatives to be invaluable on the task forces with which I have been involved; this will be no exception. I am meeting Graham Smith and, I hope, Nicky Wilson of the National Union of Mineworkers tomorrow. We will extend invitations for the Scottish Trades Union Congress to take up at least two places on the task force. We will, of course, discuss what the appropriate representation should be, and it will be for them to make the nominations. We will be happy to benefit from their input on the task force—that will be an invaluable part of our work, which I anticipate will take several months.

We want to do everything that we can to ensure that the industry enjoys as high a reputation as possible. In many parts of Scotland, the industry is an integral part of the rural community. For example, it provides 709 jobs in East Ayrshire, 312 in South Lanarkshire and 147 in Fife. In addition, it provides work for subcontractors in haulage and other support services. I have examples of restorations of previous opencast sites that have been carried out well in East Ayrshire, which include Garleffan and Hannahston, near Drongan. That has resulted from close working, which we envisage the SMRT and, in particular, Professor Russel Griggs, will take forward. I hope that that work will enhance the reputation of the sector.

We place great importance on the use of sustainable and renewable energy in Scotland, from manufacturing across a range of sectors and activities. The shift to renewable energy will also result in lower energy bills for the manufacturing sector than would come from continued reliance on fossil fuels. From 1 April, the new resource efficient Scotland programme will provide tailored support for manufacturing and other business sectors to maximise the benefits of resource efficiency.

Yes, I do, and yes, we have. Just yesterday, I presented certificates to about 40 businesses and public sector organisations that have massively cut their energy bills and reduced emissions. One of them—the Glenuig hotel—cut its energy bills by a massive 85 per cent. Renewable energy use can be of immense value not only in protecting the environment but in cutting business costs at a very difficult time.

We will continue to promote the pro-renewable energy policies that the Government supports—with faltering and wavering support from Jamie McGrigor’s party, the Conservative Party. I am delighted that Gaia-Wind, which is located in Glasgow, is a world award-winning manufacturer of small turbines. Other turbines are also manufactured in Scotland. With our unequivocal, clear and strong leadership—unmatched by the Conservative Party—we will continue to add to the 11,000 jobs in Scotland that are supported by renewables.

As members will be aware, I have had the opportunity to take part in possibly several hundred debates in the Parliament, but without being derogatory to any of the participants in those debates over the past 13 years, we cannot always say that they have been fun. However, I was bowled over by Christina McKelvie’s opening speech, which was not only an advertorial for the manifold attractions of this country of ours for tourists but was delivered in a way that I can describe only as a sort of tsunami of enthusiasm and passion for Scotland. Therefore, I warmly congratulate Christina McKelvie on bringing this important topic to the chamber. It is the first time, I think, that we have debated the topic in relation to tourism, so Christina McKelvie has done us a great favour. I welcome to the public gallery all those who have made #Scotlandhour such an extraordinary success. The immediacy and relevance of social media are becoming increasingly apparent to all of us, even those such as me who have not got the hang of social media or become regular participants in it. I hope that this will not be misquoted against me in future, but I really must do better. I ask Mr Johnstone not to use that comment out of context in relation to other topics. Social media are becoming more important and are part of everyday life now, particularly for those who are on the correct side of 30. The latest VisitScotland research showed that in 2012 no less than one in three visitors to Scotland shared their trip experiences online while they were still in Scotland—so one third of all the visitors to our country talked about Scotland online. That is entirely new. In the old days, we would send a postcard, but these days online communication by visitors goes to all their friends and family, then it can be passed on to a very wide audience all over the world. So, as a method of communicating positive messages, social media have truly infinite opportunities. As Malcolm Chisholm rightly said, we must take advantage of social media; and Alex Johnstone said correctly that governments are perhaps not best placed as institutions to be alive to and respond quickly enough to the opportunities that derive from the new technologies. After their trip, nearly half of all visitors to Scotland used an online platform to talk about the trip. We have seen some fine examples of truly innovative tweets in that regard. Not only can we send stunning pictures of Scotland, but recently the Canadian astronaut Commander Chris Hadfield tweeted some from the international space station. I suppose that we could say that that tweet was quite literally out of this world. Such endorsements are helpful in attracting visitors to Scotland. We want the Scottish Government to be open and alive to the opportunities that social media provide. VisitScotland is terrific at marketing and its efforts have been acknowledged worldwide. This year began with CNN, the international news outlet, listing Scotland as the country to go to: the top country, the best country, the leading country out of around 200 countries in the world. What a tremendous accolade! When I heard that on the early morning news, I thought that I must find out exactly what the rationale was; it was that VisitScotland’s marketing of the winning years and the focus years—the year of food and drink, the year of creative Scotland, the year of natural Scotland and the year of homecoming—creates a bold vision of Scotland and gives a positive message about and a positive portrayal of Scotland. It helps to create an image and perception throughout the world that Scotland is an interesting and serious—not frivolous—place that is worth visiting and which has a huge number and variety of attractions, as Christina McKelvie correctly signified. It occurs to me that it would be useful if those who are involved in #Scotlandhour could give us their suggestions of opportunities for other focused years. Of course, 2014 is the year of homecoming and, as I indicated earlier this week, we are thinking about opportunities for 2015, 2016, 2017 and 2018. Perhaps people could use #Scotlandhour to make suggestions for what we could do in those years. That way, we could hear from people across the country. Policies should not be set by me and a group of people in the public sector making decisions; they should be set as the result of the participation of everyone in Scotland. I am aware that the blogmanay hashtag reached more than 3.7 million users worldwide and produced more than 1,000 images of Edinburgh’s hogmanay and winter on social media channels. Increasingly, of course, all businesses that are involved in tourism are dependent on the internet for their bookings. These days, not to be online is not really to be in tourism. That raises the important question of how to ensure that internet access, at good speeds, is available throughout the country. That is another topic, but involves something to which we and other parties are committed. Visitor satisfaction surveys are important to us. Some 94 per cent of visitors are satisfied with their trip to Scotland, overall, and 98 per cent will probably or definitely recommend Scotland, based on their experiences. I imagine that many political parties would be quite pleased with a 98 per cent rating, although I suspect that that will not happen in this lifetime. Those figures are valuable, and the value of social media to further improve Scottish tourism and recruit people to come to Scotland cannot be overestimated. This is tourism week, and we have already seen a number of great developments. A new visitor centre has opened on Buchanan Street in Glasgow, in masses of time for the Commonwealth games and the Ryder cup, to which Christina McKelvie referred, and many in Scotland have taken the opportunity to promote tourism as a great career and to train young people in all aspects of tourism. The FutureChef competition, which was organised and run by Springboard, is in its 13th year. It teaches teenagers how to cook to a standard that would have been unimaginable for a teenager to attain three or four decades ago. The East Lothian Hospitality and Tourism Academy, which is a partnership between business, Queen Margaret University and the local council, gives 40 volunteer secondary 4 and 5 children the opportunity to participate in university-type lectures and industry-type training. I met four of those young people, all of whom said that their personal confidence increased massively as a result of their attendance. That is an invaluable investment and improvement whatever they do. One of them told me that she had not previously known that there was such a thing as events tourism and that she was going to pursue that as a career. Those types of thing are the future for tourism in Scotland. I hope that they can be pursued further through the collective wisdom of those who are involved in #Scotlandhour and who participate in the hourly Wednesday evening debates. I thank everyone who has participated in this debate, which has been a useful one. I want to see what more we can do in Government to work with the organisation that has brought so much credit to this country to develop and achieve even more for this great country of ours through the use of social media. 13:04 Meeting suspended. 14:30 On resuming—

Sustainable economic growth is the Scottish Government’s key objective and is delivered through a strategy of promoting and supporting growth companies in growth sectors and growth markets.

Yes, I would be happy to take up the member on his invitation and praise the company for its success thus far. In relation to Elmwood’s ambitions for exporting, we will ensure that it receives the excellent support of the enterprise network, which helps companies precisely in the way that Bob Doris has identified, for example by assisting trade missions. Thereanent, I am looking forward to leading a trade mission of 29 oil and gas companies to Brazil, which departs Scotland on Sunday.

Yes, I agree. I have seen at first hand the commitment and abilities of the staff of our enterprise network, who are working to make a terrific success of our aspirations for companies to grow. We have set an ambitious target of achieving a 50 per cent increase in exports by 2017. I hope that that will be achieved. If it is, it will be by sectors in oil and gas, renewables, chemical science, and food and drink. It seems that even in a recession—or perhaps because of it—the world cannot drink enough whisky.

With over one quarter of the European offshore wind resource, Scotland is ideally placed to make a significant contribution to the European Union target of generating 20 per cent of its energy from renewable sources by 2020.

As Lewis Macdonald will be aware, Scottish ministers must refrain from commenting on live applications: it would not be appropriate for me to make specific comment on any application that is before us. However, to answer the question in a general sense, it is absolutely correct that Aberdeen possesses expertise in oil and gas, some of which can be transferred to assist in developments in the offshore wind sector. That knowledge, together with knowledge from the fishing industry about how to operate in the cruel seas around Scotland’s waters, is an essential ingredient for the success of the offshore industry. Lewis Macdonald’s point is well made.

We are extremely concerned about what is, in effect, an investment hiatus, because there are simply no rules for the post-2017 future incentivisation of renewable energy, and of offshore wind in particular. We therefore urge the UK Government to end the uncertainty and to provide answers on EMR as quickly as possible, otherwise—the industry has warned—we risk leaking investment to Germany and France, and we risk jeopardising an industry that could contribute a great deal to Scotland and the rest of the UK. A report by Cambridge Econometrics says that the success of offshore wind by 2030 could add nearly 1 per cent to United Kingdom gross domestic product. That is what is at stake. Therefore, we are working with the UK Government to end the uncertainty as quickly as possible.

Oil and Gas UK estimates that up to 24,000 million barrels of oil equivalent have still to be recovered. Those reserves have a potential wholesale value of up to £1.5 trillion—£1.5 million million. That implies that, by value, more than half the reserves in the United Kingdom continental shelf have still to be extracted. Furthermore, the latest Oil and Gas UK activity survey reports record levels of North Sea investment. In 2012, investment was worth £11.4 billion, which was the highest level for 30 years. Total investment in companies’ plans is now estimated to be worth almost £100 billion—that is £100,000 million. Oil and gas will therefore remain an enormous economic resource for several decades to come.

I would not be overwhelmed with confidence in that respect. However, as energy minister, my part is to work productively to assist businesses and individuals in Scotland—especially in Aberdeen—to achieve enormous success. They are truly world leading and world beating in many areas, such as subsea work, reservoir management and project management. They are running projects throughout the world, thanks to their expertise. What we need is for the UK Government to address the very serious problems—for example, the ageing infrastructure—that could, according to the analysis that has been submitted to PILOT by Jonathan Roger of Centrica Energy, if they are not addressed cost £85,000 million of lost tax revenue. Those are the serious issues that we need to address and the Scottish Government is, for its part, determined to give those matters the consideration that they deserve.

I suppose that I should be complimented that I have been promoted to the post of cabinet secretary. However, that is a post that I do not hold, so I do not attend Cabinet meetings. Therefore, the question, albeit that it is somewhat contrived, is hypothetical. Be that as it may. Every minister in the Scottish Government recognises the terrific success of the oil and gas industry. That is the serious point that is before us. Moreover, we need to spell out the facts to the public—they do not want the political spin, if I may gently say that to Mr Macintosh.

The public want the facts, even if the Labour Party is not particularly interested in them—as we have seen to be the case on previous occasions. To conclude the point, the facts are that around one half of all the earnings that are made in the oil and gas sector in Scotland are made through exports. That is because we are not simply extracting oil from the waters off our own shores but are exporting our expertise throughout the world. Wherever oil is discovered, Scottish men and women will be found at the forefront of that industry. That fact must be better appreciated in Scotland in order to build up the confidence in our nation.

I am not sure how relevant that is to the primary question, but I am happy to answer. As I think Alex Johnstone is aware, we pursue an evidence-based approach in relation to unconventionals. Before we proceed, we want to see the evidence on potential environmental impacts and other matters, and we want to work with local authorities, the Scottish Environment Protection Agency and the United Kingdom Government. That is exactly what we are doing, and that is the right approach. I say with respect to Alex Johnstone that it might, because there is no unconventional gas mining in Scotland at present, be a little more productive to focus on the real live issues that face us now. For example, if over the lifetime of projects we extract 1 per cent more oil and gas from the fields off our shores, the gain to the taxpayer will be £22,000 million. The oil and gas industry is achieving great success and is maximising recovery, which is the centre of our oil and gas strategy. We are delighted that the UK Government is finally, after we produced our oil and gas strategy last May, getting round to producing its own strategy. What a shame that it is nearly four decades too late.

Yes, I do. Perhaps if the UK had pursued the approach that Norway has pursued, which was to set up an oil fund—I believe that Norway’s fund is of the order of £300 billion—the resource would not have been squandered in the ’80s, the ’90s and the noughties. If Tory and Labour Governments at Westminster had taken that sensible and prudent fiscal approach, perhaps things would be in a better state now. However, next year, we will have the opportunity, in the hands of our own nation, to determine to make the decisions for ourselves and to run our own affairs. We have the opportunity to determine whether our children and grandchildren receive the benefits of the enormous assets off the shores of this country and to make an investment for the future, rather than squander those assets, as has happened over the past four decades.

We expect and want a wide range of renewables technologies to be developed to help Scotland to meet its target. That range includes onshore and offshore wind turbines, in the right places, guided by a planning and consent process that we will ensure remains fit for purpose.

It was David Cameron who said: “We need more wind farms”. The Scottish Government is committed to a mix of sources of electricity. Of course, renewable energy supports 11,000 jobs in Scotland, and last year renewable energy contributed a greater proportion of Scotland’s electricity than ever before. There appears to be division among Tory MSPs on wind farms. Some are for them, some are against them and others already have one of their own. It used to be that the Tory party in Scotland was unequivocally in favour of more jobs and businesses, but it now looks as though that was just another one of its lines in the sand.

I apologise to Elaine Smith; I did not catch the very beginning of her question. She will appreciate that it would be utterly inappropriate for me to make any comment on a live application, but I can say, for her benefit and for the benefit of other members—I hope that this is relevant to her question, not all of which I caught, but I will reply to her in writing later—that, in the vast majority of cases, which is to say in two thirds of cases, Scottish ministers have upheld the decisions of local planning authorities. Those are the facts.

Yes, that output is more important than ever before, as has been illustrated by the bleak warnings, which the Office of the Gas and Electricity Markets issued last October and again this week, that the capacity margin for meeting the electricity needs of the United Kingdom is dwindling from 14 per cent over peak demand—when “Coronation Street” is on on a cold winter’s evening—to just 4 per cent. The neglect and negligence of UK energy policy has led to the pretty pass that it may not be possible to keep the lights on without massive importation of gas from places such as Russia. What a pretty pass we have reached. Therefore, Scottish renewable energy is now more important than ever for keeping the lights on, both north and south of the border.

I accept back-handed compliments even from the most unlikely of sources. It would be utterly wrong for me to interfere in the decisions of local authorities in the way that Neil Findlay’s question implies is necessary. It is the responsibility of each local authority, which is accountable to its electorate, to take decisions in its area. As I have already said, the Scottish Government—contrary to the misinformation that is being peddled by some people—has supported local authority decisions in two thirds of cases.

I thank the committee members and clerks for the report and the huge amount of work that went into producing it. The report is presented in a balanced fashion and makes a positive and constructive contribution to the debate about Scotland’s energy future. Its publication coincided with our update to the Scottish Government’s renewables route map. Both publications underline the welcome degree of broad consensus in the Parliament about the importance of renewable energy and energy policy as a whole. I warmly welcome the committee’s central finding that our target to produce the equivalent of 100 per cent of domestic electricity demand from renewables by 2020 can be achieved. Our renewable heat target is also of the utmost importance. Recent figures from the Energy Saving Trust show that renewable heat is on the increase throughout Scotland. However, monitoring progress is complex and we are working hard to improve in that area. Meeting our renewables targets will really help to reduce carbon emissions. Figures released this week show a 35 per cent drop in emissions from our fossil fuel power stations between 2006 and 2011. That has coincided with huge growth in our renewable energy output. The targets are also about jobs and investment. They are about making the cost of energy more affordable to consumers by reducing our reliance on fossil fuels. Renewables are also fundamentally a matter of energy security. This week, Alistair Buchanan—Ofgem’s chief executive—warned us that the United Kingdom’s electricity capacity margin could drop from 14 per cent today to less than 5 per cent by 2015-16. I think that I am right in saying that that repeated the warning that was given to the UK Government last October. It could hardly be more serious. The fact that we have, it is sad to say, reached the pass at which there will be a margin of only 4 or 5 per cent between generation capacity and peak demand can be seen only as a sad indictment of the neglect of energy policy for far too many decades. Secure supplies are of paramount importance. That is particularly true in the context of the developing UK Energy Bill and its incentives for new renewables and low-carbon thermal capacity. Put simply, Scotland’s renewables output, especially offshore wind, can play a vital role in helping to keep the lights on throughout the UK—something to which, I think, we all subscribe. Our renewable power will, therefore, play a vital role in the UK achieving its binding renewables targets as well as keeping the lights on. We also hear concerns about the timescales for building new gas capacity. Clear and fast signals are necessary if those investments are to be made and to become available when they are needed. The warnings by Keith Anderson of Scottish Power should be given considerable weight by the UK Government in that respect. That is important because the lower-carbon thermal generation will complement and help to balance Scotland’s renewable generation. Investment in that new low-carbon capacity creates major implications for the UK grid network. The Beauly to Denny project represents Scotland’s first major grid investment in 20 years and the first of the major reinforcements that will deliver a transmission network that is fit for an energy mix rich in renewables. Ofgem is fast tracking a £7 billion investment programme by Scottish grid companies to upgrade our network and deliver renewable electricity to the Great Britain market and, potentially, beyond. Crucially, it recognises that cost both to be competitive and to represent value for money for consumers. Those investments of billions of pounds have been driven strongly by increases in operational and planned onshore wind capacity. That underlines the point that, in the right places, onshore wind developments play, and will continue to play, a vital role in driving investment and creating a platform for the development of our offshore renewables potential. The recently formed intergovernmental group on island charging—which was formed at my behest and which, I am pleased to say, was agreed to by the UK Government, working in partnership on this matter—will play a crucial role in developing those resources, and I welcome the UK Government’s acknowledgement of the impact of a charging structure that acts as a significant brake on development. That is extremely important work, as members such as Liam McArthur are aware. I am determined to work with members of all parties to drive it forward so that a solution emerges from the intergovernmental group. It is crucial that that solution emerges sooner rather than later, otherwise key projects might be placed in jeopardy. Murdo Fraser quite rightly highlighted the area of planning, to which I now turn. I was encouraged by the report’s reaction to the ways in which the planning system can help us to achieve our renewables targets, although I recognise the improvements and actions that the committee suggested. The system is well set up to deliver large-scale onshore wind or to steer it away from sensitive locations. My working group on onshore renewables wants to achieve continuous improvements in that respect. On a smaller scale, there are some tensions in the system, which we have addressed. As Murdo Fraser said, the 20 per cent increase in planning fees that will come into effect from April is intended to help to improve planning performance. In addition, we have provided an extra £673,000 to help planning authorities to process wind turbine applications. We plan to monitor that closely and to share good practice. Planning policy must continue to support the development of a diverse range of renewable energy technologies and to guide development to appropriate locations. Our review of the national planning framework and Scottish planning policy will reinforce and clarify policy on the areas that we expect to be protected from significant development. Where the Scottish Government is the decision taker on electricity act consents or on planning appeals, we will approve only the right developments in the right places. Our decisions on such matters are available online and data capture—an issue that the committee highlighted—is improving all the time. Our published response to the report covered the issues that I have dealt with and the others that the committee highlighted. I am sure that many of them will be raised during the debate, and I look forward to responding towards the end of the debate.

I entirely agree with Liam McArthur’s analysis of the potentially damaging consequences of not finding a solution to transmission charging in the islands. I emphasised that very point to John Hayes when I met him last week in London. Does the member agree that it would be extremely helpful if Mr Hayes or Mr Davey could attend a meeting of the intergovernmental group as soon as the consultant’s report is concluded so that we can find, once and for all, a solution to the islands’ transmission charging problem?

Will Alex Johnstone give way?

The debate has been extremely useful and wide ranging. I will try to do it justice and to reply to some of the requests from individual members. Rhoda Grant asked what progress has been made on the intergovernmental island charging group. A consultant has been appointed, by agreement among Ed Davey, me and the other members of the group. Evidence-gathering sessions took place in the Western Isles on 13 February and are due to take place in Shetland on 27 and 28 February and in Orkney on 28 February and 1 March. Thereafter, my request to John Hayes, which was relayed at a meeting with him last week, was that, because of the huge importance of the issue, there should be ministerial attendance at the intergovernmental group. Liam McArthur suggested some possible solutions. There are of course several possible solutions. One is an island ROC, which could be X plus Y, where X is the evidence-based island ROC and Y is the cost of transmission. That would be a buffer and would ensure a return for investors. However, that would take us up only to 2017, so there would probably need to be a CFD solution as well. Thirdly, those solutions could be combined with others and with a section 185 order, which would put a cap on existing charges. It must be said that we are in this position because the UK regulator, Ofgem, did not provide a solution for the whole of the UK. Indeed, the islands have been separated from a solution that has been offered to the mainland. That is a serious state of affairs. There must be a solution, so I will continue to work positively and constructively with the UK Government and with colleagues in the Labour, Liberal Democrat, Conservative and Green parties in this Parliament. I will keep members informed about the progress of this important issue to the best of my ability. The matter will be raised at the convention of the Highlands and Islands, which I think is due to take place in Lerwick next month and which I will certainly attend. I will keep members fully advised about that. Alison Johnstone made an excellent speech covering many topics that others perhaps did not cover. In relation to district heating, we have had an expert commission and I have chaired some of its meetings because I am passionately committed to taking forward district heating. Alison Johnstone rightly praised the success of district heating in Aberdeen. There has been success in Shetland and Glasgow as well. What is at stake is the tackling of fuel poverty in an effective way. One lady tenant in a flat in Glasgow, who is in a tower block that has had the benefit of the district heating scheme, put it simply. She said, “This scheme has meant that I do not have to wear my duffle coat indoors any more.” That puts it as well as it can be put.

I was aware of that. I think that I have been invited to visit the scheme, which I hope to do. If I do, I will certainly combine it with a visit to the Pulteney distillery, whose best product is not steam. Many members have touched on community renewables. I am advised that, prior to the end of this financial year, we expect funding for six community projects to be approved, five of which came through the community and renewable energy scheme pre-planning pipeline. That will result in a spend of around £2 million in the community renewables sector. I was pleased that so many members—including Mary Scanlon, Alison Johnstone, Stuart McMillan and Rob Gibson—highlighted that issue. We want to do far more on community renewables but we recognise that the mechanics are extremely challenging and difficult. There is no doubt about that at all. Our job, through Community Energy Scotland, CARES and some excellent civil servants who are fully committed to making this successful, is to spread out the benefits to as many communities as possible. I am keen to work with members from all parties on community renewables. Margaret McDougall mentioned skills at some length—quite rightly so. Ken Macintosh mentioned skills as a particular challenge. I agree: the skills issue is a challenge. It is a challenge for the whole world. We are short of engineers; the whole world is short of engineers, as I know from when I visited Calgary and the First Minister visited Norway. It is a challenge that is faced by all nations, not simply with regard to renewable energy but with regard to oil and gas and across the spectrum. Part of the answer, of course, is for more emphasis on STEM topics. I am pleased to say that the Scottish Government has provided nearly £2 million in funding for this academic year to allow the funding council to support an additional 300 funded STEM university places, increasing the total number to 1,200. Out of the 25,000 modern apprenticeships, we have ring fenced 500 starts for energy during each year in this session, and engineering and energy-related modern apprenticeship starts show a 13 per cent increase over the past two years. That is welcome, but we need to do more: we recognise that. There is no point in backslapping and congratulating ourselves on what has been achieved—that is no use as a minister. Ministers always have to look to tomorrow and do better, and that is what we are determined to do. I am grateful that the skills issue has emerged clearly as a topic. I also recognise the work that SSE and Scottish Power have done in setting up and supporting apprenticeships and work in places such as Carnegie, Inverness, Ayr, and Dumfries. That work also means that throughout those parts of Scotland, where, understandably, there are many people who are antagonistic towards aspects of the renewable energy policy, people can at least see that somebody—a son of somebody they know—is getting an apprenticeship or a job in the area. That is immensely important. Nuclear energy has been touched on. I say with respect to Iain Gray that—as I think he knows—I have visited Torness and paid tribute to the professionalism of the work there. We are not opposed to continuing existing nuclear power stations in use, when that can safely happen. I recognise the professionalism of the operation in Torness and in Hunterston, whose life extension we supported. However, we do not believe that it would be sensible to build new nuclear power stations, when the costs of those that are being built in France and Finland have exceeded their estimates by two or three times and when the Public Accounts Committee at Westminster has estimated that the costs of decommissioning Sellafield alone amount to £67.5 billion. To be frank, that strikes me as game over for new nuclear power stations.

I am sorry—as always, I am happy to continue our discourse later.

The committee’s report is a solid piece of work. There are challenges and it will not be easy to achieve the targets but, in setting the targets, Scotland has created an interest and an investment. That will mean jobs and businesses in Scotland now and tomorrow, which will be good for all of us and good for a proper energy policy.

The Scottish Government recognises the valuable role that is played by credit unions in providing financial services and products, including affordable loans, to a wide range of customers. We will do all that we can to promote credit unions as an alternative to high-interest short-term lending, where that is appropriate.

I am happy to meet the member to discuss such matters. I am also delighted to note that today’s Daily Record, that campaigning newspaper for ordinary people in Scotland, has a 16-page pull-out containing very useful advice for those suffering the misery and despair of debt. If it is in order, Presiding Officer, I suggest that purchasing a copy of today’s Daily Record would be a very prudent investment.

I am aware of what the member has highlighted. The 110 credit unions that operate in Scotland have 250,000 members and truly provide a marvellous service. We in this chamber want to promote their excellent work and I am happy not only to endorse the work that is being carried out in Linda Fabiani’s East Kilbride constituency but to pay tribute to the work of credit unions elsewhere such as 1st Alliance (Ayrshire) Credit Union, which is working in partnership with local registered social landlords to deal with the problems that are going to arise when the United Kingdom welfare reforms hit home and ensure that those who will be hit hard by those reforms can get access to their services. Such work is truly excellent and I commend that example to other credit unions across the country.

Although Margo MacDonald did not ask me a question, I am happy to agree with her comments. One might also reflect on the fact that credit unions manage their financial affairs a lot more effectively than many banks we might want to think about.

A formal request for devolution of consumer powers was submitted in June last year with the support of, among others, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and Consumer Focus Scotland. In December, the UK Government confirmed that those powers, which are already devolved to Northern Ireland, would not be devolved to Scotland.

Yes. We must ask ourselves whether it is fair to pass the powers to Northern Ireland but not to Scotland. What is the rationale for that? Just yesterday, an example of the importance of the powers was manifest when Richard Lochhead, I and consumer bodies discussed the higher charges for parcel deliveries to places in rural and island Scotland compared with those to urban conurbations. Those higher charges penalise consumers and small businesses, who rely on reasonable costs and fair parcel deliveries. Westminster has not dealt with that. Maybe we would do a better job.

The year of natural Scotland got off to a great start with the great Edinburgh international cross-country and winter run on 5 January 2013. The programme for the year includes more than 40 flagship events and more than 500 partner events, which are happening the length and breadth of the country.

Surprisingly enough, I agree with the member. The point that he raises is the reason why CNN voted Scotland the top country in the world to visit. Scotland—number 1.

I am delighted to have secured this debate on debt, which is a subject that touches many people across Scotland. The number of members here highlights the importance of the debate and the shared concern across all parties. I am sure that all members will join me in welcoming the publication in today’s Daily Record—a copy of which I happen to have with me—of a 16-page practical supplement to help families to take control of their debts. I have read the supplement, which sets out excellent advice, and I commend it to all members and everyone who has an interest in the topic. I congratulate the Daily Record on the supplement’s publication; it will be of great help. A helpline has been set up to offer people a free financial health check from an independent approved money adviser. That step will help people to take responsibility for their finances and will encourage good money management. I say, “Well done” to the Daily Record. The Daily Record’s supplement is helpful in highlighting to the people of Scotland that turning to high-interest payday lenders is seldom the answer. The number of people who take out payday loans is increasing, sadly, all the time. A report that Consumer Focus commissioned indicates that no less than 1.2 million adults in the United Kingdom took out an estimated 4.1 million payday loans in 2009, to the value of £1.2 billion. The report goes on to suggest that those figures could continue to rise steeply, potentially by 40 to 45 per cent, or up to half a million additional UK payday borrowers. Members across the chamber will have heard many of the sad tales that borrowers have to tell about how they have found themselves trapped in a cycle of debt that they are unable to pay back. When their payday loan is rolled over—or “flipped”—that means, in effect, that a new loan is taken out and that even more interest is charged. In one example I heard, a loan of £400 cost £800 to repay after six months. That is not unrepresentative. Interest rates and control over payday lending rest, of course, with the UK Government. As a Parliament, we lack the power that we would like to possess to curb high interest rates; we do not have the power to do what the Labour amendment exhorts us to do, although we would like to have it. However, lack of power over those things will not stop this Government taking action where we do have powers. We will ensure that in relation to enforcement of debt, which is a devolved matter, individuals are not placed in an adverse position in our statutory debt management scheme, which is the debt arrangement scheme, or DAS. I will say more shortly about our plans for changes to DAS, which we hope to introduce before the summer recess and which will be aimed at supporting people who are affected by continued interest charges, including high-interest lending. The changes that we will make will help to alleviate the burden on individuals in Scotland, but that is only part of the answer. The full solution can be found only if the UK Government is willing to take action to address the extortionate interest rates that are applied by payday lenders. Although I welcome the modest steps that have been taken at UK level—principally, the introduction of codes of practice—they simply do not go far enough.

I will revert to the point in my closing speech, because I am interested in hearing what Labour has to say and I want a consensual debate, as I think this will be. However, let us be in no doubt: we want the powers in this Parliament, but we do not have them at the moment. That is a fact. If we did have them, we would do far more than we are currently doing and would go further than the action that I will announce today. Let us consider what other countries are doing. In Finland, the Government has introduced a bill to cap charges and costs resulting from payday loans at 50 percentage points above the European Central Bank reference rate. The approach ensures a cap of 51 per cent for 2013. In France, there is a tightly specified ceiling on interest rates, which I am advised is set at 33 per cent above the average Banque de France quarterly rate. Such changes have been made in order to improve the ability of consumers in those countries to assess the total cost of their loans and to prevent predatory lending to households that are in financial difficulty. Those are laudable aims that the Scottish Government supports. The UK Government, however, has declined to take similar steps, which leaves us again with the sense that the UK is not acting in the best interests of the people of Scotland. If the approach is good enough for France and Finland, why is it not good enough for Scotland or, indeed, for the whole UK? The Scottish Government does not want people who are in debt to be unable to access fair remedies, whichever side of the border they are on. In an independent Scotland, we would have an opportunity to learn lessons from other countries and to choose our own solutions. In 2014, the UK Government will transfer regulation of consumer credit from the Office of Fair Trading to the new financial conduct authority. I hope that the FCA will understand, as the Scottish Government understands, that some payday lenders are extending credit to borrowers who have no means of paying back what they owe, and that it will therefore take firm action to regulate the sector. I want to work with the UK Government on such matters, which is why we will support the Conservative amendment, which perfectly reasonably calls on us to do so. The Scottish Government will not wait to do what we can do with the powers that we have. Later this year we will introduce our bankruptcy reform bill, which will deliver on our proposals for a financial national health service and ensure that Scotland leads the way in the development of modern insolvency practice that responds effectively to the rights and needs of debtors and creditors. The hardships that relate to payday loans require us to act faster. People who might be legitimately seeking to improve their financial wellbeing by taking out payday loans sometimes find that instead of curing the problem they have made it much worse. Individuals whose payday loans have been flipped and rolled over can be charged interest that accrues at punitive annual percentage rates of up to 4,000 per cent. In a proposed change that is not directed only at payday loans, the Scottish Government will, in the spring, make changes to DAS in order to freeze interest and charges earlier in the process; they will be frozen from the date when a debtor’s application is submitted to creditors. In practice, that could protect the debtor from as much as two or three months of additional interest charges. That might not sound like much, but we are talking about two or three months during which the debtor would be worried sick about the mounting interest charges; I remind members of the £400 debt that rose to £800 over six months. I hope that all parties will support the measure, which will have to go through the parliamentary process. We expect that if it receives support from other parties, and subject to the scrutiny of Parliament, the measure could come into force before the summer recess.

Kezia Dugdale has made a very important point. The issue is constantly under review because we need to ensure that there is access to appropriate advice throughout Scotland. I will come back to the member, after the debate, on that. We acknowledge its seriousness. Although we have improved access, there is always more that we need to do. Other changes to the scheme include a review process for decisions by the DAS administrator and the introduction of composition where the debt payment programme has been paid over 12 years or more and 70 per cent of the debts have been paid. We will also make changes to the rules on payment holidays to make them more flexible. If a person loses their job and cannot pay what they have agreed to repay, there needs to be flexibility. That is the principle. DAS is a uniquely Scottish product. Its use has risen from 128 DAS cases in 2005-06 to 3,319 in 2011-12. This year—2012-13—there have been 3,900 cases, and there are still two months to go. The DAS is popular, its use is rising and it is useful. I hope that the changes that I have set out today will secure cross-party support and, more important, will provide further help for the people in our country who most need it and who are suffering from the misery—and sometimes despair—of being in serious debt. I move, That the Parliament notes the benefits of the Debt Arrangement Scheme in taking control of debts that are becoming unmanageable; recognises the despair and misery that financial difficulties bring to many people in Scotland; shares concerns expressed by Citizens Advice Scotland and others that individuals are becoming trapped in a cycle of debt as a result of high-interest lending, and supports the Scottish Government’s planned reforms to the Debt Arrangement Scheme to freeze interest and charges from an earlier date, fixing the amount of debt owed to creditors thereby preventing the continued imposition of punitive interest charges.

I think that we broadly want to pursue the same objective, so the member’s approach is positive. I am delighted that the taxpayer paid zero for the excellent work today of the Daily Record, because we are working in partnership with it. That is a good form of advertising from the Scottish taxpayer’s point of view. However, I ask Mr Macintosh to clarify just one thing. My information is that the proposal that he has set out of a guarantee loan fund was not made at any point during the budget process. Can he say what his proposal is, how much money he argues the Scottish Government should set aside for it and from which budget it would come, since as far as I am aware we did not hear about the proposal during any part of the budget process that was completed yesterday?

I have thoroughly enjoyed this debate, from which I think a consensus is struggling to emerge. I undertake to all members who have contributed to this debate that the Accountant in Bankruptcy and I will study carefully what has been said, because a wide range of points have been made. I am determined to ensure that we listen to Parliament and consider any specific, constructive proposals that emerge in these debates so that they have a purpose. A number of specific proposals have emerged during the debate. There is a great consensus that payday loans represent a contemporary, growing and widespread problem that has very serious consequences. The numbers—4 million payday loans in 2009 and rising—illustrate that the problem is serious. Irrespective of differences of opinion about the constitutional future of our country, it is accepted that the powers to address these matters rest largely with Westminster. It is a sadness to me that the powers have not been used by the current and previous Governments. That is deeply unfortunate, and I would prefer that the powers rest here. I have made those points clearly, but I will not dwell on them because I think that people who are following the debate—particularly in the light of the Daily Record’s marvellous contribution, which all parties have praised—are interested in what we can do now to help. A number of suggestions have been made, and I will look at all of them. I will respond to the amendments. The Conservative amendment asks us “to work with the UK Government to increase awareness of the Scottish Debt Arrangement Scheme with creditors based in the rest of the UK.” We are doing that and we will continue to do that. Shortly before Christmas, I met a number of banks, most of whose operations are south of the border, to engage with them on the extent to which they can at least inform their customers who are in difficulty that the debt arrangement scheme exists. The problem is difficult, because banks’ legal duties constrain them in pointing customers in a particular direction. However, Alex Johnstone would expect me to have such engagement, and it is right that I have it. We are working closely with the major creditors that appear time and again in the bankruptcy claims list or the protected trust deeds list and which are the major creditors in most consumers’ affairs. We will support the Conservative amendment. I started with the mindset of wanting to support Labour’s amendment. Of course, we support and are doing all the things that the amendment urges us to do and which we can do. We work closely with local authorities and we warn of the consequences that payday loans can have for some people. I have always done that. I think that one of the first members’ business debates of the parliamentary session was initiated by Margaret Burgess—now a minister—when she spoke with passion about her deep knowledge of the area, and I was the minister who responded. I say with all respect to Kezia Dugdale’s comments that I made my position on payday loans very clear then. My position has not changed and has remained ever since exactly as it was. I think that the vast majority of members share that position. Labour’s amendment has two difficulties. First, it invites us “to curb high interest short-term lending” but, sadly, we do not have the powers to do that. We cannot adopt a proposition that we know that we cannot implement. Secondly, rather than ask us to consider a guarantee loan fund, the amendment says that there should be such a fund. As a minister, I cannot accept an uncosted and open-ended commitment in an amendment. That is the precise legal position—if I accepted the proposal, I would be bound to implement it, and I have no doubt that Labour members would quickly urge me to do so. That is how Oppositions are, and I was no different. However, if Labour Party spokespeople wish to discuss the proposal with me at the meeting that I have agreed to have with Kezia Dugdale or in any other way, I will be happy to meet them, because we all want to achieve the same things. I hope that I have given an explanation. It does not really matter that we will not support the Labour amendment, because we will look closely at the idea. I have to say that, in Mr Macintosh’s response to my intervention, the idea transmogrified from a guarantee loan fund to the possibility of underwriting loans, which is somewhat different. Nonetheless, I am happy to look at any options that emerge from the process.

The power to control interest rates is reserved. We do not have the power to cap payday loans. In my opening speech, I alluded to the fact that France, Finland, many states of the United States of America, Canada and many other states and countries have applied thresholds. We do not have the power to do that in this country. I think that both Mr Malik’s party and mine would like to have those powers, but I have already covered that matter.

With respect, I want to respond to some of the points that have been made in the debate. Concern has been expressed about the availability of money advice throughout the country. That is an important matter. Before 2011, there were 135 approved advisers throughout the country. In 2011, we changed the law so that individual advisers were no longer approved but organisations that offer money advice and are suitably qualified to ensure that the people who work for them can provide accredited and professional money advice were approved. There are now 105 approved money adviser organisations, which include, for example, Citizens Advice, Money Advice Scotland, local authorities and many private sector bodies. We are therefore better served in respect of the availability of money advice, although there is more work to be done.

There are a number of very good—indeed, excellent—money advisers in the public sector, but we must recognise that the private sector plays an important role. The top 10 DAS-approved adviser organisations include several private sector ones. We want a partnership between the public sector and the private sector in order to ensure that the appropriate advice is available. That, of course, goes beyond the debt arrangement scheme. The other options that may be appropriate for individuals as a last resort include bankruptcy or a protected trust deed. In some cases, especially complex ones, some of the work that is required to be undertaken to administer a protected trust deed or bankruptcy involves a qualified insolvency practitioner, so there is a role for the private sector. I think that Mike MacKenzie referred to the fact that the numbers of sequestrations in Scotland have reduced, and he made the link between that modest but welcome reduction in the number of personal sequestrations and the growth in the number of people who have entered debt arrangement schemes, particularly over the past couple of years. That is a very important point. In 2005-06 only 128 people entered into debt arrangement schemes; last year 3,319 did so; and so far this year—we still have February and March to go, of course, so a sixth of the year is yet to elapse—3,900 people have entered a debt arrangement scheme. The significance of that is that around 4,000 people in Scotland as opposed to just over 100 have adopted the Scottish Government’s scheme, which was designed to help people to pay off their debts in full over time, not to help them to get off or free from their debts under bankruptcy or a protected trust deed. That is a major change in our society, which is to be welcomed, as we all believe that those who can pay their debts should do so. Perhaps it indicates that some individuals previously entered into debt relief options instead of debt management options—in other words, they did not pay their debts to creditors when, in fact, they could have done. That is proof positive that the debt arrangement scheme that we have debated has been a success, and I very much welcome the cross-party support for it. All the parties that are represented in the chamber have welcomed the announcement that we have made today that we will extend and improve further the debt arrangement scheme, and I am very appreciative of the support that we have received from those parties. We will bring forward the statutory instrument for consideration by the relevant committee so that it can be made law by the summer. I conclude by once again paying tribute to the Daily Record for its excellent journal, and I pay tribute to Fergus Muirhead, Christine Sinclair and Kelly Gallagher, who provided the advice in it. I am quite sure that no one would accuse me of shamelessness at any time.

We have all united in supporting the Daily Record, and I am very pleased that I have taken part as the responsible minister.

The Scottish Government is in touch with HM Revenue and Customs about a range of issues. However, questions about tax paid by individual companies that are in receipt of Scottish Government grants are covered by taxpayer confidentiality and so are not discussed. The amount of tax paid by companies in the United Kingdom is a matter for HM Revenue and Customs and the UK Government.

HMRC operates within a legal framework that regards taxpayer information as confidential. There are good reasons for not disturbing that framework. However, information about tax paid by a company should be available from its published reports and accounts. Recent experience shows that such information is available and can be used to support public debate about the taxes that corporations pay.

From April 2015, revenue Scotland will be responsible for collecting two devolved taxes in Scotland: land and buildings transaction tax, which will replace stamp duty land tax; and landfill tax. Through revenue Scotland, we will serve the needs of the people of Scotland at a lower cost than the UK set-up does. We will therefore deliver a better system that is more in line with Scotland’s needs. We are satisfied with the work that has been done to that end thus far.

The Scottish Government is aware of the on-going House of Commons Scottish Affairs Committee inquiry into blacklisting in employment, which was established to determine the scale of the problem and what is being done to eradicate it. We are following the progress of the inquiry and await its findings with interest. Following the Information Commissioner’s Office investigation into the practices of the Consulting Association, the United Kingdom Government introduced the Employment Relations Act 1999 (Blacklists) Regulations 2010, which prohibit blacklisting. The regulations provide rights if blacklisting results in refusal of employment, detriment, dismissal or redundancy.

Yes, I think that, broadly speaking, we share concerns about any proven use of blacklisting. We would all deprecate such a practice. We will take the member’s remarks under advisement and look carefully at the specific request that he has made. However, it is fair to say that we can proceed only on the basis of evidence and not on the basis of allegations. I hope that all members agree that it is in that way that we must consider these matters.

I am aware of the answer that the Deputy First Minister provided to Mr Findlay on 22 January. A comprehensive reply has already been provided to him. I repeat that we share the general concern about blacklisting and we will follow the progress of the existing inquiry at the House of Commons closely. However, I remind members that this is a Parliament and not a court. It is not appropriate, in my view, to bandy around allegations without evidence. In that light, we must proceed with great caution in this matter, and that is the approach that we will take.

The fund, which is delivered by the Scottish Investment Bank on behalf of the Scottish Government, will provide bespoke investment deals in the form of loans, loan guarantees and equity finance alongside co-investment partners to accelerate renewable energy deployment.

Yes—and much of our work is devoted to precisely those objectives. Indeed, I was delighted to attend the all-energy conference in Aberdeen yesterday where a memorandum of understanding between Highlands and Islands Enterprise and four Highland ports—Kishorn, Ardersier, Cromarty and Nigg—was entered into. That is a move in the right direction to achieve precisely the objectives that Mr Gibson has described and to see more Scottish jobs and businesses created and more existing business benefit from renewable energy developments in Scotland.

It is clear that there is a huge amount of interest in the motion, which is emphasised by the fact that the debate is well attended. The Scottish Government absolutely accepts that January can be the most difficult month financially for a great many people. We understand that people may find it tempting to seek extra cash from payday lenders to deal with unexpected bills or simply make ends meet, but we strongly urge anyone who seeks a payday loan to consider other options before obtaining that type of credit. I have been saddened to hear of many instances in which, rather than helping, such loans have led to individuals becoming entrapped in a cycle of debt when they are unable to pay back the loan. The loan is then rolled over to create a new loan on which further interest is charged, and the situation can spiral out of control. That is a truly contemporary development that causes grave concern across all parties, especially because, as Kezia Dugdale said, relatively young people are borrowing amounts for periods as short as 30 minutes, perhaps to spend in the bookies after a first bet has failed. The situation is very serious and is of concern to us all. On the Parliament’s powers, I hope that a broad, cross-party approach can be taken. Payday lenders are part of the consumer credit sector and the law in that area is reserved to Westminster. The businesses operate under rules that are set out by the Financial Standards Authority and are regulated by the Office of Fair Trading. We believe that the rules must change, and we are not alone in that belief. Many countries in Europe and many states in the USA have introduced legislation to protect consumers from severe financial difficulty. There is a lot to learn from what has been done in other countries and in the USA. I hope that there is a willingness to learn and that those lessons can be learned. However, we, too, have acted. I have written to the UK minister responsible for consumer credit. I have the letters here, but protocol means that I will not read from them. I have asked the UK minister to regulate payday loans and have urged the UK Government to consider a cap on interest rates for high-interest and payday lending. I have not done that lightly or without a great deal of thought as to the consequences, because I am aware of the recent history on the issue at the House of Commons. I have taken some time to read the various deliberations of the House of Commons and the OFT. The OFT and the former Labour Government concluded that a cap was not appropriate. We need to look carefully again at a cap and I urge the UK Government to do that.

I was responding to Kezia Dugdale’s first point, which I did fairly and without resorting to scoring political, partisan points. I am coming on to the other point, although my time is running out. I have had a number of meetings with all stakeholders to drive forward the use of the powers that we have. I recently convened a round-table meeting with representatives from money advice, credit unions and the payday loan industry to discuss payday loans and their impact on people in Scotland. I have written to all payday lenders who operate in Scotland to encourage them to comply with the good practice customer charter, and I will continue to monitor firms’ behaviour. I am told that four trade associations represent 90 per cent of the companies that are operating. That is all well and good, but what about the 10 per cent? What do they do? By definition, those companies might not be so willing to operate by the code. On welfare reform, it is plain to see that the changes and cuts that the UK Government is introducing can have only a detrimental effect on people and services in Scotland. We are committed to doing all that we can do to lessen the impact of the reforms. Between 2008 and 2010 the Scottish Government invested £12 million in the third sector enterprise fund, and 30 credit unions benefited from that. We have used some of our advertising budget to promote practical solutions for people who are in serious debt. Kezia Dugdale asked about that, so I will respond to her. Last year, we had a successful advertising campaign to promote the use of the debt arrangement scheme—DAS—which allows debtors to pay off their debts, thereby relieving them of the huge and crippling anxiety that debt brings to many households throughout the land.

I am just about to finish, but I will give way as I close—I think that I have 40 seconds left.

Yes, Presiding Officer. I apologise. We recognise that being in debt is often an horrific experience. It leads to the breakdown of families. It causes parents—very often, mothers—unending worry and stress about how to bring up their families. It is the most serious of issues. We have acted, using the powers that we have, to change debt law and to work with credit unions, working with the grain to do the best that we can do. We will do more, as we will announce next week in the debate on the DAS. I very much hope that this debate focuses on the positive, the practical and the constructive, so that we in Scotland can unite and do our best for those who are suffering from the scourge of debt. I move amendment S4M-05504.2, to insert at end: “and notes that the Scottish Government has called on the UK Government to consider introducing greater regulation of payday loan companies, including a cap on the total cost of credit, and has contacted all payday lenders operating in Scotland to encourage them to comply with the industry’s Good Practice Customer Charter.”

I wish to return to the matter at hand, which is debt. The debate has been welcome, and I thank Kezia Dugdale and the Labour Party for bringing it to the chamber. We will support the motion tonight and hope that Labour will support our amendment. People expect us to work together; the last thing that people want to see in this Parliament, on this topic, is cheap political point scoring and a wide ranging tour de table about the perceived ills of various economic policies and the faults of various parties. What purpose would that serve? I bring to the debate fairly long experience as a solicitor who worked in debt, before I was elected. That job was one of the most humbling and moving experiences of my life, because the people who came to me for help brought with them the most horrendous difficulties and problems. As I have said in the chamber before, it was often the female in the household who would face reality first and would come to me, usually accompanied by children. The overwhelming sense of worry on the mother’s part was not for herself but for her children—she wanted only to keep a roof over their heads. Such are the issues that we are talking about. We are particularly concerned about the people who face extreme problems. John Mason was quite correct to talk about the old prevailing ethos that I think we would all recognise and which is summed up in the phrase “Neither a borrower nor a lender be.” Previously, it was believed that taking on debt was something that should not be done lightly. Perhaps that ethos, which meant that people could not get a mortgage without saving for a long time, was not so bad. If it had prevailed in the 1990s and the noughties, would we be in the recession that we are in now? Credit unions manage their finances according to that ethos; they do not borrow irresponsibly and have behaved more sensibly and prudently than many fancy banking organisations throughout the world. My solicitor experience brought home to me the predicament that people face. Of course, all MSPs will have had the experience of speaking to people in their constituency surgeries who face real pressure—bank foreclosure, the threat of losing their house, their children finding that they have no home and their home life being disrupted. That is the cause of huge pressure. Of course, every human story is different. There is no point in generalising, because every life and every experience is different. However, we all have a duty to respond as we can. That is why I have sought to give a lead by giving a clear warning that payday loans offer a particular danger to people who take them up. If they are rolled over—if they are not repaid in the month in which they are taken out—they rapidly become unmanageable. We all agree about that. I support, and the Government has supported, the second point that Kezia Dugdale made: namely, that we should use some taxpayers’ money to advertise positive debt solutions, as we did with the debt arrangement scheme last year.

I say gently to Kezia Dugdale that it is wrong to characterise matters in that way. Next week, we will announce serious measures on which we have worked for some time. Not only will they show that we have taken a lead, but they will introduce a remedy that will be helpful to many of the people who face precisely the problem that she mentioned. It has been in planning for a long time. Next week, at the appropriate time, we will announce details of the measures that we propose to introduce. We recognise that there is a role for the Government to play in using taxpayers’ money, which we have been entrusted to spend prudently, on advice and information about the risks of taking on dangerous debts and the positive solutions that are available. We have done that appropriately and will continue to consider appropriate measures. The third measure that Kezia Dugdale described was credit unions. We all support credit unions, and Anne McTaggart made a helpful speech about the work that she has done in that area. Other members in the debate mentioned the hugely important role that those organisations play. Credit unions’ problem is that they are not as accessible as the payday loan shops. Many of them operate successfully, but they have a far lower public profile. It would be inappropriate for me to mention them, but we all know the ones that do extremely well, are visible and help a great many people.

We will certainly continue to promote, and advise people to consult, local credit unions. We will also contribute to public information, press publicity and campaigning. I hope that we will all do that jointly. The debate has been useful, by and large; there has been a measure of agreement. I hope that Parliament will unite—or substantially unite—this evening on the way ahead. I wish that we had the power in this Parliament to tackle the whole problem. If we had that power, there would be a consensus to use it, after careful thought, to regulate payday loans in a way that they are not regulated at present. I believe that strongly and profoundly, and I urge Parliament to adopt that view when we come to the vote this evening.

I am happy to clarify that the SNP wishes those powers to be transferred to this Parliament. I will just make a plea to Ken Macintosh. Would he be willing to work with us in order to secure—now or within a short time—the transfer of powers to implement the measures that he himself said a moment ago he wishes to support and to see implemented, in order to solve the problem and to regulate payday loans in the way that he has just described?

A range of partners are working together on a programme to mark the 700th anniversary of the battle of Bannockburn. The battle of Bannockburn re-enactment weekend over 28 to 30 June will be a centrepiece of the homecoming Scotland 2014 celebrations and a highlight of the Stirling 2014 programme. It will include the largest battle re-enactment ever hosted at the memorial battlefield, a tented clan village, weaponry and falconry displays and a clan parade.

Stewart Maxwell is entirely correct. For many of us, especially on these benches, Robert the Bruce is a national hero. I hope that that applies to members on all the benches in this Parliament. Although Robert the Bruce won Scotland’s independence before the invention of political parties, I suspect that he was politically ecumenical, because he simply believed in his country of Scotland. We are keen to do everything that we can to commemorate Robert the Bruce and his achievements for Scotland. I am keen to work with the member and all members of all parties to secure that objective.

I had the pleasure of meeting a number—I do not know what the collective noun is—of clan chiefs at Castle Leod just before the turn of the year. I look forward to further engagement with several more of them in early course. We work closely with the clan chiefs. We recognise that, generally speaking, clan gatherings take place on a quinquennial basis and that they have a great deal to offer Scotland. We should not be unduly pessimistic about the success of the events next year. I am heartened by the lesson of homecoming 2009. The number of visitors who came to Scotland as a result of that initiative, and the revenue from that initiative, vastly exceeded our targets. In that sense, it was a great success.

The oil and gas sector is one of Scotland’s great success stories. In addition to supporting almost 200,000 jobs across Scotland, the industry generated more than £10 billion tax revenue last year. Up to 24 billion barrels of oil and gas remain in the North Sea, with a potential wholesale value of £1.5 trillion. It is therefore clear that the industry will remain a key part of the Scottish economy for decades to come.

The renewables sector is extremely important to the Scottish economy. It supports around 11,000 jobs in this country. Over the past year, it has received £1 billion of investment. Projected investment in our renewables sector over the coming years is in the order of £9 billion. Those are gigantic numbers.

Those numbers reflect the fact that the industry will be extremely important to the Scottish economy for many years to come.

The Scottish Government recognises the vital role that new businesses play in contributing to sustainable economic growth and is committed to maintaining a supportive environment to encourage new start-ups and help them grow. Key measures include support from the business gateway, which last year helped more than 11,000 businesses start up; the small business bonus scheme, which benefits more than 89,000 business properties; and steps to reduce unnecessary burdens on small businesses and to make it easier for them to access public sector contracts.

I think that Mr Fergusson and I agree that these are tough economic times, but I know of a number of great successes in Dumfries and Galloway. Indeed, I have had the pleasure of visiting that part of the world in the south of Scotland on many occasions and have seen considerable success in businesses. I also know that more than 4,000 businesses in Dumfries and Galloway are benefiting from the small business bonus scheme, which can result in savings of up to £4,500 per property and which benefits the smallest business in the land. As in the Highland area, small businesses are far more important to Dumfries and Galloway than they are to many city economies. Lots of good things are happening, but if the member has any particular suggestions or measures that he believes we should introduce I am more than happy to meet and discuss them with him. That said, I am comforted by the fact that VAT registrations, for example, increased by 19.5 per cent in Scotland between 2002 and 2011, a higher percentage than in the United Kingdom as a whole. If the member so wishes, I am as always happy to meet him and discuss how we can work constructively across the parties to tackle these important issues together.

I am very grateful to Rhoda Grant for allowing the Parliament to debate these issues. It has been a good and useful debate in which many interesting speeches have been made. There has been a great deal of consensus. From my gleaning of what the members who have spoken in the debate have said, they all recognise that biomass has a role to play. Determining what that role is is a matter of weighing up carefully a number of considerations. As members know, the Scottish Government has taken a careful and distinct position on biomass over the years. There is no question but that energy from biomass can make a major contribution to our renewables targets. Biomass already contributes more than 90 per cent of the renewable heat that is generated in Scotland. I think that Rhoda Grant alluded to some local examples in the Highlands and Islands, and I remember that, during my brief and unsuccessful attempt to learn Gaelic at a week-long pre-beginners course at Sabhal Mòr Ostaig, the building was certainly not cold. To be serious, there have been a number of successful schemes all over Scotland, and as Stewart Stevenson said, local schemes are absolutely appropriate. To use the woody material—the waste material—locally for local purposes means that it is not travelling far. It is perhaps not really usable for any other purpose and might otherwise end up either lying on the forest floor or going to landfill unnecessarily, using up fuel, creating emissions and so on. We all agree—in so far as I can ascertain from the members who have covered the topic in the debate—that biomass certainly has a positive role to play. Indeed, we want to promote and encourage its use, and to encourage community renewables to use biomass. I have visited communities as different as Comrie and Lossiemouth, where I have played a part in launching or opening biomass facilities, which are popular locally. Biomass has a number of attributes, such as the ability to control output, which separate it from other renewables technologies and make it strategically valuable. However, there are other differences that have prompted us to revisit the role that biomass should play and the support that we should make available for it. Many members have referred to those differences, including the finite nature of the resource, its importance to other existing sectors and jobs, and the need to ensure that all the biomass that we use is appropriately sourced. All those issues have been raised in the debate. I am well aware of the active representations made by bodies such as the Scottish Timber Trade Association and Confor, the UK forest products association. Charles Hendry, the former and much-missed energy minister—obviously, we work well with his successor too—attended two meetings that we arranged in Scotland with representatives from the timber sector. They put forward arguments that Jamie McGrigor rehearsed today alongside other members: demand is rising and the sector does not want to see the price that they pay for their material rise. Equally, the panel products industry is an important user of timber and an important customer for timber growers throughout Scotland. We have to weigh up those interests carefully. The price of saw logs, of course, is much higher than the price of wood fuel, ensuring that saw logs do not enter the wood fuel stream—indeed they should not—as Alison Johnstone and Stewart Stevenson pointed out. I do not think that members mentioned, unless I missed it, the possible capacity of timber growers to bring additional wood on to the market. There are some practical reasons why some timber cannot be brought on to the market, such the lack of access to more remote forestry, the lack of forest roads or just the economics. Trees that fall in the forest could be used as wood fuel. We want timber growers to maximise their potential, because in turn that enables them to replant. Therefore, the more successful timber growers are, the more we will see replanting. Those are all forestry matters of which Mr Stevenson in particular will have a deep understanding. As members have said, we have consulted on those issues at great length, and we recently proposed that there should be some form of capacity ceiling, above which support will not be available under the renewables obligation, except for those stations that capture and supply heat. The responses that we have had to our consultations on those proposals and on the sustainability criteria highlight the complex and sensitive nature of the issues and of the options that are available to us. We have to strike a careful balance. Our approach must be designed to ensure that the fuel that is used in the biomass stations that are built meets requisite and meaningful sustainability standards. At the same time, we need to ensure that those requirements do not create a disproportionate burden for those who operate the stations in question or those who are charged with monitoring them. The system that we put in place must also ensure that we can continue to make progress towards our targets in a sustainable fashion. In a number of weeks, we intend to announce our decision on the question of support for biomass under the RO. We need to consider matters very carefully. At Rhoda Grant’s request, we will study the contributions to this debate and consider them in our deliberations before decisions are made. The debate has therefore been timely, and I thank Rhoda Grant for that. Obviously, I cannot comment on any individual application that is before me for a decision—I have not done so and I will not do so—but I make the general point that we can enforce and monitor sustainability standards through the conditions of consent that might be applied to individual power station consent determinations. I want to respond briefly on the level of efficiency standards and the 70 and 35 per cent figures. I accept that concerns exist about the 35 per cent efficiency requirement, but it is important to remember that that is a minimum and that it is in everyone’s interests that energy stations operate as efficiently as possible. It is harder for biomass CHP stations to achieve such a high efficiency level due to issues such as the moisture of the wood fuel and the need to process it. On imports, imported timber is subject to standards such as heat treatment standards, and I have been advised that it is most likely that pellets that are already heat treated are the form in which the material will be imported. I appreciate that Mr Angus MacDonald has raised a number of concerns. He has expressed those concerns over a long period and has campaigned consistently on the issue. I acknowledge that, as a local member, he has made his position very clear. All the matters that he has raised must be carefully considered. I appreciate members’ contributions to the debate and thank them for those contributions. As Rhoda Grant said, energy security is an issue that we must also take into account when we consider these matters. In a statement last October, the Office of the Gas and Electricity Markets indicated that capacity falling to 4 per cent by 2015 means that there is a serious issue and that, at least south of the border, the lights may go out—I make it clear that we in our party do not want that to happen—which is why we will be able to export much more of our renewable energy. Although that may be an issue for another day, policy makers and Governments must take it into account. People expect us to keep the lights on. There has been a lack of investment in the UK over a number of decades thereanent, and I am afraid that such matters were not considered in the 70s, 80s, 90s or noughties. There are now serious challenges, all of which policy makers in government on either side of the border must take into account. I am heartened that all members recognise that appropriately sited and properly used biomass, with the right element of electricity production and heat generation, can make a significant contribution to our energy policy. I thank all members for taking part in the debate. Meeting closed at 17:43.

This will be an anxious time for the employees of Montgomery Litho Ltd and their families, and the Scottish Government will offer them every support possible. I can confirm that the Scottish Government will do everything that it can through its partnership action for continuing employment—PACE—initiative to help those employees of Montgomery Litho who are affected by redundancy. Montgomery Litho is a well-respected company that had earned its place on the Scottish Government collaborative framework for design, print, publishing and associated services. I have just been advised that the purchase of Montgomery Litho Glasgow has been announced in the press.

I am happy to provide that undertaking to Iain Gray. He is perfectly correct in what he says about those who have been made redundant in his constituency: it will be a bitter experience for them and their families at this time. PACE has been working at the Haddington site since October 2012 following receipt of media reports that jobs could be lost. Services were provided by PACE partners in November last year, including benefits advice, job search support, CV preparation advice, money advice and business gateway support. That intervention was possible because of engagement with the company late last year. It is always beneficial that a company’s invitation to PACE—and the PACE intervention—is made at the earliest opportunity to provide employees with as much time as possible to receive advice about alternative options for them, whether that involves training, education opportunities or, indeed, seeking other employment. I stated—this was an adjustment to my written notes—that I have just been advised that a buyer has been secured for the part of the Montgomery Litho business in Glasgow. The joint provisional liquidator, Blair Nimmo from KPMG, is quoted on the BBC website as saying: “The sale of the business represents the best possible outcome for the Glasgow operation which will now continue to trade.” The article states that 76 jobs in the Glasgow arm of the company may be saved as a result of the management buyout. I sought to speak to Mr Nimmo earlier, but we were unable to make contact with each other. I hope to speak to him at 4 o’clock to get a further report. I will feed any further information to Iain Gray, who is quite rightly raising the matter on behalf of his constituents. I will personally oversee that PACE’s efforts are as good as they always have been—his constituents deserve nothing less—to ensure that his constituents get every possible support at this most difficult time.

Iain Gray is quite right to point out the difficulties facing East Lothian. I am more than happy to meet East Lothian Council—indeed, I have written to it in connection with other matters, and I hope to meet it to discuss more positive aspects in relation to tourism. With its agreement, I will certainly take the opportunity to discuss what more can be done. PACE’s record is formidably good. I chair the meetings in which PACE brings together its partners to ensure that we do everything that we can as team Scotland to help those who are being made redundant. The PACE client experience survey, which brings together the total results of its input throughout Scotland, reported in October 2010 that almost two thirds of PACE service users who had left their redundant job role had either found new employment or undertaken training or development. I understand that the more recent survey will show an improvement on that figure. That is a pretty good record, but it can be improved and we are taking steps to do that. There is a message of hope for those who face redundancy during this difficult economic time: jobs are available in parts of Scotland. However, as Iain Gray rightly pointed out, in some parts of Scotland there are particular difficulties for people who are seeking re-employment. Therefore, we will continue to do everything, working with Scottish Enterprise and others, to help people to find jobs to replace those that they have lost.

I agree with much of what Murdo Fraser has said, but does he agree that, as has been said already, the ORR’s proposed track access charges represent a pretty serious additional threat to the coal industry?

I am grateful to Adam Ingram for securing this important debate and for his clear and succinct account of the industry’s importance and the challenges it faces. We are grateful to him for that; he brings a depth of knowledge of his part of Scotland to the debate. I also thank other members for their speeches. As the Minister for Energy, Enterprise and Tourism, I am well aware of the important role that the coal industry plays in the rural and wider economy. Scottish output from surface mining—there is no underground mining in Scotland now—was around 5.5 million tonnes of coal in 2011, which represents just more than half of the UK total from surface mining. Despite the difficulties that many members have alluded to—which I will come to—Scottish output has been relatively stable over the past five years, with some marginal reductions in the 17 Scottish surface mines that were in production at the end of September 2012. We have heard that East Ayrshire and South Lanarkshire are key areas for the coal industry, but the industry encompasses other areas, too. I had the interesting and pleasurable experience of visiting two opencast mining sites, and I was extremely impressed by the professionalism of the activity there. Although a planning application for an opencast mine can cause controversy when it is submitted, as some members have alluded to, I was also struck by the contrast between the numbers of objections that one particular company told me it had received for its last successful planning application, which I believe ran into the thousands, and the number of complaints that there have been since that opencast mine started operating a few years ago—zero. There is perhaps a lesson for us in that. Our planning policy from 2010 seeks to minimise the negative impacts that can arise for communities, particularly those that are in close proximity to new opencast mines, but we recognise that opencast mining and coal play an important part in our energy mix. In the 24 hours to 4.30 pm today, coal generated 43.5 per cent of the UK’s electricity. Many members will be familiar with those statistics, which are available on a day-to-day basis. Coal is still king in many respects, at many times of the year and in particular weather conditions, and it is important that the Scottish Government and all parties recognise—I think that they do—that there is a need for baseload and for thermal generation. That is very much part of our draft electricity generation policy statement. We are on a transition to a low-carbon economy, but it will be a long transition because there will be the need for baseload for many years to come, despite the fact that we will be generating and indeed exporting renewable energy most of the time. As members said, the coal industry in Scotland supports at least 4,000 jobs, the majority of which are in rural areas. Adam Ingram set out the facts clearly, as did other members. The average salary, at around £42,000, is well above the Scottish average, so we are talking about well-paid jobs that would be difficult to replace in the locations in which they exist. From my discussions with employees, I know that people take great pride in their jobs and do them extremely well. At one of the coal companies, a consultation is going on because of the economic difficulties, and a 10 per cent reduction in wages has been proposed. The response reflects the difficulties that such companies face. The contemplation of such a practical, responsible measure contrasts with the approach of the ORR, which Mr Ingram rightly mentioned. The increased track access charges that the ORR announced last week present a real threat to the coal industry. The ORR says that switching from road to rail reduces CO2 emissions by 70 per cent per tonne, but under its proposals a charge of £4.04 per tonne will be added to the current track access charge of £2.83 per tonne. As Dr Elaine Murray said, the unintended consequence might be that coal freight is forced on to the road network. Worst of all, the new charge will be levied on a per-kilometre-travelled basis. Given that 50 per cent of coal produced in Scotland—around 2 million tonnes—travels to market in England by rail every year, the new arrangements will place coal operators in Scotland at a severe disadvantage compared with their competitors in England and Wales. I am grateful for Murdo Fraser’s support in principle. He pointed out, quite reasonably, that the new charges are due to be introduced in 2016, which gives us a breathing space in which to seek to persuade the ORR that unless things change significantly the impact of the new charges will potentially be very damaging. Along with my colleague Keith Brown, who is active in making representations in that respect, I will continue to make our case heard. Members made reference to other difficulties that the industry faces. The predominant issue is the coal price, which has fallen from £90 per tonne last March to £60 to £65 per tonne today, which is a swingeing reduction. It is not surprising that many companies in the industry face particular difficulties. As many members know, Sir Russel Griggs, officials and I are doing everything that we can do to keep in contact with companies that are playing a leading role in Scotland. It would not be appropriate to go into detail in that regard; suffice it to say that we are doing everything that we can do and that Russel Griggs is intensively involved in that regard. I have sought to keep members who have contacted me informed on the progress of talks. I believe that there is a bright future for the coal industry. Our strategy is correct. I and Mr Wheelhouse had a coal summit last year with a number of the main players. There have been a number of meetings and we are looking at what we can do to improve the practical difficulties that have been referred to with regard to such matters as restoration bonds—in this day and age, it is very difficult to get those bonds, if possible at all. Alternative approaches must be considered, and I am grateful that local authorities, with their detailed knowledge and understanding of the opencast industry, are involved in a positive way in the discussions. That particular challenge can be overcome. I have been able to do justice to only a few of the issues that have been raised. The carbon reduction commitment policy was giving rise to an unintended consequence that would have severely damaged the industry. I and Mr Wheelhouse made representations to the UK Government on that, and I was pleased to have a fruitful conversation with Greg Barker on the issue. I am also pleased that a measure has been announced that will reduce part of the problem—although it will not deal with the problem as regards the money paid for the first year of the scheme. We will persist with our arguments on that in the hope that they will prevail. I pay tribute to all who work in the industry. There is a good, strong future for the opencast mining industry in Scotland. Members have referred to carbon capture and storage and to the opportunities that exist in Scotland to take that forward—we are wholly behind that. As many members have said, the coal industry in Scotland is part of our culture and our history. It should remain so for a long time—for many years to come—and as the energy minister I will do everything that I can, working with colleagues from all parties, to ensure that that objective is achieved. Meeting closed at 17:57.

I am indebted to John Mason for bringing the topic before members. In his speech, John Mason set out the potential benefits and potential risks that are attached to mergers and acquisitions. That balanced approach is correct. Mergers and acquisitions are a reserved issue. As far as I know, they have not been frequently debated in the Parliament, if at all. Obviously, I have analysed the relevant legal provision that exists, which stems from the Enterprise Act 2002, and the role of the Office of Fair Trading, which can investigate mergers that either meet the turnover test or the share of supply test. The turnover test is whether the target company has a UK turnover that exceeds £70 million. The share of supply test is met if the merging parties will supply together at least 25 per cent of goods or services of a particular description either in the UK as a whole or in a substantial part of it. I have much more information, but there is no point in my reading it out. However, I thought that it would be useful to start off from that standpoint of legal fact, as that is the legal backdrop against which the UK Government considers these matters. It should be pointed out that that led to the failed merger talks between BAE and EADS. I believe that mergers and acquisitions can enable the injection of significant amounts of capital into businesses, and that they often do so. It is undoubtedly true that businesses that operate in various sectors require capital in order to succeed, and it is self-evident that companies that make profits are better than companies that make losses, not least because the latter tend not to have good survival prospects, so the stakes of customers and employees are at risk. Well-capitalised companies are therefore in the public interest. It is in the public interest that companies have the capital to make the investment that is necessary to remain competitive and succeed globally. My experience of visiting companies in 20 months has been not insubstantial. I have visited a great many companies that have benefited from investment from furth of Scotland, and that is a good thing. The Scottish National Party has never proposed putting a tartan curtain around Scotland that would deter foreign investment. Just this morning, I opened the offices of UFW, which is a company that has established an ecohub and brought together small businesses to see a display of various types of renewable installations, which the public can also go and see. What a great thing. The company is not owned in Scotland but, on behalf the Scottish Government, I welcomed our friends from south of the border and the contribution that they are making. On a larger scale, INEOS, Dana Petroleum and Talisman Energy have received substantial investment from China. I cannot speak for the companies, but my understanding is that often such investment provides a long-term perspective and means that they can take a longer-term view. In sectors such as oil and gas and in the refining business, the scale of the investment is enormous. I have also had the pleasure of visiting companies such as FMC Technologies and Oceaneering at their headquarters in the United States of America. John Gremp, the chief executive officer of FMC Technologies, told me, “There are only three guys that ever come and see me—Singapore, the state of Louisiana and Scotland. I like Scotland.” He went on to add that he was not a wild fan of federal government, for reasons that one may deduce. There is confidence in Scotland in many sectors of the economy where we have great strengths. That confidence comes from knowing that, in this country, we welcome investment. It is difficult to generalise about whether mergers and acquisitions are in themselves a good thing. They are, after all, simply mechanisms and structures. What is more important is that Scotland is the best place in the world to do business. I want that to be the case and I believe that in many cases Scotland is seen as pre-eminent. Yesterday evening, we had a reception for the oil and gas sector that was extremely well-attended and the general mood was one of optimism and a belief that Scotland is a good place to do business. My friend Mr Malik made a number of points. For the record, I strongly disagree with a number of his contentions. We have wind turbine manufacturing companies with a presence in Scotland. Gaia-Wind Ltd in Glasgow manufactures turbines and I believe that Wind Towers in Argyllshire also manufactures turbines. In addition to that, we have attracted most of the large players in the world. I believe that Gamesa and Arriva have commitments to come to Scotland and that is welcome. The presence of such companies has been hard fought for by Scottish Enterprise, Scottish Development International and Highlands and Islands Enterprise. Every single major inward investment is a result of a huge amount of work. It cannot be otherwise. We cannot expect any company to invest in Scotland just because we wish it; we have to show commitment and we have to provide the relevant support. In my experience, most companies are not looking for large cheques. They want to know that they are coming to a country where there is a supply of labour; a positive attitude to work; a supportive Government environment; and sufficient governmental support for training and for additional costs that may arise from taking particular premises from a multitude of areas. We do our best to provide all that but, above all, companies like the can-do attitude and, if I may say so, the direct access that they have to me, the First Minister and the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth. We will move heaven and earth to attract major investment to Scotland; we do it every day. We provide that leadership across a whole range of sectors that are doing very well—oil and gas, renewables, finance and also the chemical industry, which I believe does not receive sufficient coverage. The tourism sector is doing so well that, as the First Minister said, Scotland has been singled out by CNN as being one of the best countries, if not the best country, to visit in the world. Such things do not happen by accident; they happen because of the people involved in the business. Therefore, although I am grateful to Mr Mason for raising the topic of mergers and acquisitions, it seems to me that the more fundamental point that we should bear in mind—one that should be the leitmotif for our policy on enterprise—is that we must continue to strive and to look forward to tomorrow, rather than praising ourselves for what we may have had a part in achieving yesterday, to ensure that Scotland is the best place in the world in which to succeed in business. 12:59 Meeting suspended. 14:30 On resuming—

I welcome the opportunity to pay tribute to and recognise the success of Scotland’s oil and gas sector. The sector is one of Scotland’s biggest economic successes. It accounts for more than 90 per cent of total United Kingdom oil and gas tax receipts and supports 440,000 jobs across the UK. Scotland’s oil and gas strategy was launched by the First Minister in Aberdeen last year. Its key message is that there is much, much more to come. The strategy’s development was led by industry and the oil and gas leadership group, which Melfort Campbell and I co-chair. I am delighted that the UK Government is to put together a similar strategy, to complement Scotland’s. I have been particularly pleased to have close and, I think, constructive working relationships with Ed Davey and Charles Hendry and now with John Hayes. As part of that, I attend and play what I hope is a constructive part in PILOT meetings, which take place in London. Our strategy is aptly entitled “Maximising our Future”. It is focused on how we can maximise the value of remaining reserves, to create skilled jobs and prosperity for people throughout Scotland. Of the 440,000 jobs that the North Sea oil and gas industry supports across the UK, nearly 200,000 are in Scotland. The sector is a major source of tax revenue for the UK Exchequer; I believe that revenues have totalled more than £300,000 million over the years.

I do not look at the figures in that way. I will deal with the tax issue in due course. Since large-scale production commenced in the North Sea in the 1970s, more than 39 billion barrels of oil equivalent have been extracted from the UK continental shelf. This is not a story of decline; significant unharvested reserves remain. Estimates, by definition, vary. Oil & Gas UK estimates that up to 24 billion barrels have yet to be recovered, and forecasts from Professor Alex Kemp at the University of Aberdeen and others suggest that oil and gas production will continue well into the 2040s. By volume, just under 40 per cent of Scotland’s reserves remain in the ground. At current prices a potential £1.5 trillion in reserves are left. That is extraordinary potential—one and a half million million pounds of reserves are still to be returned to these shores. It is imperative, therefore, that we push to maximise recovery of our precious resource. In the latest round of North Sea oil and gas licensing, the Department of Energy and Climate Change offered 167 new licences, covering 330 North Sea blocks, with a further 61 blocks under environmental assessment. This is an exciting period of new investment and new discoveries. There have been a number of recent investment announcements. On 24 October last year, Talisman announced investment of £1,600 million to prolong North Sea oil fields. Also in October, Shell announced the development of the Fram field, which is one of the biggest Scottish North Sea energy projects of the past decade and will pump 5 per cent of Britain’s gas needs at its peak production. In December last year, Dana Petroleum announced a £1 billion development for nine wells in the Harris and Barra fields 100 miles east of Shetland, and it aims to double its production to 100,000 barrels a day by 2016. Just before the Christmas period, Statoil announced a £4.3 billion investment in the North Sea, which will create 700 new jobs—and the Mariner field is expected to produce for 30 years. Investment on that level is unparalleled in our economy. There is a vibrancy to the sector that we must celebrate and encourage in these challenging economic conditions. That is why I have spent the past 20 months as minister visiting all those companies and many others. I want to dispel the myth that the oil and gas sector is just an offshore industry. Each of those companies supports a long supply chain offshore and onshore, providing Scottish jobs and commercialising Scottish technological advances. Our offshore industry is the basis for a vibrant economy onshore, and Aberdeen is now established as one of the world’s most important energy hubs. It has an enviable reputation throughout the world in the engineering disciplines for its innovation and subsea skills. Aberdeen is truly an international centre of excellence, but the energy industry stretches far beyond the north-east. There have been new developments—for example, from FMC Technologies, which has located in Bellshill and Dunfermline; Glacier Energy Services, whose new office I opened last year in the Clyde Gateway; Oceaneering in Rosyth; and the Global Energy Group in Nigg, which has expanded its existing 800 personnel with an announcement before Christmas that it is creating 400 more jobs. The sector is truly a pan-Scotland industry. In our oil and gas strategy, the Scottish Government seeks to support the industry in all the ways that we can. Our strategy has been developed with—in fact, almost devised by—industry, and sets out a compelling long-term vision for the sector’s future. The most important element of the strategy is its focus on innovation to improve recovery rates. Scotland’s historical recovery rate is only 40 per cent on average, while 60 per cent of our precious resource remains in the ground. By contrast, the recovery rate in the Norwegian territory is 48 per cent. Our oil and gas strategy sets an ambition to improve average recovery rates to 50 per cent, so that we take out more than we leave behind. To put that into perspective, an increase of just one percentage point in our recovery rates would result in a rise in economic output of £89,000 million, and a rise in taxation revenue of £22,000 million. An increase in recovery of one percentage point over the lifetime of fields equals £22,000 million more in taxation, which is money that we would all wish to be used for such things as vital public services. There are six key themes in the strategy: the domestic supply chain; the international supply chain; innovation; skills; new opportunities; and industry promotion and place. The strategy focuses on technology and innovation within the industry, as well as developing the supply chain internationally. The focus is now on delivering the strategy with industry, Government, academia and the economic development agencies. Scottish Enterprise has identified £10 million from its existing budget to support industry innovation with a series of calls over three years. The first call was aimed at innovative projects that can improve the integrity and reliability of oil and gas industry assets, and I expect the first awards to be made within the next few months. Future research and development calls will take place in the spring and autumn of 2013 for proposals to address subsea challenges and improve reservoir imaging. I anticipate a further two calls in 2014, and more beyond if the outputs continue to merit that approach. Scottish Enterprise is working with industry to leverage in additional support and expertise from industry so that we can make the value of those awards even greater. Here in Scotland and worldwide, hydrocarbons will remain a central element of the energy mix for some time to come. Our draft electricity generation policy statement gives our clear view on the need for both rapid expansion of renewable electricity throughout Scotland and the underlying requirement for new efficient thermal capacity. Carbon capture and storage is the only technology that is capable of cutting fossil fuel emissions by up to 90 per cent.

Not just yet. Linking CCS with enhanced oil recovery could accelerate its development and unlock 3 billion barrels of hard-to-reach oil—worth £190 billion—from the North Sea. The centre for North Sea enhanced oil recovery with CO2, which was launched in May last year and is based in Edinburgh, will develop understanding of enhanced oil recovery technology. That could create a commercial use for CO2 that is captured from power plants and industry. The new centre will become a hub for collaboration across the energy sector to help realise CO2-EOR’s true economic potential for Europe. I recognise industry’s view that more work needs to be carried out before EOR is fully commercially viable, but I will continue to push for a partnership of industry and Government to see our CCS ambitions become a reality.

No, I do not agree with that. It will allow huge reserves of oil to be extracted, which will be hugely beneficial. Frankly, I would have thought that the Greens would welcome the application of CCS, because it will allow reductions of 90 per cent in carbon emissions. I thought that that was a good thing. Furthermore, without CCS, I do not know how the European Union’s energy emissions targets can be achieved. Only the application of CCS to power stations can make reductions in emissions of the scale that is necessary to achieve the targets. Those are not my views; they are the views of the International Energy Agency, whose chief executive spoke at the Council of Ministers meeting that I attended in November 2011. I disagree with Mr Harvie. I turn to ageing infrastructure on the UK carbon shelf. It is estimated that there are resources of up to 27 billion barrels of oil equivalent still to be recovered, but it is possible that around 5 billion will not be extracted due to infrastructure access issues. That equates to approximately £85 billion in lost revenues.

I do not think so—I have too much to cover. We simply cannot afford to lose revenue on that scale, nor can we afford to lose the tax revenues, which I have described, that are linked to that. Irrespective of what our politics may be, no one can afford to forfeit or lose this vital opportunity. If no action is taken and things continue as they are, the majority of North Sea hubs will not be available after 2035. The current exploration and production activities are forecast to recover around 12 billion to 14 billion barrels of oil equivalent from the 25 billion barrels that are estimated to remain in the UKCS. The industry recognises that many of the solutions are industry solutions. However, industry and Government will have to work together to resolve the problem of ageing infrastructure and guarantee the long-term future of the UKCS. I am pleased that some progress has been made, including the introduction of a DECC infrastructure stewardship process, incentives to increase exploration and activity, a review/update of licence terms and the establishment of areas of special economic interest around critical hubs. However, UK oil and gas production has declined by 30 per cent over the past two years. Tavish Scott’s amendment, which I should say for clarification’s sake that we will accept along with the Labour amendment, recognises the challenge. How we respond to that challenge is the real debate. Although the industry is confident that it can slow the decline by introducing new technologies and procedures, investors need long-term certainty. More needs to be done and I will continue to work with the UK Government to provide the right package of fiscal and other measures to ensure the longevity and continuity of production on the UKCS. Presiding Officer, I have foreshortened the remainder of my speech—[Interruption.] Well, I will do so just slightly in the light of your direction. The oil and gas sector is a global business and we want to increase the international impact of our supply chain. Ten years ago, international activity in the industry accounted for 31 per cent of Scotland’s supply chain sales; in a decade, that figure has risen to 46.4 per cent. In other words, nearly one half of the money that the oil and gas sector makes comes from international work. I do not think that that important point is well enough understood. Because of the standards of excellence of so many of its companies and individuals, the industry has become truly international and operates throughout the world.

Ah, well. All I can say is that that figure must increase. I have not talked about skills, but we are working on the issue as we move towards the announcement of an energy skills academy with a particular focus in Aberdeen on oil and gas. I look forward to hearing what members have to say in the debate and to working with members from all parties on implementing and delivering our strategy. It gives me great pleasure to move, That the Parliament recognises the importance to both the Scottish and the UK economy of the oil and gas sector in Scotland; welcomes that oil and gas extraction will continue in Scotland for decades to come; notes progress in delivering Scotland’s first oil and gas strategy; recognises the world-leading capability of the Scottish oil and gas sector and supply chain workforce, and supports close collaboration between the Scottish Government and its agencies, industry and academia to work to meet the future personnel and skills needs of the sector and ensure continuing sector growth.

I am happy to assure Rhoda Grant that, as far as decommissioning is concerned, Scotland will honour her responsibilities. On taxation, we recognise that stability and predictability are absolutely key. Does the member agree that the worst possible thing would be the repetition of the tax hike that the industry faced—without any warning—in 2011, of a 12 per cent supplementary petroleum tax? Does the member agree that that did considerable damage by undermining the confidence of oil investors and companies based throughout the world?

Could Mr Harvie clarify whether the Greens are against carbon capture and storage? I genuinely do not know the answer.

I have enjoyed the debate. I particularly enjoyed Ken Macintosh’s speech at the end. In fact, were it not for just two sentences that he obtruded at the very end of his speech, I would have said that he displayed the velvet vocabulary that we would expect from a Kofi Annan or a diplomat. Perhaps a future career beckons for him. I, too, will not dwell on the debates about Scotland’s independence—something I believe in with all my heart and soul—suffice to say that we will be back debating these issues directly, head on, in due course. That is the correct thing to do. Something has been achieved today that I do not think has been achieved before in the history of the oil and gas industry. Perhaps I am borrowing some of the First Minister’s undoubted optimism, but I do not think that there has been a debate about oil and gas in which there has been an endorsement from all the main parties participating in the debate recognising, first, the enormous value of the industry and, secondly, the fact that it has a secure and long-term future. I do not recall those two statements having been accepted across the board. Hitherto they have been the subject of claim and counterclaim. The fact that, today, both those statements have been accepted by both of the main parties is a step forward. Moreover, it will be seen as a step forward by the industry and its representative bodies. Members will be aware that Maureen Watt is kindly hosting a reception this evening in the garden lobby that will be attended by leading figures from the oil and gas industry. I hope that all members will come along. Crawford Gillies, the chairman of Scottish Enterprise, will be there, denoting his recognition of the importance of the industry to Scotland, and Melfort Campbell, with whom I co-chair the industry leadership group, will be speaking, as will I. I am delighted that Melfort Campbell has recently been appointed to the board of Scottish Enterprise, which further strengthens the contribution of the oil and gas industry’s expertise and knowledge to Scottish Enterprise. Those are all good things.

I am happy that that is the case now and I hope that it was the case in the past. Almost all members spoke about the imperative importance of health and safety. Rhoda Grant spoke quite movingly about the 25th anniversary of the Piper Alpha disaster, and I especially want to note the speech of Kevin Stewart, who spoke about the members of his family who work in the industry. Similarly, I know that Lewis Macdonald’s brother reports on the oil and gas industry, and I hope that he does so for many years to come. Many members—particularly those from Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire—spoke of the industry movingly and with great knowledge of their families, because the oil and gas industry is part of the warp and weft of life in Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire. I was only sorry that I did not hear the dulcet tones of Dennis Robertson because, whenever I think of Westhill, his name flashes through my cranial area.

I thank Dennis Robertson for that contribution. We are all relieved that he did not accept the career opportunity as a night watchman that he was offered at school. I come, logically and sequentially, to careers advice. Many members mentioned that participation in the industry starts at school. Maureen Watt and others mentioned the importance of the STEM topics. The importance of taking the right subjects is key, but there is more to the issue than that. The industry, Government and academia must ensure that children understand the huge range of opportunities that exists in oil and gas. It is far greater now than it was 10 or 15 years ago. There is a huge range of skills and expertise, and it is important that young people maintain STEM subjects so that they do not deny themselves the opportunity of taking up careers of which they cannot be expected to be aware at the age of 14 or 15. That is why initiatives such as the Glasgow Science Centre’s offer to have all children come along to see what happens there are terrific. I would love such opportunities to be spread all around Scotland. The provision of energy skills is a wide-ranging matter. From my fairly extensive engagement with the industry, I know that the industry expects Government to make a substantial contribution, and we do. Stewart Stevenson mentioned Banff and Buchan College. There is also Aberdeen College, Robert Gordon University and the University of Aberdeen. Last month, I met Professor Diamond and others, and I have had six or seven meetings about developing an energy skills academy. I want to ensure that there is one plan that unites the academic world, the Government and industry. That is key. We need to avoid duplication and go forward in a way that meets the needs and interests of all. However, it is important to understand also that the industry’s needs are wider than the provision of graduates, important though they are. It looks to recruit from the armed forces. It seeks more relations with schools. It certainly looks for far more to be done to make it clear that there are massive opportunities for females as well as men in the industry. Many members picked up on that point and were right to do so. Companies such as the Wood Group have led the way on what is called transformation training. [Interruption.]

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Transformation training means transferring skills and being retrained from, for example, the automotive industry into the oil and gas industry. With many sectors, particularly the construction industry, facing grave difficulty, it is logical and desirable that we do everything we can to enable people who find themselves redundant or simply wish to change career to have the opportunity to retrain. That is why initiatives such as the energy skills academy at Nigg are important. I was delighted that, just before Christmas, Roy MacGregor—a proud highlander, as Mary Scanlon mentioned—announced another 400 jobs in addition to the existing 800 jobs there. Not only that, but avid readers of The Press and Journal, such as myself, not to mention readers of The Inverness Courier, will have picked up the fact that, as well as Global Energy Group’s energy skills academy, there is a crane operator school—as far as I know, the only one in the UK—at Nigg. Dougie McGilvray set that up, and I am told that his company, Weldex, is now the 11th or 13th largest crane company in the world. The only place to learn those skills in that way, as far as I know, is in Nigg. The skills issue is wide ranging. There is no single solution. It involves an array of answers. The industry has recognised that it needs to do far more on that front and makes no bones about that. I am working with Oil & Gas UK, Subsea UK, OPITO and the universities and colleges in the area to develop solutions to the problems. Claudia Beamish said that we were not pursuing opportunities in Brazil. I am delighted to tell her that I am going to Brazil. [Interruption.] Members ask whether I am coming back. I am happy to lead a trade mission to Brazil in March precisely because of the large number of companies that are operating successfully not simply to extract oil from the North Sea west of Shetland but to replicate their skills, expertise and excellence all over the world. The opportunities in Brazil are enormous, so I look forward to my visit and am sure that I will enjoy it. There is a consensus. We value the industry and what it can provide to Scotland, but I do not think that we yet fully appreciate its range and scope. A huge number of companies are involved in it. It is centred in Aberdeen, which is an international centre of excellence, as Nigel Don mentioned. For example, the GE Group is designing fields off the shore of Australia. Rod Christie, the president of that company, told me that that work is being done in Scotland because we have the best people in the world. That is why the industry is so important to Scotland. That is why I recognise that the key challenges that are ahead of us are to meet the skills challenge in our skills strategy, address the problems of ageing infrastructure—if we do not address those problems, it could lead to the loss of £85 billion—and advance the maximisation of recovery of our assets, even if only by one percentage point, because every 1 per cent of oil and gas that we recover brings in an additional £22 billion. The members who said that that was not a good idea—I think there was only one—will be in a small minority today. I am delighted that the Parliament will back and support the industry not only now but for generations to come.

On 29 November, I advised Parliament that I would come back before the Christmas recess to provide details of the support that I intended to put in place to complement the existing package of support for redundant Remploy workers who seek to move into new jobs. I am pleased to be able to set out the proposed scheme and to answer members’ questions. As members are aware, the United Kingdom Government is to remove all direct funding from Remploy by March 2014. In response to that, and with the agreement of the UK Government, Remploy has put all factory sites up for sale or closure in two stages. Stage 1 has seen three sites in Scotland—those at Netherton, Edinburgh and Aberdeen—close in recent months, with the Springburn site in Glasgow due to close in January next year. Members across the chamber share my view that the stage 1 process was poorly handled from the outset—both the commercial exercise and implementation of the support package for the people who faced redundancy. The Scottish Government made strenuous efforts to persuade Remploy and the Department for Work and Pensions to share information on the commercial process to enable us to work with bidders, but that was refused. Stakeholders and members of this Parliament have contacted the Scottish and UK Governments about the problems that have arisen throughout stage 1. The apparent lack of preparation for the process resulted in poor communications with staff and potential bidders, and missed opportunities in the commercial process. The end result, which will see all four sites closing, is nothing short of a travesty for the workers concerned. Problems occurred at all the sites, but the commercial process at the Springburn site has been the subject of strong allegations of mishandling. It is likely that we will never get to the bottom of what happened there. Now, despite our efforts to secure a delay of any further action until a full, independent review of stage 1 has taken place, stage 2 has been announced and the futures of all the people who work in what is left of Remploy are under threat. As I noted in last month’s debate on Remploy, we have taken action and we will continue to do so. Through Scottish Enterprise and Just Enterprise, we have offered business support to potential bidders. Through the partnership action for continuing employment team, we have delivered support for redundant Remploy staff. Thirdly, we have sought to build public and private markets for the remaining Remploy sites and other supported businesses in Scotland. I turn to the next steps. Stage 1 showed us that we have to do more—we have to be proactive, and we will be. In the coming months, Scottish Enterprise will provide a dedicated resource to work with the DWP and Remploy on supporting potential bids. I am pleased to report that, in a meeting yesterday, Remploy and the DWP agreed in principle to a greater level of joint working to support potential bidders for the businesses. Scottish Government officials, with their UK counterparts, will now work quickly to develop the terms of such an approach. We continue to push for agreement for PACE support for those who are under threat to be made available much earlier than was the case in stage 1, in which, in some instances, factories closed before Remploy transitional support staff had completed even the initial skills assessments. For those who are already redundant, and any others who lose their jobs in this next stage, it is clear that we need to do more. To date, 10 redundant workers in Scotland have found new jobs. Esther McVey hopes that all redundant Remploy workers will get jobs. So do we, but the latest figures make it evident that more support is necessary. That is why I have decided to offer a recruitment incentive of up to a total of £5,000 to employers who recruit disabled ex-Remploy workers in Scotland into permanent jobs. The funding will be offered to employers to help to meet any additional costs of recruiting and training Remploy workers. It must not duplicate any of the existing support packages that are in place from DWP. The employer recruitment initiative will be available to employers in the private, public and third sectors; it will also be available to any Remploy workers setting up their own social enterprise or co-operative, or who enter self-employment. It will be paid in stages over 18 months to ensure employer commitment and to enable the employee time to settle into their new role. It will be available to all disabled redundant Remploy workers for as long as they are receiving PACE support. Employers who have already recruited Remploy workers when the scheme becomes operative will be able to claim the payment retrospectively. The programme will be managed by Skills Development Scotland, who will procure the delivery from a third-sector body with a proven track record of supporting disabled people. When appointed, the delivery body will work closely with the DWP personal case workers and the other organisations that are supporting Remploy workers following their redundancy, including the Shaw Trust and Remploy employment services. The programme is not about offering paid work experience or temporary jobs with no secure future. Employer commitment to the individuals will be crucial. Posts offered under the scheme must either be new jobs or real vacancies; they cannot displace existing staff members. By offering this additional incentive today, I hope that we will encourage more employers to recruit Remploy workers. I know from personal experience of visiting many Remploy sites that the employees are committed, hard-working individuals who find themselves unemployed through no fault of their own. We have a responsibility to do what we can to support them. I will be happy to report to Parliament in the coming months on the progress of the initiative.

I appreciate working with all members and broadly welcome the support that we have had from the Labour Party, in particular. We have worked co-operatively and I hope and expect that that will continue. On the task force, we have had stakeholder meetings from the very beginning, as Jackie Baillie knows—I think that we have had five or six meetings, all of which I have chaired. Stakeholder meetings will continue. I have indicated informally to Patricia Ferguson an offer of a meeting with all Labour members, because many Labour members have an interest in the matter—as do many members of the Scottish National Party and all parties. Indeed, there are too many interested members for them all to be on a task force—it would be the most populous task force in the history of task forces. We do not want committee meetings and commitments to attend and so on to get in the way of progress. However, we will continue to work closely with people and especially with the trade unions. Like Jackie Baillie, I support the sterling work of trade union representatives, who passionately believe in what they are doing. That is manifest to everyone who knows Lyn Turner and Phil Brannan, in particular, who have taken a principled lead on the matter. Jackie Baillie’s main question was about the Welsh example. What we are offering is a fallback position. Our job is difficult because, against Jackie Baillie’s wishes and my wishes, the UK Government has determined to forge ahead with the tendering process instead of pausing for thought, reflection and assessment and seeking voluntary proposals. However, our primary objective is to ensure that Remploy workers continue to do the work that they do and are not made redundant but transferred to new employers under the Transfer of Undertakings (Protection of Employment) Regulations. That must be objective 1, and I am grateful to Jackie Baillie for giving me the opportunity to set that out. Of course, if the objective cannot be achieved in every case, we strongly believe that the incentive that I announced today of up to £5,000 per person offers sufficient encouragement to employers, whether they are in the private sector, the third sector or the supported employment sector, to recruit redundant disabled Remploy workers. The incentive is not on the financial scale of the support that is offered in Wales. However, such schemes need to strike a balance between providing a real incentive and providing sustainable support. It is not right in principle that a new employer should be totally relieved of his financial responsibilities for employees for an indefinite period or even for several years. Employers must financially recognise the value that they get from the effort and work of their employees. Having visited five of the Remploy sites, I know that employers get excellent value, excellent work and total commitment from their employees. I am confident that the measures that I announced are proportionate and significant. If they are needed—and I hope that they will not be—I hope that they will also be effective.

I assure Mary Scanlon that every possible effort is being made to ensure that there are business opportunities in relation to the continued procurement of all the goods that are produced in the phase 2 Remploy factories, and that attention has been given to other units, such as closed-circuit television units, in which members have taken an interest. I have visited the factories that produce workwear and seen the quality of what they produce, which is top class. The factories make excellent products. We are, of course, mobilising the procurement power of the public sector to ensure that there can be a sustainable future for the businesses that provide workwear. However, our difficulty in that regard is that with the future of all the Remploy sites now in question because of the tender processes firing ahead, how can any public sector body give a contract beyond March or a few months afterwards? They do not know whether anybody will be in place—whether there will be a business, a body, a supported body or a third-sector body—to fulfil the contracts. We have a catch-22 situation. We can and we will use—and I am using—the public sector purchasing power and our influence in the private sector to do everything that we can to secure the sustainable future of the phase 2 factories. However, because of the uncertainty surrounding the continuance of those factories, how can we reasonably expect any unconditional offers to purchase to be procured? Secondly, Mary Scanlon asked about contracts in the reserved area. I personally intervened in relation to the Stirling factory at the behest of Mr Crawford because the factory produces, among other things, suits that are designed to enable members of the armed forces to withstand chemical, biological and nuclear exposure. Again, that factory makes high-quality products. I intervened specifically to ask the UK minister to extend a Ministry of Defence contract. As of today, I have received no answer from the minister to that request.

Co-ordination will be important. That is why I hope and expect to bring together all relevant local authorities to discuss how we can work together, in concert and collaboration, to ensure that all opportunities are pursued. I am also meeting Tim Matthews of Remploy next month and the stakeholders group is meeting next month. In addition, a dedicated resource from Scottish Enterprise will be available throughout the country in the places where it is required in order to ensure that potential bidders are identified. A lot of work will be involved. It would be simpler if we did not have the gun of the tendering procedure at our heads because that work must be done in accordance with the newly announced procedure, where best and final offers are to be expected shortly after March, so we have very little time indeed. A lot of work needs to be done and I welcome the support of all members across the chamber in carrying out that work in all parts of Scotland.

I confirm that I have discussed that with my colleague Alex Neil. He has made it clear that he is 100 per cent behind my efforts to bring together the health procurement officials in order to see what we can do. I can also confirm that my officials have been in contact with Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board on the matter and that useful discussions have been had. I very much hope that progress can be made. As Patricia Ferguson will be aware, procurement by public sector authorities is independent of the Scottish Government. It is not for us to tell them that they must do things. However, in this circumstance, especially now that the supported employment procurement framework that has been in place since 12 September is being acted on by various public sector bodies, there is good will around this issue. Working with Patricia Ferguson and others, I am determined that every opportunity to provide continued work—in this case, through the procurement of wheelchairs—will be taken, and I am happy to work with Patricia Ferguson there anent.

I am aware of the work that Bob Doris has done in relation to the events in Springburn, which are some of the saddest events that we have seen in Scotland recently. The story of those events has been told by many, not least by the Daily Record, which has truly put a human face to the issue and whose campaigning support on it we very much appreciate. We will do everything that we possibly can to ensure that employees in Springburn who are being made redundant receive every possible support. I can confirm that, on 10 December, the DWP and PACE made a substantial effort to help those workers to receive support. It is extremely disappointing that they were led up the garden path. They were led to expect that there might be the possibility of future employment, but their hopes were cruelly dashed, in short order, after the phase 1 process was concluded.

First, I should say that the maximum cost of the ERI proposal that we have announced is set at £1.638 million. I apologise for not giving that figure to Jackie Baillie earlier. We are happy to explore any opportunity to access finance in other ways. I will write to Helen Eadie about the specifics of the matter that she has raised. We do not want to duplicate things that the DWP is doing; that would simply be foolish. I know that Helen Eadie has, rightly, taken a close interest in this matter in relation to Cowdenbeath and Leven. The main objective, which we all share, is to ensure that the excellent work that Remploy employees do, and have been doing for decades—one gentleman to whom I spoke said that he had been in his post for 38 years—can go on for another set of decades, and that people do not have to face the possibility of redundancy. That is the objective that we have set and it is the job that our stakeholder group and others are devoted to.

We have already argued—unsuccessfully, I am afraid—with Esther McVey and her predecessor at the DWP, Maria Miller, that the bid process should be halted. We argued that not for political reasons but for practical reasons—so that the work that I have described can be conducted in an orderly and concerted fashion, and not rushed, with an arbitrary deadline. However, we will of course continue to work closely with the DWP. That is why, just yesterday, my officials met DWP officials and Tim Matthews, the head of Remploy. We understand that Remploy has acknowledged that the process that it instituted and conducted in relation to phase 1 was less than perfect, shall we say, and that progress is required. Concessions were given yesterday that it will do better in phase 2. We want to see proof that phase 2 will be different from phase 1. All members want that. They and, in particular, the trade unions are rightly sceptical about this, but on the face of it, we received at yesterday’s meeting assurances that progress will be made. I will meet Tim Matthews towards the end of next month, by which time I hope that we will have made progress, especially on enabling Scottish Enterprise and the social enterprise body Just Enterprise to obtain details of potential bidders and to help them to do the necessary work to see what help we are able to provide, as a country, to enable as many of the Remploy factories as possible to have a secure future.

The package that we have announced has been brought forward because of the scale and the impact of the redundancies that Remploy workers face. To put that in perspective, there are more than 300 of them in Scotland. The measure has been brought forward to reflect that. These are difficult times for the supported employment sector. Following the interchange that my officials had just this morning with a leading social enterprise, I am told that times are even more difficult than they were a year ago. I make it absolutely clear that, if redundancies are faced in other social enterprises between now and the end of the session, I would hope, and would do my damnedest, to respond in the same way for them as I have done for Remploy. Our efforts are really designed to avoid such situations arising, difficult though I admit and accept that they are. However, if circumstances affect other supported employers and disabled workers face redundancy in future, such situations will be considered on a case-by-case basis. The principle that we have adopted today is a sound one and it should be followed.

Since we debated the subject on 29 November, I have had various discussions with the Offshore Contractors Association, various oil and gas companies and the offshore wind industry group, which I co-chair. In each of those discussions, my purpose has been to suggest to a number of the most successful companies in the country that, if they have cause to require, for example, the marine safety jackets that are produced by two of the Remploy factories, those could be the subject of procurement. I must say that I have received a marvellous response and an immediate one. As there was in the case of Glencraft with the philanthropy of the Wood Group and the personal commitment of two of its leading executives, there is a clear will among the leading industrialists in Scotland to do what they can. Our difficulty is that they do not know whether there will be businesses around to fulfil orders, so any orders that are placed will have to be, by definition, conditional. Businesses do not really like placing conditional orders; they want to make orders and get the goods—that is the way that it goes. Notwithstanding that, Alison McInnes has asked a perfectly fair question. As I said in my statement, I will report to Parliament as we make further progress on all such matters.

All members are determined to do what we can for the workforce at the Cowdenbeath and Leven factories, both of which I have visited. Those visits were moving experiences because of the workforce’s commitment and diligence and the value of the work that it does, which is second to none. It is up to us to make every effort to do what we can to ensure that the workforce continues to have employment. I will work closely with Jamie Lawson of Remploy and with the private sector interests that I have described to ensure that every opportunity is explored.

We will engage with local authorities. With Mr Paterson, I visited the Clydebank premises, which are in a slightly different situation, because that factory makes the insides of car seats and is linked with two Remploy factories down south. We need to address that particular situation. As I said, I hope to bring together all local authorities fairly early in the new year to ensure that we are working in co-operation. The incentive measure that I have announced is by a long way the most generous employment recruitment initiative that we have delivered in Scotland. If we can do other things in the future to help local authorities, we will of course look at that. However, I will take one measure at a time.

As I said, Just Enterprise and Scottish Enterprise services will be made available to any individuals who wish to explore such options. It is also essential for PACE to have early access to the workforce in all the factories. It was denied that before, which was wrong. Following yesterday’s meeting, I hope that that wrong will be put right in phase 2.

I believe that there is activity in relation to Redrock and the Edinburgh factory, which Sarah Boyack will know about. It would not help if I commented prematurely on that. The ideal solution is a social enterprise model. Broadly, that view is shared across the chamber. However, we must play the cards as they fall. If any private sector employer wants to make a genuine commitment to retaining the workforce, we must consider that carefully. I look forward to continuing to work closely with Sarah Boyack on the precise circumstances in Edinburgh.

I hope that the shroud of almost Sicilian secrecy over the whole process that existed during phase 1 will be lifted, and that we will see openness, transparency and a willingness to work with Remploy. We can then identify social enterprises in particular that want to continue to give the Remploy workers a secure future and the respect and dignity of work.

As Jenny Marra knows, we are pursuing the position on procurement extremely actively. Obviously, the police and fire services have made their own arrangements for procuring appropriate uniforms and other materials. That is what they do, and those contracts are in place. We are working extremely closely with the public sector in order to ensure that it uses its purchasing power, which is precisely why the article 19 framework has been in place since September. That is also why, as I outlined on 29 November, we have made substantial progress with a large number of public authorities on using the powers that were set out in the framework that my colleague Alex Neil introduced when in his former role. Rather than carping about what might be appropriate at some point in the future, we should all work together to ensure that the public sector exercises its independent authority in the spirit of Scotland to do the right thing for the Remploy workers. I am confident that that will happen, provided that there is an opportunity for it to do so effectively.

I am confident that we have in the enterprise network people with sufficient expertise, drive and determination to do what is necessary, provided that they are enabled to do so, over the coming months. I will happily report back to Mr Brodie and all other members on the progress that we make on that hugely important task in the weeks and months to come.

The Scottish Government has regular discussions with the UK Government on a number of issues, including the European funding that is available to small and medium-sized enterprises.

Yes, I can confirm that we make all appropriate representations with the UK Government and with the European Union on ways in which we can help Scottish companies to access such finance. I am delighted that, to date, under the enterprise finance guarantee scheme, 1,164 offers have been made to Scottish companies involving £162.78 million. Many Scottish companies, including the prosthetics company Touch Bionics and the wave energy company AlbaTERN have benefited from EFG assistance. We will carry on working hard to ensure that all Scottish companies receive the best financial help on the best terms that are available.

The Scottish Government believes that Scotland needs a diverse energy portfolio to aid resilience and maintain security of our supply. Unconventional gas offers potential as another source of natural gas, but it is essential that unconventional gas exploration and extraction are done safely and responsibly with due regard to the environment. The Scottish Environment Protection Agency has recently produced guidance to cover its regulatory roles in relation to coal-bed methane and shale gas. We will continue to work with the United Kingdom Government and SEPA to ensure that there is a robust regulatory regime in Scotland in relation to unconventional gas exploration and to provide clarity for industry, planning authorities and communities.

With respect to the member, I do not agree that such confusion exists. It has been made very clear indeed that there is a robust regulatory regime in place, the nature of which has been made clear on numerous occasions. I repeat that the licensing of the exploration and development of shale gas and coal-bed methane is a reserved matter for the UK. A petroleum exploration and development licence—PEDL—is required. Such licences are issued by the UK Department of Energy and Climate Change. Following that process, planning applications to move into the production phase require planning permissions gained through local authority planning processes. Given their appeal obligations, Scottish ministers must not and cannot comment on live individual planning applications. Therefore, there is a clear regime for obtaining necessary permissions before anything can happen. Moreover, I am not aware of any application for fracking in Scotland.

I am sorry to disappoint the member once again, but I am afraid that I just do not agree with any of that. I think that there is total clarity. Above all, the approach that we take on this matter, as on so many others, must be based strongly on evidence. It is on evidence that we take our decisions in relation to energy policy.

That is a sensible question. I agree entirely that it makes good sense for all those who propose to proceed with energy projects to consult fully and in detail the local authority and the local community. I commend that approach in respect of the case that Mr Crawford rightly raises.

I cannot give assurance in respect of applications that have not been submitted. I am happy to receive details of the case to which the member refers, but it strikes me that, if the application has been withdrawn, there will be no gas extraction.

I doubt that there will be a meeting of minds between me and Mr Harvie on that matter. We will consider carefully any impact on emissions from the burning and extraction of shale gas and coal-bed methane, as we do with all other energy applications.

I thank Mr MacDonald for that question. I am happy to look into the specific detail. I have not looked at the case in detail, so I do not want to comment without knowing all the facts. However, for the benefit of all members, many of whom have an interest in the topic, I say that SEPA is to be commended for introducing guidance proactively. Anyone who studies that guidance, as I have done, will see that it is a considerable aid indeed to everyone who has to interpret such matters, whether local authorities or others. I am indebted to SEPA for its approach, but I will correspond with Angus MacDonald or meet him if he wishes to discuss the particular case.

Sarah Boyack expresses a legitimate view. I suggest that her espousal of the precautionary principle should be considered in the light of the evidence on the matter. Because unconventional gas extraction has not yet taken place in Scotland—at least, not to a significant extent or recently—it is essential that we proceed on the basis of evidence rather than any other approach based on what people think may be the facts. I hope that all other members—even Mr Harvie, who is shaking his head at this point—will agree that that alone is the correct approach on this important matter.

The memorandum of understanding between Scottish Enterprise and Areva sets out both parties’ intentions to work together to find the most appropriate location for Areva’s United Kingdom manufacturing site and to support Scotland in becoming an offshore wind manufacturing hub. The final decision on location—and therefore the timing of the decision—is for the company to make.

I am aware of the good work that is done in Fife by a number of companies and of the support for that work locally, which we value. It is for the company to decide where to locate. Areva made a commitment in Paris on 19 November to locate its UK turbine manufacturing site in Scotland. We believe that that will pave the way to create a great deal of jobs—up to 750—for manufacturing and the supporting supply chain. It is absolutely correct that Claire Baker lobbies for the area that she represents. I am sure that it will feature in the decision-making of the company, but it is for the company to decide which particular location to opt for. I am delighted that Areva has shown that commitment to Scotland, especially since I visited its Bremerhaven operation in June.

As the local MSP, I very much welcome the progress that has been made in bringing Ardersier back into use. Many of us remember the heyday of its oil fabrication success. Thanks to the Scottish Government’s renewables policy, which I am pleased to say all parties in the chamber supported when we debated the issue in September, we now see massive opportunities all around our coasts, including at Nigg; potentially at Ardersier; at Wick; at Montrose; at Leith; at Methil; at Dundee; at Kishorn; at Orkney; at Lybster and at Scrabster. I could go on but the great news is that opportunities are being created all over Scotland because of our unwavering support for the potential that renewable energy off our coasts has for Scotland and her communities.

That resembled more of a statement than a question. Notwithstanding that, I am happy to say that we are well aware of Hunterston’s aspirations; indeed, I understand that planning permission has already been granted to Mitsubishi for a testing facility. That development is very important and I very much hope that we can work together with Mr Gibson, who is always a strong advocate for North Ayrshire’s interests, to ensure that the area is by no means left out. However, the success that Hunterston has already had and its ability to attract a company of Mitsubishi’s international status are a huge testimony to our Scottish Enterprise colleagues’ massive efforts in successfully gaining the interest and commitment of companies throughout the world to locate in Scotland. It has been a truly momentous achievement thus far and we must now translate that commitment into a great number of jobs and businesses throughout the whole country.

Through initiatives such as our flagship community and renewable energy scheme—the CARES loan scheme—and the public register of community benefits, we are both supporting community ownership of renewable energy and helping to ensure that communities benefit from commercial projects. Indeed, we are making good progress towards each of those aims. For example, we are around a third of the way towards our target for 500MW of community and locally owned renewables across Scotland by 2020, and our support for community renewables was recognised recently by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development as a pioneering policy intervention and a global example of good practice in taking a bottom-up approach to renewable energy.

I thank Dave Thompson for giving me notice of that question. The First Minister met members of the Glenelg and Arnisdale Development Trust last November. Since then, there have been a number of meetings between officials of HIE, Community Energy Scotland, the Scottish Government and the trust. The trust has accepted our offer to provide funding for an independent assessment of the investment opportunity that is open to it, including an investigation into financial models that might be adopted. Work on that assessment is well advanced: the report is due for completion early in the new year. Once the report is available, a further meeting with the trust will take place to explore how Scottish Government funding for community renewables could support the project through CARES—the loans scheme—or the renewable energy investment fund. We will continue to offer support to the trust as it seeks to take the project forward. We will also continue to keep Dave Thompson, as the local member who is campaigning on the issue, closely informed.

Rhoda Grant is right to raise that matter. It is of huge concern to us. That is why in June this year I wrote to Ed Davey suggesting that, because of its importance, we set up an intergovernmental body to consider the matter. I was pleased that he agreed to that, and I believe that the first meeting of the intergovernmental group has just taken place or is just about to take place. It is essential that we address transmission charges to the islands. The problem has existed for some time but was exacerbated when the estimated cost of the connection went up from, I think—I will need to check the figures—just below £500 million to more than £700 million. That has had a massive knock-on effect so that, if the recommendations of the Office of the Gas and Electricity Markets were accepted, the charges would be £10 per megawatt hour on the mainland and £150 or thereabout on the islands. I will check those figures, but they indicate the scale of the problem. It is essential that we tackle that problem together with United Kingdom Government. We are working extremely positively with it towards finding a solution. A solution is necessary if we are to realise the potential in our islands for renewable energy. Indeed, Shetland, Orkney and the Western Isles are the places in the UK with the best potential for renewable energy, both onshore and marine. We are determined to solve the problem and to work with people such as Rhoda Grant, who rightly campaigns on the issues.

Yes, I welcome the committee’s report and hope that we have the opportunity to debate it in due course. Chic Brodie is right to point out the enormous benefits to communities. The target of 500MW, which we are one third of the way to achieving, could be worth £2,400 million to communities in Scotland over the lifetime of the project. Since 2007, more than 800 grants for community renewables schemes have been awarded—some £16 million—and now we have CARES. We are absolutely determined that communities throughout Scotland should receive every practical and affordable assistance that we can provide in order to realise their aspirations to have community renewable energy schemes. The benefits therefrom are of a huge variety and people are increasingly becoming aware of them, which is a good thing. I welcome the cross-party support that exists for community renewables and undertake to work with all parties to advance such schemes across Scotland.

Work has already begun on the Scottish energy skills academy initiative. My officials are consulting industry, skills providers and relevant public bodies to discuss the proposal and its alignment with national frameworks.

The Scottish energy skills academy will be developed as a Scotland-wide academy. I am pleased to say that we are making great progress. Just this week, I had useful meetings with senior representatives from the University of Aberdeen, the Robert Gordon University, Aberdeen College and Banff and Buchan College, all of which already do excellent work. We want such work to be enhanced and increased. It is correct that we will see much of the energy academy’s oil and gas focus being centred in Aberdeen when that initiative is announced. However, it is important that we get the initiative right, rather than rush to launch it. That is important because we need to align the activities and efforts of academe with those of industry and the Government. That is what we want and what I believe the oil and gas industry wants, and that is what we intend to deliver in due course.

On 22 March this year, members of this Parliament debated the announcement that was made earlier that month by Maria Miller, the then United Kingdom Government Minister for Disabled People, that the Department for Work and Pensions funding for Remploy would be fully withdrawn by March 2014. During that debate, members spoke with passion about the Remploy workforce and the impact that losing their jobs would have not just on them but on their families and communities. In the months since then, we have seen the effects of the two-stage process in Scotland, and many members have written directly to me and to the UK Government to express their growing disquiet over the handling of the matter by both Remploy and the DWP. We have seen three factory sites close in Scotland, with 61 disabled people losing their jobs in the process, and this week came the further devastating news that the Springburn site is to close, with a further 45 disabled people set to lose their jobs. From the outset, in my communications with UK ministers on the matter, I have expressed a wish to work openly and positively to save as many jobs as possible. Sadly, the reality has been different. The commercial process in particular has been run with unnecessary levels of secrecy and it seems to have been predicated on an assumption of the closure of all the stage 1 sites regardless of the commercial process put in place.

The best way in which we can give people hope is by calling a halt to the process now to allow time for an orderly transition from Remploy to other means of securing that employment. I say that having had the opportunity to visit the Stirling factory in the constituency that Mr Crawford represents, having spoken to many of the workforce there, and having, inter alia, ascertained that the goods that they produce in Stirling are of high quality. I believe that they produce chemical, nuclear and biological warfare suits that are purchased by the Ministry of Defence and used by armed forces personnel. The factory hopes to get another order, and I have asked Esther McVey whether that order can be delivered through the MOD as part of a process to try to further secure, or to secure, the future in Stirling. In consequence of the experience in the stage 1 process, the Scottish Government, officials and potential bidders alike have not been provided with relevant and essential information in sufficient time for any purchaser to be able to proceed, such as an asset value of the sites. Such information might have supported action to save the factories. All members will know that, in any situation in which a company is in difficulties and people want to try to preserve it, they need information about the value of the assets, the levels of wages and the obligations that they would be taking on. Without that information, they have their hands tied behind their back and they cannot reasonably be expected to participate in the process. In the past few weeks I have visited all five of the Remploy front-line sites that are marked down for stage 2 and I have been told repeatedly that staff feel uninformed and do not know what their future holds. Many of them have said that they do not think that they can afford a Christmas this year and that their jobs will be over next March. That is what I have found when speaking to many of the staff across the five sites.

I certainly think that that opportunity should have been provided. I tend to agree with Mr Macdonald that had that opportunity been provided, it would have been easier to perhaps secure that future, just in the way that the future of Glencraft was secured by the intervention of Production Services Network—PSN—which is now part of the Wood Group. Some major players in the private sector in this country feel a sense of moral obligation towards workers in supported employment. The effect of the cloud of uncertainty greatly affects the staff—that is, the people whom we are here to represent and whose future is the foremost purpose of this debate. Officials from the Scottish Government, Scottish Enterprise and Just Enterprise—who deliver a business support programme of services and whom I have asked to support potential bidders—have been denied information about the factory sites and those bidders. Thereby, they have been prevented from providing the type of support that they exist to provide and that has been very unfortunate indeed. It is also unfortunate that a great deal of time has had to be spent on the constant monitoring of the stage 1 process and on our attempts to be more involved with the commercial arrangements. There is no doubt that had we been able to work more closely with DWP and Remploy on this matter, more could have been done to try to prevent the job losses that we have seen so far. That is the point that Lewis Macdonald made. I pay tribute to the work that Frank Doran did in Aberdeen. He worked with the Co-operative Bank and persuaded Remploy to agree to transfer the assets, although apparently it took 30 days. He and many other members across the parties have done a lot of work behind the scenes, and I pay tribute to that. A number of steps have been taken successfully, and in the coming weeks we will do more to help those who have already been made redundant and to work with the remaining businesses to try to ensure a secure working future for Remploy workers.

Yes—I engage and I will engage. I visited the Clydebank Remploy factory with Gil Paterson and saw what it produces. I think that the factory provides two well-known Japanese makes of motor vehicles with an essential part of their seats. That product is highly in demand—once again, it is not a Mickey Mouse product but one that is highly valued and needed, and with which there should be a successful, commercial, viable and profitable future. That is what I saw in Clydebank with Mr Paterson. Over the past eight months, I have had regular meetings with a group of stakeholders and officials on this matter; indeed, we had our sixth meeting at lunch time. In the October meeting, members had the opportunity of meeting Esther McVey, the UK minister, to raise their on-going concerns. The group, which includes trade union officials, the DWP, Scottish Enterprise and local authorities, has helped to provide a clearer understanding of the difficulties faced in trying to support Remploy staff, and its invaluable input has enabled me to highlight to UK ministers on-going issues from the commercial process and the development of the support package. When the commercial process was announced, I requested Scottish Enterprise and Just Enterprise to complete a report on the Remploy factories. Unlike KPMG, this Scottish contingent of business support and manufacturing experts actually visited all nine factory sites in Scotland before producing its report. Although those people were denied access to relevant financial information by Remploy, it was nevertheless clear to them that significant restructuring would have been required to maintain viability of the stage 1 sites. However, in every site, they reported a committed, determined and highly skilled workforce who were bewildered by what was happening to them and sceptical about the modernisation process to date. The report accompanied an offer to any potential bidder of advice and guidance from either Scottish Enterprise or Just Enterprise, but that offer might have been more readily taken up had Remploy been prepared to share the details of those bidders with us. As many members know, partnership action for continuing employment is our unique partnership-based system of support for those who are at risk of redundancy. PACE officials engaged with the DWP from the outset but even with their well-established approach they have experienced a number of difficulties. Normally, DWP staff offer their redundancy support to any organisation facing closure from the start of any 90-day consultation. However, in Remploy—one of its own bodies—staff who were facing redundancy were denied all PACE support until the start of the 30-day consultation. Despite the support of trade unions and my intervention at ministerial level, Remploy refused to enable early access to help address the obvious additional support needs of vulnerable workers. That early access is a vital part of PACE’s excellent work; the earlier that it can get in to help people who are under the cloud of redundancy, and the longer that it has to build up a bond of trust—and to give the one-to-one support that it so ably provides in this country to people who have never in their lives had to find a job for themselves, because they have worked in those factories for decades—in order to help them to adjust mentally to a new situation, gain confidence and find strength, the better. I am pleased to say that PACE support is now being delivered to whose who have been made redundant and I made it very plain to Esther McVey when she visited Parliament on 22 October, and to Remploy at the meeting that I have just left, that support must be made available and without delay to the Springburn staff. No delay will be acceptable—I made that crystal clear about 30 minutes ago both to Remploy and to a senior DWP official. During the debate in March, members rightly asked what steps the Scottish Government is taking to increase procurement opportunities for supported businesses in general and Remploy in particular through greater use of article 19 of the European procurement directive. I am pleased to say that we have launched a framework with four lots covering a range of goods and services. I gave details of those lots to Mary Fee, the convener of the Equal Opportunities Committee, at what I thought was a useful meeting that we had this morning. The public sector is beginning in earnest to act as we would all wish. I will do all that I can to drive that forward and would appreciate the support of members across the chamber in that respect. Members will be interested to know that a new company formed by ex-Remploy managers—it is called Redrock Document Processing Services—intends to continue operating as a supported business and hopes to employ some of the disabled people who were previously employed at the Remploy Edinburgh factory. Discussions in that regard have been positive. With regard to more general article 19 matters, I have written to all my ministerial colleagues to ask them to ensure that their officials and agencies consider the framework and article 19 when procuring goods and services. Members will be aware that the Scottish Government has recently consulted on the procurement bill. I think that other great opportunities exist, particularly in the marine sector and the offshore energy industry. With that in mind, I have written to a range of energy sector contractors, including the Offshore Contractors Association and Oil & Gas UK, encouraging them to make contact with, and potentially to consider working with, Remploy or a successor company in the future. I understand that at least three companies are to receive presentations from Remploy about its world-beating life safety belt products, which are made in Cowdenbeath and Leven. However, more needs to be done. The Scottish Government is developing an offer of further financial assistance for redundant disabled former Remploy workers. The technical, legal and financial details require to be finalised, but I advise members that I intend to come before Parliament before the Christmas recess with full details of that support package. I hope that that will be welcomed by all in the chamber. I requested the debate some time ago, as I thought that it was very important for all members of all parties to have the opportunity to take part in a positive way in determining how we can make the best of a very difficult situation and do what we can for all the workers who are affected by the situation, who are extremely anxious about the prospects for the future. I look forward to hearing what members have to say and hope that they will support the motion. I move, That the Parliament calls for an immediate halt to any further actions by Remploy and the Department for Work and Pensions to sell or close the remaining Remploy businesses until a full and independent review of the stage 1 commercial process has been completed; agrees that the Scottish Government should be consulted fully on any further actions in Scotland by Remploy and that much greater collaboration with the Scottish Government must take place to ensure the continuation of jobs for disabled Remploy workers across all parts of the business; believes that redundancy support for Remploy staff in the three sites that have now closed was made available at too late a stage in the closure process, and agrees that there should be much earlier access to Partnership Action for Continuing Employment advice and support for those in sites under threat.

I acknowledge the work that Helen Eadie does. To have accepted one MSP on the task force would have opened the door to accepting many MSPs on it. That alone was the reason why we did not do so. We will support the Labour amendment. I hope to work with all parties and to meet the Labour Party to discuss in detail some of the proposals that Helen Eadie has put forward. Let us all work together to use the powers that we have to best effect in order to achieve what we can for the Remploy workers.

This has been a serious and passionate debate. There were a few moments of levity, some of them unexpected. I never particularly expected that Einstein would make an entry into the debate—that was thanks to Mr Brodie, who made a useful speech. Most of the speeches that we heard were passionate but also informed: across the chamber, across all the parties including, I have to say, the Tory representatives, there is a concern about the topic. I do not want to make and will not be making any party political comments about the issue. Our whole focus is about where we can go from here and what we can do for the individuals who are affected. Sadly, as we have heard, a great many of them have already paid the price, made the sacrifice and lost their jobs. I want to address some of the particular points that were made across the chamber by a great many members. First of all, we must use the powers that we have. We are doing that and, in particular, are using the powers that we have with respect to procurement. I was able to share with Mary Fee and members of the Equal Opportunities Committee the fact that we have put in place the reserved framework contract for supported business. It was established on 12 September 2012, thanks in part to the efforts of my colleague Alex Neil in his former role as Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment. I probably should not ask this question because it is certainly not in any script that is before me—not that I would be reading from such a script anyway—but I will: have we, all of us, done enough over the years? No, we have not, and that probably includes me. Perhaps that is a good starting point from which to move forward and say that we should all now do what we can to put that right. The framework is a serious piece of work, and drawing it up was not a simple task. Reference has been made to the potential EU difficulties. I am not aware of those issues, but I will look into them so that I can respond to the point and reassure members in the chamber. I sincerely hope that there are no issues in that regard. The framework was put in place relatively recently, about two months ago. There are four lots, and 10 suppliers have already been successful in gaining a place. They include Beltane Products in Wishaw, which was mentioned by Clare Adamson, who made a passionate and informed speech about the gradual decline in the workforce at Netherton. I pay tribute to those authorities such as North Lanarkshire that have champions for procurement opportunities for supported employment. That relates to Sarah Boyack’s point about another public sector institution that was not aware of its moral—and perhaps legal—obligations in that respect. One key point that we all must take on board is the need to increase awareness among all public sector bodies that have significant procurement responsibilities so they know that they can be part of the solution. I think that those bodies are becoming aware of the sector. As well as Beltane Products, we have Dovetail Enterprises in Dundee, and Glencraft in Aberdeen, about which we have heard from all the Aberdeen members, who made excellent contributions to the debate. We also have Matrix Fife, Palatine Beds in Newcastle, and Remploy in Swansea. It is not simply a Scottish issue—we do not want the assistance to stop at the border. There is also Remploy Edinburgh; RSBI in Glasgow, about which we have heard; Remploy Frontline textiles in Stirling; and the Sign Factory in Falkirk. In the first six weeks in which the framework has been operating, the following public bodies have placed contracts: the Scottish Government with the Sign Factory in Falkirk for signage worth £40,000; City of Edinburgh Council with Dovetail Enterprises for furniture worth £15,000; Argyll and Bute Council with Matrix Fife for furniture worth £8,000; and the Highlands and Islands Fire and Rescue Service with Dovetail Enterprises for furniture worth £7,000. Those are all relatively small amounts, but many a mickle maks a muckle, as has been said. If all the public sector organisations can contribute through procurement and if they have people who are champions for supported employment—or who are at least educated about it—much more progress will be made beyond those initial positive steps. Those steps are modest, but they are a good start given that the framework was launched only a few weeks ago. I have a particular responsibility that I will do my best to fulfil, which is to ensure that all public sector bodies are made fully aware of their responsibilities. My colleague Alex Neil was not present to receive the praise that I bestowed on him a moment ago, but he is here now—he is always the modest chap. [Laughter.] I could not resist saying that. We all have a serious responsibility across all the portfolios to do what we can to ensure that every part of the common weal in Scotland plays its part in procurement that will benefit the supported sector and enable it to carry on working in the way it does so well. I was pleased that Graeme Pearson and John Finnie mentioned the role of Remploy in CCTV, which highlights a useful contribution from a group of people who were otherwise in danger of being ignored. There are Remploy employment services sites in Scotland—I visited one in Glasgow, and I know that they provide excellent services. I mention those because, although they are not the immediate focus of the debate, their work is much appreciated. The next steps are very important and, so far as I am concerned, the next step is that we urge the UK Government to think carefully about how it proceeds. We have called for a halt, echoing the moves that the trade union representatives have made, not for party political reasons but for practical reasons. If there is an immediate commencement of a fresh tendering phase, it will be difficult to marshal the support of, for example, the private sector in the oil and gas sector and the offshore wind sector, as I seek to do, if they are not sure whether there will be an organisation to fulfil orders. How can I encourage the private sector to make orders for life jackets when they ask me who will be around to deliver and fulfil the contracts? Plainly, if phase 2 of the tender process is initiated and the tender date is set but the message for private companies is that there is no future for, for example, the Cowdenbeath and Leven factories—which Helen Eadie knows and which she spoke so passionately about—what is the point of their putting in an order? The business will not be there to fulfil it. As I argued at the stakeholder group this afternoon to the Remploy representatives who were good enough to come along and take part, surely it would be better, rather than go ahead with phase 2 of a tender process, to think of other options, such as a voluntary sale. I understand that, in relation to the Cowdenbeath and Leven factories, because the intellectual property is owned by a third party—a commercial company that has some of the patents—it may not be possible to go out to tender. I heard that today for the first time, but it would have been nice to have heard it before. Be that as it may, if we have a rethink for practical reasons not political reasons, that will be good news all round and it will be the best means of going forward. I am delighted to accept the Labour amendment this afternoon. I want to meet Patricia Ferguson about the issue. I supported her speech, as I did the speeches of many of her colleagues, who made excellent contributions. We are already considering further measures. Incidentally, we will announce those further measures not after Christmas, as Labour mentioned, but before Christmas. I ask members to hold me to that and to make some points of order or whatever if I fail to deliver. We want to deliver the news before Christmas because the Remploy workers are there, which is perhaps the key point. As Dennis Robertson reminded us, the debate is ultimately about people and not about tender procedures and article 19, which are just devices. What I think we all want, including Mary Scanlon—to be fair to her and to lift the matter out of the party political—is to find a way that means that in Scotland we have the ability to achieve the survival of the dignity and respect that is secured by all the people around the country who work in the Remploy factories. They have had that dignity and respect for decades in the past, and we want them to have it for decades to come. I am cautiously optimistic that we can achieve that, and I am cautiously optimistic for one reason alone. Over the past few months, I have had the opportunity of meeting and speaking to some of the workers in the factories in Fife that I visited—I look forward to visiting more of the factories that I have not yet had the chance to visit—and I found, without exception, some of the hardest-working and most committed and determined individuals that I have met in any workforce in any office or factory throughout the land. They produce first-rate products that are valued and commercially profitable if they get the right support, which they have not been getting. We will make determined efforts to provide them with the ability to continue to use our powers in public sector procurement and our influence with the private sector to persuade companies to emulate the magnificent act of PSN, which is now part of the Wood Group, in displaying a moral sense in its intervention in Glencraft, which Richard Baker, Lewis Macdonald, Mark McDonald and many others rightly praised. I think that we can do for other companies what the Wood Group has done for Glencraft. I am cautiously optimistic that we can see the survival of the businesses in places such as Cowdenbeath, Leven, Clydebank, Stirling and Dundee. Following this debate, I will devote all my efforts to that objective, with, I hope, the support of all parties in the chamber.

Thank you very much, Presiding Officer. I am delighted to secure this debate on business tourism and I am pleased to see the cross-party recognition of the importance of the motion. In the spirit of consensus, let me say at the outset that we intend to accept the Labour amendment, but with two points of clarification, the first of which is that Aberdeen City Council has agreed to waive the accumulated £26.2 million that is referred to in the amendment. We believe that provision may have been made for that, but that it is not yet paid for. Secondly, the claim with regard to the number of business tourism delegates who travel to Glasgow should refer to international delegates. However, with those two points, on which I hope that we can agree, clarified, we are delighted to support the Labour amendment. Business tourism is extremely important to Scotland. The meetings, incentives, conferences and events—MICE—market is hugely important for Scotland. It is on track to be a £1 billion industry each year. I can assure members that the Scottish Government is wholly committed to the success of business tourism. Scotland, for example, is the only country in the United Kingdom to have a team—VisitScotland’s business tourism unit—dedicated to the MICE market. The purpose of the debate is to allow all parties to discuss business tourism as a key part of one of the priority sectors in the Scottish economy and our economic strategy. It also enables us to say a big thank you to all the stakeholders and partners who are involved in making business tourism such a great success. They include Stephen Leckie of Crieff Hydro, who should be somewhere up in the gallery—hi, Stephen; I hope that I am allowed to say that, Presiding Officer. Stephen heads up the Scottish Tourism Alliance and has put a power of work into making it a great success in bringing together the industry. I recommend that more businesses should join the STA, because the more members it has, the stronger its voice will be and the more effective its lobbying will be on some of the most important issues that affect the industry. Business tourism has moved from being perceived as a niche part of Scotland’s overall tourism sector to becoming one of the main focuses of interest, and one that is strongly supported by a wide range of Scotland’s agencies and destinations. There are two reasons for that. The first is the direct economic contribution that business tourism makes. Meetings and conventions of only 500 delegates can deliver an economic impact of £1 million, while a gathering of 5,000 delegates can deliver one of more than £10 million. The second reason is that business tourism showcases our assets to the world, boosts our exports, enhances our reputation and helps to attract inward investment. Business tourism is a key driver of growth and collaboration for Scotland, not least as a kind of bridge between tourism and inward investment. Business tourism is different because it supports a wide range of small, medium and large companies across Scotland that are not necessarily involved in the leisure market. They include conference centres, catering companies, unique venues, charitable status venues, civic venues, academic venues, florists, design agencies, audiovisual companies, and coach and private hire companies; I could go on. In addition, business tourism is less seasonal than leisure tourism. That is a highly significant point. It brings visitors to the country outside the traditional leisure season. Business tourism visitors spend from one and a half to nearly two times more than leisure visitors in local shops, restaurants, bars, taxis and other places. Business tourism visitors have a high propensity to return—an interesting statistic is that 40 per cent of them return to Scotland. Therefore, if we can attract 10 new people to Scotland as business tourists, it is likely that four of them will come back, and they might bring their families. That is another useful benefit of the expansion and success of business tourism. Business tourism, especially the conference and meetings sections, currently makes a strong contribution to the economic vitality of Scotland’s key tourism destinations. It has a particular focus on the cities of Edinburgh, Glasgow, Dundee and Aberdeen, as well as principal resort destinations such as Gleneagles, St Andrews and Perthshire. However, we do not see business tourism as being solely for the larger venues or the cities, even though our cities have a huge amount to offer in their history and heritage, their unique venues and their luxury hotels. A great number of luxury hotels, particularly in the capital city, have had enormous sums invested in them, as I have had the pleasure to see over the past year or so. As I said, business tourism is not just about the cities. The whole of Scotland has a wealth of distinctive venues and top-class accommodation. I have had the pleasure of meeting buyers for corporate events and hospitality on several occasions. It does not tax the investigative powers of a Sherlock Holmes to detect that I have been at more than a few business dinners over the past wee while—duty calls. I have done that in the service of the nation. I am departing from my script slightly. In the course of fulfilling that duty, I have had the great pleasure of meeting visitors from many countries, as well as members of august bodies such as the Professional Convention Management Association, which brings together people who organise the most important and most lucrative conferences and conventions in the world, and Trailblazers. I have met people who arrange the most lucrative incentive holidays for large companies such as Allianz of Austria; I attended one such event in the Signet library. It is clear that they look for something unique—an event or a venue that Scotland can offer that money alone cannot buy. We are committed to spreading the benefits of that across Scotland. It is a key segmentation of the market and one in which an urban location is not necessarily an advantage, or the sole advantage. The Scottish Government will provide a response to the points that were made in the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee’s report on the winning years that was published on Monday, but it is timeous that paragraph 29 of that report states that the committee wants to ensure that rural areas benefit from tourism as well as the major cities. I heard the convener of that committee opining to that effect on Radio Scotland a day or so ago, and we endorse that point.

There are a variety of priorities. Conference managers want to have top-class venues. They want to have splendid hotels and good food and drink. They receive those from Scotland and we have received some outstanding testimonials to that effect. They also want certainty and predictability—like every other person who makes a deal, they want to get what they pay for. They do not want to be taken advantage of; they want to pay a reasonable price and get excellent value for that price. As a further response to Margo MacDonald’s question, I will read out some of the testimonials about Scotland from some of the global buyers from the very visits that I described earlier. One of the global buyers said about a visit: “This was the best trip I have been on in 25 years in this business”. Another one said: “For me it has not only been a great experience but an holistic one. I enjoyed the country, the facilities, the activities, the food, the ambience, the group—awesome.” Those testimonials are praise indeed for Scotland. Turning to the conference bid fund, the Scottish Government listened to the industry and recognised the value that business tourism brings. We heard the industry’s calls about the need to be even more competitive on a global level. That is why we launched the conference bid fund in March 2012. That fund is providing £2 million over three years to match fund bids for major conferences for key sectors. VisitScotland, to which much praise is due for the work that it has done, including the work done by the business tourism unit that is headed by Neil Brownlee, estimates that 18 conferences have been secured thus far with the conference bid fund. Those 18 conferences are estimated to have an economic impact of £56 million between 2013 and 2020, with a VisitScotland conference bid fund spend of £527,000.

In a minute. I cannot think of many uses to which taxpayers’ money have been put that have seen such returns. The total return to the public purse for every £1 spent—and I have £1 here—is £53, so the £1 coin that I am holding in my hand has been joined by 52 others as a result of the overall success of the fund.

Christine Grahame is absolutely right—as I have already alluded to, the successful fund applications to the bid fund have largely been in Glasgow and Edinburgh, although other locations have benefited, including St Andrews and Dundee. I totally agree with her—this is a key message from the debate and I hope to develop it with all members contributing—that we want every part of Scotland to benefit from the bid fund. We can have conferences, events, associations and meetings in every part of Scotland. They need not involve thousands of delegates; they can involve a small number. The bid fund is for all of Scotland, and one of the key purposes of this debate is to get that message across and to get all members, across all the parties, to take that message across Scotland.

I am happy to agree that we want to do more to spread information about the fund. That is why I travelled recently to Aberdeen, which, as Labour’s amendment says, has had success. I met Barney Crockett there. I will meet colleagues in Edinburgh and engage with colleagues in local government in many parts of Scotland to pursue the matter. Margo MacDonald is absolutely right: we need to extend information about the fund. After all, it is relatively new: it was launched only in March. Part of the purpose of the debate is to promulgate information about its success. I am not claiming any particular great credit for that; the credit goes to the people who organise, arrange and secure the conferences and put in a power of work. In particular, I pay tribute to Scott Taylor of Glasgow City Marketing Bureau and his team; John Sharkey of the Scottish Exhibition and Conference Centre and his team; Hans Rissmann OBE of the Edinburgh International Conference Centre; Lucy Bird of Marketing Edinburgh; the chambers of commerce, which play a great role; my friend Gordon Matheson of Glasgow City Council, with whom I have worked closely on these matters; Amanda McMillan of Glasgow airport, who will roll out the red carpet for conference leaders; and those in universities who play a key role in bringing many conferences to Scotland. People who work in the royal colleges have influence and can persuade their colleagues in that type of organisation that Edinburgh, Glasgow and other places would be great locations for them to meet, celebrate and discuss. I have not covered everything that I meant to cover—I have eight to 12 pages that we will leave for another time. Members: Aw! I am sorry to disappoint members. I very much look forward to the debate, and have pleasure in moving the motion. I move, That the Parliament recognises that the Scottish tourism industry delivers over £2.9 billion annually to the Scottish gross value added; welcomes the contribution made to this achievement by the business tourism sector; acknowledges the efforts made by the VisitScotland’s Ambassador Programme to boost Scotland’s profile across the world; notes that, in addition to the direct economic impact from conferences and events, they also enhance Scotland’s credentials as a place to invest, study, live, work and visit again; further notes the successes to date in winning additional events with the Conference Bid Fund, and encourages stakeholders of all sizes to make greater use of the match-funding available from the Conference Bid Fund to win even further business for Scotland.

John Mason is a mathematician, so I should have realised that he would pick up what others failed to spot. The 53:1 return takes account of match funding from other partners, including Glasgow City Council.

I have thoroughly enjoyed this excellent and useful debate, which will help to promote a better understanding around the country of business tourism and the bid fund, and I am extremely grateful to every member who has taken part. I will try to do justice to members and address specific points but, as is my wont, I undertake to write to those who have made specific calls for information. If I fail to do so, they should chivvy me, raise a few points of order or whatever to ensure that I do not neglect their utterances and demands. Ken Macintosh rightly suggested that we need to instil in young people the idea that they can have an excellent career in tourism. Indeed, Margaret McCulloch pointed out that it should, as in France, be regarded as a profession. I endorse both sentiments and cite the excellent example of the good work of the East Lothian Hospitality and Tourism Academy, which held a reception in the Parliament and whose achievements I have since had the chance to learn more about at an event attended by many college representatives. We certainly appreciate that work, which is helping to achieve the aims that have been described. Mary Scanlon quite rightly highlighted the success that has been achieved in Inverness. A few weeks ago, I attended a flagship buyer event called Scotland means business, at which buyers have a speed-dating session with many of our visitor attractions. That event will be held in Inverness next year, and I hope that Mary Scanlon and I can have a little private date then. That said, I should not use mere flattery to neglect or ignore the member’s ever-persistent pursuit of our website’s apparent defects in identifying walks in the Highlands and Islands. I am determined to get to the very bottom of this—believe me, I am going to sort this one oot, particularly as I am off to Orkney tomorrow. I was very pleased to hear Margaret McCulloch’s praise for VisitLanarkshire. I met Stephen Balfour at the recent Scotland means business event and the member is right to say that VisitLanarkshire itself represents a fine example of partnership. Duncan McNeil highlighted the use of the quayside in Greenock and Inverclyde, and the extraordinary success that his constituents, partners, local authorities and others have achieved with the cruise industry and the 60,000 people who pass through there every year. I recently sent a letter of support to Richard Alexander, chair of CruiseScotland, in which I asked what we could do to help it secure further business in the north American market. This is truly a Scottish success story. All around Scotland from Orkney to Greenock to Leith, our ports and harbours are being used for the cruise industry in ways that we would never have expected, even a decade ago, and it is great that they are also being used for other purposes such as renewables. Tavish Scott raised the issue of the air discount scheme, on which he and Liam McArthur have campaigned valiantly. I hope that members will bear with me, because I am not absolutely sure of the details of this. Nevertheless, because Mr Scott has raised the matter in a very straightforward and appropriate way, I undertake to look into the matter. My understanding from a note that I have been given is that it was not the intention for the scheme to extend to business-related travel—it was a scheme for individuals—but if I am wrong I will put that right. In any event, I will look into the issue further and write to Mr Scott about it. As always, Christine Grahame made an interesting speech. No one can accuse Christine Grahame of being anyone’s patsy; she is most certainly a woman of independent mind. As she said, I have visited her part of Scotland—the Borders—on a few occasions recently, and I recognise that the people there face a number of difficulties. We are on the case, and VisitScotland is aware of the situation. I recently had the pleasure of visiting Traquair house. At 9.30 in the morning, I had the pleasure of sampling the newly brewed Jacobite ale—thereby no doubt transgressing some Scottish Government health advice—and I must say that it was very good. I know that Traquair house also holds the Shakespeare festival. We hear a lot from Christine Grahame about the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune aimed towards her constituency and constituents, so it is absolutely right that she raises the points that she does. Murdo Fraser made a number of good points about the importance of the conference market and business tourism to places furth of the central belt and to the fine city of Perth in particular. He mentioned the success of the city’s halls and, as he pointed out, we recently had a conference in Perth concert hall that was pleasant, enjoyable and successful from everyone’s perspective. I also recall that Murdo Fraser mentioned the Pitlochry Festival Theatre. I had the pleasure of attending an event there on Sunday, when I had the opportunity of meeting people from Scotland’s finest bed and breakfasts and listening to their concerns, which we take very seriously. There is a sense in Scotland that the difficulties in the tourism sector are faced perhaps more in rural and island areas than in the cities. We are very much aware of that issue, and we are keen to work with all members to address it. There were perhaps three recurring issues that pervaded the debate, and I will touch on them before concluding. First, there was the issue of the divide between cities and rural areas in relation to business tourism. I think that we have all agreed that there is more potential for growing business tourism all over Scotland, both urban and rural. Although I cannot reveal the details now as the bids are subject to commercial confidentiality, I can advise members that there are a number of bids to the bid fund from rural areas, and I would be surprised if none of them was successful. I believe that we can all do much more to promote to our local authorities the success of the fund. I am certainly keen to do that. When I meet councillors from around Scotland, I often have no idea which party they are from, if any, and frankly I am not especially interested, because what we want to do is to make things happen, to promote the economy and to see every part of Scotland benefiting from business tourism.

The fund is available for three years. It will be committed to various conferences that are won between now and the end of the decade—and, in one case, beyond. The money will not have to be paid until much nearer or at the time of the conference in question. We shall have to see how the fund performs. Currently, about £500,000 or £600,000 has been committed after a relatively short period, and we will keep the situation closely under review. Thus far, the success of the fund is at a notional return to the public sector of 53:1, as I pointed out gently—or perhaps not gently—to members earlier. As many members, not just from the Scottish National Party, have been kind enough to point out during the debate, that is a terrific success for Scotland. I am grateful to all the members who recognise that that is the case. It is something that we should build on, as there can be far greater things yet to come. We are looking closely at how we can build on the success. The other themes raised included transport links. I do not think that I have time to go into all of them, but suffice it to say that almost all the points raised are of a serious nature and we are either pursuing them now or will pursue them in due course. The M74 extension has transformed connectivity in Glasgow. The Aberdeen western peripheral route will now go ahead and thereby solve a long-standing and very serious problem in Aberdeen. The third theme related to the costs imposed by VAT, APD and fuel duty. Many members highlighted that these are extremely challenging times for both Governments and businesses, and they were right to highlight those issues. Presiding Officer, do I have much time left?

Bringing my remarks to a conclusion, I thank all members who took part for a very consensual debate. However, as Murdo Fraser pointed out, the real thanks and praise should go to all those who run conference facilities, who organise conferences, who bring business tourists to this country and who participate in the success of this venture. They are now working in partnership together more successfully, I think, than at any time in Scotland’s history—I have to say that Glasgow is ahead of the rest of the country in that regard—and that close partnership working is delivering enormous business tourism success for Scotland. Perhaps even more important than the monetary return is that those efforts are creating a hugely positive image of Scotland for all those visitors who come here—a worldwide image. Given that 40 per cent of those who come here will come back, the more conferences that we can win at home and from abroad, and the more we see business tourism take off—not only in our cities, but in rural Scotland and in our islands—the more success we will see in not only our tourism business, but our industry, our inward investment and our country as a whole. I am extremely indebted to the leadership shown by Mike Cantlay and Malcolm Roughead at VisitScotland and to all their staff. On behalf of the Scottish Government—and, I believe, the Scottish Parliament—I thank them for all their efforts. The best, I think, is yet to come.

I welcome the opportunity to set out the Scottish Government’s position on air passenger duty. We welcome the support of Scotland’s four main airports for the devolution of air passenger duty. As the Minister for Energy, Enterprise and Tourism, I recently had the opportunity to meet separately and at length the chief executives of Edinburgh and Glasgow airports, and I am scheduled to have a formal meeting with Derek Provan of Aberdeen airport in the new year. As the motion makes clear, we have seen the worst recession in living memory, which has impacted on tourism in Scotland. However, the gross value-added figures from 2008 onwards have shown an encouraging rise to the current annual figure of £2.9 billion. We have also seen welcome growth in both domestic and international passenger numbers in the past 12 months. That record of success is hugely appreciated, but it is unfortunate that APD has prevented us from being even more successful. That is the global context, and 2012 is the first year for which the United Nations World Tourism Organisation has predicted that there will be 1 billion tourism arrivals around the globe. For the first time in the history of the planet, 1,000 million people will be able to enjoy a holiday, something that all of us here and our families have probably taken for granted. That figure is expected to grow to 1,800 million by 2030, almost doubling in a relatively short time. Scotland, for all our manifold attractions, is in competition with the rest of the world for each and every one of those potential customers. Therefore, I hope that it can be agreed by all sides on this debate that our competitive stance is a key factor, not just in attracting an increasing share of the burgeoning global market, but in retaining the business that we have already won, which the industry across Scotland, from the bed and breakfasts to large hotels and visitor attractions, has worked so hard to achieve over the years with the quality of the offering that it has provided. There is a propensity for 40 per cent of business tourists to return to Scotland—that is, there is a 40 per cent likelihood that a business tourist who comes to Scotland will come back. Therefore, the importance of bringing new people to see Scotland for the first time cannot be overstated. Air passenger duty is a heavy cost on our tourism offering in Scotland. The York Aviation research is clear that APD is the most expensive aviation duty in Europe. It is estimated that the increases in APD rates since 2007, plus those projected through to 2016, will result in a loss of 2.1 million passengers to Scotland’s main airports every year. A stark illustration of the effect of the APD burden is that because of it, together with other burdens such as VAT and taxes on petrol and diesel, the United Kingdom as a whole, despite the excellence of our offerings, facilities and infrastructure, is rated by the World Economic Forum as the 134th least competitive country in tourism from a list of 137.

I am not in the blame game. I hope that we can put party politics aside and recognise that this is a serious issue and one where it would be better if we had control in Scotland. I was encouraged by Michael Moore’s remarks when he said that the matter should be devolved to Scotland, and I was encouraged by Charles Kennedy’s remarks when he pointed out the damage that he believes it has caused. I hope that, cross-party, we can recognise that, beyond peradventure, APD is playing a significant part in that statistic. I hope that that means that we can move on.

I believe that the report makes it clear that APD plays a very substantial role, and it goes beyond that to quantify the impact. The statistics are projections; they are one view and nobody is saying that there can be perfection about them, but Mr Rennie has asked a question so I will give this answer. The estimated loss of passengers because of the increases in APD rates from 2007 to 2016 is 2.1 million. Frankly, that is a shocking statistic. The economic loss to tourism is £210 million. We really cannot afford to suffer losses of that order as a result of being able to be singled out in the European Union as having APD rates that are so much higher than those in other countries. Since Mr Rennie opened the door, I may as well give him some statistical analysis. These are highly relevant figures because we are competing with these countries for tourists. Long-haul aviation tax rates in economy are €35 in Austria, €42 in Germany, €3 in Ireland and €113 in the UK. The maximum rate of aviation tax for any class is €35 in Austria, €3 in Ireland, €5 in Italy and €226 in the UK. The last time I noticed, the difficulties faced by peoples in Europe affected all EU states. I do not understand how other EU states that face economic challenges—just as the UK does—are able to offer minute levels of APD in comparison with the rates applicable in the UK. I look forward to Mr Rennie’s explanation of that in his speech. In looking at the options for APD, we will of course assess the carbon emission implications of our proposals in the same way as we will assess the financial implications.

I am not sure how much time I have got left, Presiding Officer.

Well, okay.

I am happy to stand by the First Minister’s comments. From memory, I think he made them on 12 September. He pointed out to Mr Harvie that we shall be assessing the environmental impacts, as we are assessing the economic impacts. He also pointed out something that most of us accept: the real impact on emissions is from people taking several flights, because the more that aircraft land and take off, the greater proportion of fuel they use. Our policy and desire is to have fewer flights, more direct flights and fewer short-hop flights. By having them, we will, I hope, manage to please Mr Harvie. That is a high objective and ambition, but I hope that Mr Harvie agrees with the point that I have made. Direct flights will make it easier to attract business tourism to our country and to increase our share of that vital market. When airlines—flag carriers in particular—look to crucial direct routes, they are keen to consider the economic potential of the linked cities. That is why we should remember that airports whose operations are currently harmed by APD are far more than places that people shuffle into and out of. Airports invest substantially in their amenities for passengers and the surrounding infrastructure for business. They are major employers in areas, both directly and indirectly. For example, Glasgow airport not only employs around 420 staff directly; if we add in contractors and service providers, the figure rises to 4,500. Glasgow airport has estimated that it supports 7,500 jobs across Scotland. That underscores the importance of Glasgow airport and all our other airports to the whole economy.

I said that we would rather see more long-haul and direct flights and fewer short flights, not a total diminution in the number of flights. I hope that we all want more direct routes to Scotland. I do not know what the Tories’ policy is, because Ruth Davidson wants to scrap APD. That is the pledge that she made, and I will wait with interest to see whether it will be supported by the Conservatives in the Scottish Parliament today. If it is, how on earth will they obtemper that pledge, as they do not want the power in question to be passed to the Scottish Parliament and their colleagues down in the coalition Government at Westminster have uttered not a single intention even to cut the rise in APD, never mind scrapping it? Therefore, I do not think that we will take any lessons on the matter from the Conservative Party in Scotland. To conclude, the Scottish Government has been clear that air passenger duty should be devolved as soon as possible. The Calman commission recommended its devolution in June 2009. It is extremely frustrating that the UK Government has still not seen fit to act on that recommendation, and it is interesting and significant that the airports in Scotland believe that APD should be devolved. They believe that, I think, not simply because they know that we support it, but because they feel—I hope that they feel—that the political mood in Scotland is more conducive to a more sympathetic result for them across parties. I sincerely hope that that will be evident this afternoon. By devolving air passenger duty to Northern Ireland, the UK Government has clearly recognised that a one-size-fits-all policy does not work. It does not reflect the inherent differences in the UK aviation sector or the challenges that face our airports, our passengers’ needs, or what Scotland needs to compete on a global stage. I move, That the Parliament notes with concern the recent report by York Aviation on behalf of Aberdeen, Edinburgh and Glasgow airports regarding the impact in Scotland of rises in the UK Government’s air passenger duty (APD); particularly notes that rates for short-haul services have increased by around 160% since 2007, with long-haul rates increasing by up to 360% over the same period and further increases planned, at a time when Scotland and the rest of the UK have been experiencing one of the worst recessions in living memory; further notes that APD is the most expensive aviation duty in Europe and that increases in rates since 2007 and those projected through to 2016 are estimated to result in a loss of 2.1 million passengers to Scotland’s main airports per year and that, as a consequence, by 2016 £210 million less will be spent in Scotland per year by inbound visitors; also notes that direct flights are more environmentally efficient than the multi-stop journeys via overseas hub airports that APD currently incentivises; believes that the only way to properly support the ambitions of Scotland’s aviation industry, the needs of passengers and the growth of Scotland’s economy is for APD to be devolved to Scotland, as has happened in large measure in Northern Ireland, and that this should take place as soon as possible, and further believes that, as a measure to provide some immediate respite to the aviation industry, passengers and businesses, the UK Government should announce a freeze in APD levels.

Does the member accept that action has been taken? An example is the establishment of the Inverness to Amsterdam route, which has been hugely welcomed in the north and which received marketing assistance that did not breach the EU rules. Does the member therefore accept that the Government has, with its partners, taken positive action?

We have heard a lot from Mr Johnstone about why he thinks that we are wrong. Will he explain what the Scottish Conservative policy on APD is? Is it the policy that Ruth Davidson set out—namely, that APD should be scrapped?

We believe that, as a matter of practice, there should be no further increase in APD as planned. Does Willie Rennie share that view?

I appreciate much of what Gavin Brown says and the tone in which he says it. Perhaps he can explain one thing for me. Do the Scottish Conservatives believe that, at the very least, there should be a freeze in APD?

I am supportive of the thrust of Elaine Murray’s argument. Does she agree that if we had the power to reduce APD in Scotland, we would have a competitive advantage that would better enable us to win long-haul flights to places such as China?

We would get the revenue straight away.

The member will be aware that in October the First Minister announced a commitment of £4.3 million from the national renewables infrastructure fund for the Hunterston offshore wind test centre. Once fully operational, the facility—which is also benefiting from a £15 million investment from SSE—will be capable of hosting three full-scale wind turbines designed for offshore deployment.

Initial work is going ahead and we expect the project to proceed relatively swiftly. I praise Ayrshire economic partnership for its work. That work, and the work of others, is contributing to the fact that renewable energy in Scotland now supports 11,000 jobs—more than in the whisky industry. The potential to develop offshore wind, wave and tidal energy could see Scotland leading the world renewable energy industry in that respect, with the possibility of 5,000 turbine manufacturing jobs in Scotland.

I would be happy to correspond with the member about that case. We have very close engagement in community renewables schemes, and recently we have had two conferences in that respect. We have a target of creating 500MW from community renewables schemes, which would generate £2,400 million of community benefit for communities all over Scotland. That would make a massive contribution to economic development in rural and island Scotland.

We are raising energy productivity in Scotland in line with our purpose to increase sustainable economic growth by spending around a quarter of a billion pounds over the spending review period on fuel poverty and energy efficiency. Our energy saving Scotland advice network continues to provide support to households and small businesses on all aspects of energy efficiency. From April next year we will bring together business energy, resource and water efficiency into a single integrated resource-efficient Scotland programme. It will provide intensive support to help small and medium-size enterprises reduce overheads through improved energy, material resource and water efficiency.

Scotland’s oil and gas resources are still absolutely massive, of course, and worth £1.5 trillion. An additional 1 per cent of extraction above the current average will lead to £22,000 million of tax revenue if our policies are pursued. I agree that cutting our energy usage is sensible and necessary, and we are totally committed to that. We are also developing a national retrofit programme, using Scottish Government funding of £65 million a year, to lever in resources from energy companies in the private sector, and others, to create a fund of around £200 million a year to improve energy efficiency in our homes and help address fuel poverty.

Entirely fortuitously, I spent the morning at a conference that took place at my behest to bring together developers and communities. I am delighted to say that there are more than 3,400 such programmes throughout Scotland and that communities all over Scotland are benefiting from these moves. Indeed, my good friend Stephen Hagan from the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities told me that the island of Westray has received enough money to allow two young men to purchase a fishing boat. The money from renewable energy in Scotland is helping to create jobs in Scotland’s rural and island communities—and the best is yet to come.

The Scottish Government is consulting on expanded sustainability criteria for the renewables obligation Scotland, including new and more stringent limits on carbon emissions from dedicated biomass and biomass combined heat and power stations.

Yes, I would.

The member makes a reasonable point. The consultation proposals—I stress that it is a consultation, so, by definition, we have not prejudged any outcome—suggest a different approach from that which I believe is being proposed down south. We have proposed that a 10MW threshold should apply to the use of biomass to produce only electricity and that, above that threshold, the biomass plants should be capable of providing electricity and heat. In reaching that view, which we have put forward for consultation, we have taken account in particular of the views of all members of this chamber who have put them to me, including Mr Biagi, and those of the traditional timber sawmilling sector, which has pointed out that timber is a finite resource, that it has a call on it, which we recognise, and that the sector provides a great deal of employment in many rural communities.

On 1 November, I met Frank Mitchell, from Scottish Power Energy Networks, who chairs the energy skills action group, to discuss a range of issues including investment in the transmission and distribution network of southern Scotland. Planned investment by Scottish Power Energy Networks over the next 10 years amounts to £2,600 million pounds, which will see the creation of up to 1,500 jobs in Scotland. Early indications are that that investment programme will create further employment, with approximately 450 new directly associated jobs being needed, and many other opportunities locally. Additionally, through Skills Development Scotland, we are supporting Scottish Power and Dumfries and Galloway College in order to develop specialist training provision to meet the expected demand for trained linesmen in that area.

That is entirely right. It is the case that the renewable energy policies of Scotland have led to the certainty that we will see investment in not only the south of Scotland but the north of Scotland on a massive scale. Members will be aware of this morning’s press release from Scottish and Southern Energy, which states that SSE could potentially make an investment of “£5-10bn in the Highlands and Islands alone, across its energy networks”. Because of—and only because of—the certainty and clarity of our renewable energy policy in Scotland, we will see untold, unprecedented and unparalleled benefits for this country for the next several decades. [Interruption.]

The Scottish Government will do everything that it can through its partnership action for continuing employment—PACE—initiative to help those employees of Freshlink who are facing redundancy. Through providing a tailored package of skills development and employability support, PACE aims to minimise the time that people affected by redundancy are out of work. Delivery of PACE support is led by Skills Development Scotland, with partners that include the Department for Work and Pensions and Glasgow City Council. I will visit the Freshlink factory on Friday with Councillor McAveety and PACE officials. We will meet employee representatives and the management of the company to discuss the tailored package of support for employees that our local Glasgow PACE team stands ready to deliver.

Yes, I can. John Mason is aware of that because he, Drew Smith, Margaret Curran, Councillor McAveety, Bailie Liz Cameron and I all worked on the stakeholder group that met on four separate occasions. The First Minister himself chaired the last stakeholder meeting. I can advise members that the offer that was made to the company to retain its presence in Scotland was at the maximum allowable level for regional selective assistance. That was accepted by all stakeholders from different parties who worked together to try to persuade the company to stay in Glasgow. Unfortunately, those efforts were unsuccessful, but that was not because of the offer, which was at the absolute maximum. To answer John Mason’s other question, we recognise that Clyde Gateway does excellent work, which will most certainly continue with our support.

It certainly will. The plant is expected to close completely in early 2013. Both myself and Councillor Frank McAveety, with whom—as John Mason knows—I worked very closely in co-chairing the group, will be present. We will certainly have a dialogue with the management of the company to ensure that its full support is provided in respect of the PACE activities. That full support and attitude of full co-operation are extremely important in ensuring that the PACE activity is as efficacious as possible. That is one of several reasons why I will visit the factory and speak to the management on Friday.

The company’s decision that it was not prepared to accept the package that had been offered was made in the course of last week. I would have to check precisely when, because I do not wish inadvertently to mislead Drew Smith. However, it is reasonable to say that the company was fully aware of all elements of the package, including the offer that would have involved a renewable energy scheme. I think that the company understood the nature of the offer and was interested in it but—as Drew Smith knows—its argument was that the perceived gap between the cost of remaining in Glasgow and providing new premises and the costs that it would incur by switching production to Yorkshire was too large. I think that everybody accepts that those were the reasons that the taskforce gave and that it continued to give. To answer absolutely Drew Smith’s second question, I say that the company was fully aware of the nature of the offer—the offer that, of course, Glasgow City Council contributed to and worked extremely closely on. I record my thanks to every single member of the taskforce, including people from the city council, and the workforce representatives, many of whom will, sadly, lose their jobs. Every offer and every effort will be pursued to ensure that those who are made redundant—the Glasgow workforce—find other jobs. I am comforted by the fact that of those who have received PACE support in the past, nearly three quarters have gone on to find alternative employment. That is a high figure. It is a good figure; it is acknowledgement of the quality of all the components of support that the PACE team provides. Its full contribution, with all the stakeholders that work with it, will be devoted to securing every effort to help those who are losing their jobs to find other jobs. We have some time in which to do that, so I assure Drew Smith and all other members that all urgency will be devoted to meeting that objective.

I thank Adam Ingram for bringing this most interesting topic before the parliamentary chamber and commencing the debate with such a vivid picture of the achievements and life of William Murdoch. I also thank all members who participated in the debate for adding to that picture. As we heard, William Murdoch was born in the Ayrshire village of Lugar. I understand that he is still greatly celebrated in the town of Redruth in Cornwall, which holds an annual Murdoch day in June. He was an extraordinary man of remarkable insight and wide-ranging achievements. We owe a debt—not for the first time—to Kenneth Gibson in particular for pointing out how wide-ranging those achievements were. Mr Murdoch’s achievements included the steam engine and beer clarifying—a quite extraordinary width of achievement—but he is perhaps most widely recognised for his work producing coal gas and inventing the first domestic gas lighting system. In 1792, Mr Murdoch first began experimenting with coal to produce gas and, through his hard work, innovation and genius, discovered the best method for quality gas production. He designed the system for transporting, storing and purifying gas and using it for lighting. That invention truly transformed the world. It led the way for the gas industry’s massive contribution to civilisation. Where would we be without it? We would not have the heat and light that we take for granted. The motion welcomes the celebrations surrounding the 200th anniversary of the gas industry. Mark McDonald alluded to the fact that he is hosting an event this evening at which we can come together and mark the successes of that bicentenary. I hope that it is relevant—primarily because of the first sentence of the motion—for me to talk a little about the gas industry. The oil and gas industry supports around 440,000 jobs in the United Kingdom and 200,000 jobs in Scotland, and has generated almost £300,000 million in tax revenue at today’s prices. I recently had the opportunity to visit the St Fergus gas terminal. I took a tour of the site and visited the control room that monitors and controls the flow of gas from three companies—Total, Shell and Apache—into the national transmission system, which is the motorway pipeline that transports natural gas around the country. I hope that it is also relevant to point out that the oil and gas strategy that the First Minister launched in May sets out a clear support plan of which William Murdoch would, I hope, have approved. The plan recognises that we want to maximise recovery of oil and gas reserves so that they are not wasted by lying unexploited in the seabed. We want to raise the rate of exploitation from 40 per cent, as 60 per cent is currently wasted. It is surely not green to waste any product, whether it is water, food or fuel, and it is green to maximise the recovery of our oil and gas reserves. I will throw an interesting statistic into the debate, which William Murdoch paved the way for us to achieve: for every 1 per cent of extra oil and gas that we can recover, the tax take is £22,000 million. The ingenuity that William Murdoch displayed is shown by many other Scots in expanding the scope of our gas industry. For example, I had the pleasure of meeting a gentleman from Shetland called Ian McKinnon when I visited Houston in April this year. He is now at the forefront of a company that started from an incubator unit in Houston that Scottish Development International set up, and he is en route to turning over millions of dollars in the shale gas industry. He was able to increase the efficacy and value of shale gas that is recovered by managing the waste solutions, which shows that Scottish engineers are continuing the tradition of ingenuity. We are on the verge—we hope—of seeing in Scotland the beginning of a carbon capture and storage industry that will allow us to extract the carbon emissions from coal and gas power production and enable us to achieve European Union emissions targets. CCS plans can potentially be applied to the Peterhead project, which is a joint venture between Scottish and Southern Energy and Shell. A 340 MW post-combustion capture is to be retrofitted to the existing 1180 MW combined cycle gas turbine power station at Peterhead, subject of course to a planning application that will be considered in due course. There, again, the gas industry is set—we hope—to play a leading role in this country. Without William Murdoch’s invention, we would not perhaps be where we are now. Gas continues to play a massive part in our economy. The industry in Scotland is hugely successful. The National Grid plays an important role in keeping the lights on, in relation to security of supply in the United Kingdom. I am glad that representatives from the National Grid will attend this evening’s event, including Mike Calviou, the director of transmission, and Duncan Birt, whom I met earlier today. It is right to mark the achievements of the gas industry in Scotland as well as the extraordinarily inventive mind and works of William Murdoch. We have also had interesting little diversions into the notable success of Angus and Ayrshire—in fact, there seems to be some sort of unofficial competition going on about which of those two esteemed counties produced more inventors. I am sure that Mr Dey and Mr Gibson will carry on that competition at some later date. I conclude by paying tribute to William Murdoch. Mr Ingram mentioned that Mr Murdoch was not a man who bothered to seek for himself credit for the many inventions that he gave the world. Ronald Reagan once said that it is amazing what you can achieve in life if you do not mind who gets the credit. Perhaps that comment can be applied to William Murdoch—a great Scot, and the Scot who lit the world. Meeting closed at 17:40.

Such investment benefits the economy, businesses and society.

I thank Stewart Stevenson for his question, to which the answer is yes, it will. We are delighted at the very warm welcome that the EDGE fund has received across the business and public sector. For example, Sir Tom Hunter said: “This is a huge boost for entrepreneurs in Scotland”. Sir Willie Haughey has said: “This scheme is something that Scotland has been crying out for. I have no doubt that this support for start-up businesses will increase the success rate.” In response to Mr Stevenson’s question, the fund will indeed make awards to businesses judged most capable of delivering jobs and growth.

Small businesses are the backbone of the rural economy. The small business bonus scheme assists nearly 2,200 premises in Angus, and more than 200 business start-ups in Angus had help from the business gateway last year.

The small business bonus has been a lifeline for businesses in Scotland, each of which can make savings of up to £4,500 this year, which is £3,000 more than their counterparts south of the border. Last year, 89,087 businesses received help, which is up 4,000 on the previous year. I entirely agree with Graeme Dey’s proposition that we all have a responsibility to use local shops or we risk losing them. We have the responsibility and pleasure of shopping locally in our constituencies, so the answer is in our hands or, perhaps more accurately, in our wallets.

The Scottish Government announced plans to develop a Scottish energy skills academy within the budget statement on 20 September. We are currently working with relevant stakeholders—including those from industry, colleges, universities, skills bodies and the enterprise agencies—to develop the new academy.

I am pleased that the Labour Party welcomes the academy. I am grateful for that, because it is a really important venture for Scotland. The additional funding has been £3.25 million. The sensible course, which is how we plan to proceed, is to have detailed discussions with all the relevant stakeholders from industry, colleges, universities and the enterprise agencies about how the project is taken forward. To respond directly to Richard Baker’s point about additional numbers, however, I point out that we have already ring fenced 500 of our 25,000 modern apprenticeship starts for energy every year, and fairly recently we committed a further £2 million—that is, prior to the skills academy—to support an additional 1,000 flexible training places from the new energy skills challenge fund. Finally, we have provided funding of £1.9 million for the academic year to support an additional 300 funded university places in the science, technology, engineering and mathematics—STEM—topics. Those three actions prior to the announcement about the skills academy show that we are seeking to rise to the challenge of the second major oil opportunity for this country.

I have had a great many discussions with the majority of the leading and many of the small and medium-sized enterprise players in the oil and gas sector that are delivering such enormous success in the city of Aberdeen and furth of Aberdeen. Those discussions will continue and we will work closely with, for example, OPITO and Oil & Gas UK. The main thing as we take forward this exciting new initiative is to ensure that we proceed with the maximum buy-in, the maximum support and the maximum deliberation and consideration about how best we can meet not just the enormous challenge but the gigantic opportunities that face this country, given the oil opportunity that is ahead of us, and particularly the opportunities that it will bring for young people.

I am delighted that Mary Scanlon has raised that point, which is absolutely apposite. I know that Maureen Watt has championed the issue on many occasions as well, and she continues to do so. There is massive scope for the oil industry to employ more of the female half of the population. Companies such as Shell have already taken a number of steps to encourage females to enter the oil and gas industry. I also point out that, compared with Scotland’s first oil opportunity in the 1970s, a far greater proportion of jobs in the oil and gas sector are not offshore but on land, in an office. They involve top-quality, world-beating design work in relation to subsea development, and females are already playing a major part in that. We want more women in the oil and gas industry in Scotland.

Lewis Macdonald raises an apposite point. The PricewaterhouseCoopers report identified that 120,000 jobs will be required to be filled in the next 10 years. I point out that that figure includes the replacement of people who will retire, which takes us up to nearly 100,000. Broadly speaking, the number of additional jobs is 20,000. We need to study the report further; that is not a criticism—it would be sensible to do that. I am just delighted that the Labour Party in Scotland realises the huge opportunity that we have in this country to harness the huge wealth and opportunities that will flow from our massive oil and gas resources. I am delighted that it supports the work that we are doing thereanent.

I congratulate Liam McArthur on securing a debate on an issue that is of concern to a large number of people throughout Scotland and, indeed, the UK. I am grateful to all members who have participated in the debate from all the parties represented in the chamber this evening. I echo and endorse their explanations of the nature of nuisance calls and the problems that they cause. It must be acknowledged that the problems are mostly of a minor nuisance nature but, as many members have pointed out, in some cases such calls can be a much more serious matter. As many members have said, individuals have been encouraged by very persuasive people to part with money to enter into contracts that are plainly onerous, unnecessary, unwanted and unwise. I have encountered that situation, and such contracts are extremely difficult to unravel—even if the law is on the person’s side—after the ink is dry on the contract or, rather, the deal is done over the phone. Such calls can cause real hardship, especially for senior citizens, for whom these ostensibly plausible calls are of particular concern, especially those senior citizens who are alone and perhaps welcome human contact. The act of defrauding people in that situation is particularly to be deplored. Members have made their points very well. I think that we will all agree that not everyone is as stroppy as the Dey family has openly boasted about being. Not everyone has the resilience of character to resist—as Mary Scanlon revealed that she did—the blandishments of Mr Connery. As many members have rightly pointed out, the legislative power over the matter rests with the Westminster Parliament. The Data Protection Act 1998 and the Privacy and Electronic Communications (EC Directive) Regulations 2003 are the most relevant pieces of legislation. The Ministry of Justice south of the border has policy responsibility for the 1998 act and the Department for Culture, Media and Sport has responsibility for the 2003 regulations. Both pieces of legislation are, in fact, administered and enforced by the Information Commissioner’s Office, for which the Ministry of Justice is the sponsor department. The powers of the ICO are drawn from the 1998 act. To avoid any doubt about the matter, I should point out that the Scottish Information Commissioner has no responsibility for the issue. The ICO in England is accountable to Westminster. It is fair and useful to point out that the ICO has powers to take formal action against those who breach the 1998 act and the 2003 regulations. The powers include the ability to conduct audits, to serve an enforcement to compel an organisation to take action to bring about compliance with the 1998 act, and to serve a civil monetary penalty up to a maximum of £500,000. The ICO can prosecute those who commit criminal offences under the 1998 act, and it reports to Parliament under section 52(2). Some members mentioned unsolicited text messages, which the regulations also cover. Prior consent is required to send such messages, unless a consumer has provided their mobile telephone number when purchasing a product or a service. When signing a contract, many of us take care to tick the box to say that we do not wish to receive calls. That is sensible; otherwise, one is bombarded.

We all have the power to raise awareness. By securing the debate, Liam McArthur has served that purpose, and all of us have done that by participating. We can and do convey messages. The debate will help with that end. I am delighted to join people in recognising the excellent work that the Sunday Post has done. As far as I am aware, it has—more than any other newspaper—taken up and run with the issue. I have with me a copy of the Sunday Post that I will share with members, as I enjoyed reading it earlier. The front page says: “Wrong Number: 650 Million Silent Calls A Year Just One Firm Fined”. That is probably enough to show the Sunday Post that we all recognise that it has done excellent work, as we would expect from the foremost family newspaper in this country. The Sunday Post is to be praised for taking up an issue. An awful lot of the time, we feel that the press are unduly negative or are—heaven forfend—focusing on politicians’ misdeeds. In this case, a newspaper has taken up and run with a campaign. We can have more success from the campaign. I am pleased to note that the Information Commissioner’s Office announced yesterday that it is set to issue two penalties that will total more than £250,000 to two illegal marketeers that are responsible for distributing millions of spam texts. We all agree that such action is required to stamp out such behaviour. I understand that the ICO also intends to publish a list of the most complained-about companies in order to name and shame them. We recognise the legitimate role for companies to market their services. As the enterprise minister, I do not want to impede or prevent the legitimate marketing of good products—that would be wrong and a balance must be struck. However, the action that the ICO has announced is welcomed by everybody who is involved in the debate. Exemplary fines are one of the most effective measures to tackle the problem. I welcome the debate and I thank all members for their speeches. We would like to have the powers in Scotland to tackle the issue more effectively, but we recognise that the authorities down south are taking steps. Rather than be churlish about that or score points, we welcome such powers. We would like to see more swift action. I will arrange for the Official Report of the debate to be sent to the relevant UK ministers, with a letter from me, to draw attention to the fact that the debate has reflected well the concern of the public about such matters north of the border, which is also felt south of the border. Meeting closed at 17:39.

Due to parliamentary business, the meeting of the Remploy stakeholder group was short. We discussed the announcement of the closure of the Aberdeen and Edinburgh sites and concern was raised about the delay to the announcement on the Springburn site. I have raised those concerns with Esther McVey, the recently appointed Minister for Disabled People in the United Kingdom Government. Ms McVey has agreed to meet MSPs on 22 October, and I hope that all MSPs who have raised concerns about the matter with me in recent months will attend that meeting.

I recognise the great interest that Patricia Ferguson has taken in the matter. She has pursued it in the chamber and elsewhere in the Parliament. I also recognise the similarly appropriate actions by MSPs from many other parties. The matter is extremely serious, as Patricia Ferguson said. Yes—I will fully take into account all practical suggestions of the sort that Patricia Ferguson has made. I point out to members, however, that legal responsibility for the conduct of the disposal of Remploy factories rests not with me but with the UK Government. This morning, I spoke to Esther McVey, who is the successor to Maria Miller. We are straining every sinew to ensure that there is a future for the Remploy workers in Springburn. I believe that there should be a future for the work that is done there to be carried on in a financially viable way. For those reasons, I am grateful for the support of members of all parties and their willingness to work constructively towards securing that end, albeit that, unfortunately, we do not have the powers that we would wish to have to take charge of the matter ourselves.

I recognise Claire Adamson’s concern and the work that she has done on the matter. Partnership action for continuing employment is delivering support to the employees, with personal caseworkers assessing their needs and developing specialist, tailored support to help them in their search for work. I am considering whether any other support can be offered. I remain hopeful that those who wish to find new employment will be able to do so. It is my wish, subject to permission from the relevant authorities, that the Parliament should debate all the matters in relation to Remploy. It would be best for the debate to take place after Esther McVey has visited the Parliament on 22 October and met all MSPs with an interest in the matter. That would be the appropriate way to allow all the many points that have been raised to be properly aired and considered in this Parliament.

We welcome the progress that is being made to reduce the scale of charges that mainland generators in Scotland face, but we still face a fundamental problem for Scotland’s islands, and we continue to press the UK Government for a solution. As the First Minister highlighted at First Minister’s question time last week, we have proposed to the UK Government a cross-government group that involves the Scottish and UK Governments and the three island councils. That would work to assess and resolve the issue of island charging and help to unlock the massive renewables potential from the northern isles, the Western Isles and the seas that surround them.

I agree that the Scottish islands are at a huge disadvantage. We want the offshore renewables potential to succeed in England, as we do in Scotland, but unfortunately the financial penalties for Scotland’s islands are massive at present. We are determined to find a successful solution, and I hope that we will be able to convene the cross-government group so that the Scottish Government, the UK Government and the islands can meet to find a solution to the problem, which has remained unresolved for far too long.

Mary Scanlon is correct that matters currently rest with the CUSC panel. It is also correct to point out that, after that process of expert analysis is concluded, the UK Government has powers under section 185 of the Energy Act 2004 to put a cap on the amount of charges for the islands or for individual island groups. We have already urged the UK Government to look very seriously indeed at using those powers to ensure that the very place in the UK that has the greatest potential to harness renewable energy is able to do so, and is not thwarted and prevented from so doing by an unfair charges regime that has taken far too long to resolve.

The Scottish Government acknowledges the challenges that many Scots are facing in relation to their personal finances, and recognises the valuable role that credit unions play in providing financial services to a wide range of customers. We will continue to work with representatives of credit unions to ensure that we are doing all we can to support and promote them.

Everyone in all parties will agree that credit unions perform an invaluable service in Scotland. The country has 113 credit unions, which have a total of 250,000 members and £200 million of savings, £170 million of which is currently out on loan. They play a massive role and we all want them to play a greater role. We are very keen to work with the United Kingdom Government to ensure that they do even more to help the enormous number of people in Scotland who at the moment are under very difficult financial pressure.

Credit unions have raised a number of issues with us. The forthcoming bankruptcy bill will seek to address many of those. In the interim, however, the Accountant in Bankruptcy will continue to engage with the credit unions to ensure the best return for all creditors, including credit unions themselves, by balancing the rights and needs of those in debt with the rights and needs of creditors and businesses.

I share the member’s concern and disappointment at the latest United Kingdom Government announcement that the Remploy factories in Aberdeen and Edinburgh are to close. It follows, of course, last month’s closure of the Remploy factory in Netherton, Wishaw, which Clare Adamson mentioned. I am deeply concerned at the impact of the move on the employees affected and their families and we will look to support them in every way possible. Through our partnership action for continuing employment initiative, we have been working with the Department for Work and Pensions to deliver a package of support that is tailored to meet the needs of the employees who face redundancy. A disability employment adviser will be appointed to provide support to each employee.

Yes, I am happy to meet Mark McDonald and other MSPs. It would be sensible to ensure that we have every appropriate opportunity to allow that to happen and, given that a great many MSPs are concerned about this issue, I will ensure that it happens for all of them. The Remploy board’s decision to reject the submitted bid is hugely disappointing and indeed puts in doubt the future of the staff on the site. There have been discussions with social enterprises and Aberdeen City Council about the creation of a social enterprise hub in the city and I hope that that work will continue. I am, of course, happy to meet all relevant parties to take the matter forward.

I have engaged extensively with social enterprise bodies and have had four meetings of the stakeholder group, which includes the trade union representatives, to whom I pay tribute for their dedicated work on behalf of the workforce. As Lewis Macdonald and other members know, the responsibility for this and the power in relation to the sale of these Remploy factories rest with the DWP. At the very outset, I indicated clearly, verbally and in writing, to Maria Miller—and just this morning to Esther McVey—that the Scottish Government did not approve or support the path that we have embarked on and did not believe it to be correct or fair. However, as the Scottish Government, we have a responsibility to play the cards as they fall and we will do everything within our power in the interests of employees, whether they are in Aberdeen, Netherton, Glasgow, Edinburgh or any other part of Scotland, to ensure that they receive every support they can receive.

The Scottish Government’s central objective is to build sustainable economic growth. To that end, the small business bonus scheme assisted approximately 1,500 businesses throughout East Ayrshire last year, and the business gateway supported approximately 280 new start-ups.

Willie Coffey is right to point out that these difficult economic times make life hard for small businesses. That is why the small business bonus—which has helped some 85,000 businesses in Scotland with a maximum of £4,500 assistance per business per annum, which is £3,000 more than is available in England—has been of such massive help to small businesses throughout the country. In fact, as a former small business owner and manager, I cannot think of any policy that has done more to help small businesses since 1707.

The renewables obligation, or RO, is a vital component of our efforts to increase Scotland’s renewable energy production. The mechanism is established, it is understood and it is effective. The value of the RO to Scotland, the powers that it has exercised on behalf of and with the approval of this Parliament, and the need to respect and protect those powers, are subjects that I will return to during this afternoon’s debate. Since 2002, successive Administrations have used the devolved powers to support new generation across Scotland; from onshore wind and hydro to—much more recently—offshore wind, wave and tidal projects. The devolved powers have always been used carefully and responsibly. We know and understand the value that our stakeholders place on having as much consistency as possible across the United Kingdom. However, where Scotland’s needs or priorities have differed from the rest of the UK, the RO in Scotland has reflected that difference. None of that is done lightly; any change to the mechanism, particularly in Scotland alone, is based on open dialogue with all interested parties and on a careful appreciation of the implications. I am therefore pleased to announce to Parliament that the Scottish Government is today publishing its decisions on changes to the renewables obligation Scotland mechanism. This follows a detailed consultation on the proposals, which closed earlier this year. Our review raised a wide range of issues, and sought views on some significant changes to support under the RO, as well as to the criteria against which eligibility for that support is judged. The changes that we are proposing—which will be subject to the approval of Parliament—are as follows. First, we listened carefully to the many responses on a proposed reduction to hydro generation. Scotland has a proud world-renowned heritage in that form of power generation. Although the stations that can still be built may be on a smaller scale, their contribution to our energy mix and renewables targets remains important. We accept that there are, facing the development of such capacity in Scotland, conditions and challenges that increase the associated investment risk. For that reason, we have decided to retain the hydro renewables obligation certificate band at its current level. Our consultation also raised the issue of extra support for innovative offshore wind. Scotland has huge offshore wind generation potential, but much of that resource is located where there are far greater water depths than is the case elsewhere around the UK. It is therefore considerably more challenging and costly to exploit. A new band for testing floating turbines and other innovative offshore wind deployment in deep waters would help to tap that resource and bring costs down, and would create benefits for Scotland. We will work on the detailed structure and design of such a band and will, in due course, consult on our proposal. On biomass generation, we asked for views on whether to restrict or remove support for large-scale wood-fuelled electricity-only and combined heat and power stations. A significant majority responded in favour of such restrictions, although others argued that biomass generation has an important role to play in meeting Scotland’s electricity and heat targets. I accept that role, but I also believe that our concerns over competition for the finite supply of wood and our concerns about the strategic value of biomass heat over electricity merit the introduction of a new control. I am therefore proposing that wood-fuelled stations with a total installed capacity that is greater than 10MW and that are not good quality combined heat and power stations will not be eligible for ROCs after 2013. That will not apply to stations that commission after April 2013, but which received consent or planning permission before our consultation was published. Our vision for biomass is clear: it is for small and sustainable stations that are close to available local supplies and operate as efficiently as possible. In July, we announced our intention to reduce support for onshore wind by 10 per cent. I am happy to confirm that decision today, and that the band will remain at that level for the review period; that is, until 2017. As with all technologies, we will revisit that band should evidence on costs emerge that would justify such a course of action. However, we made clear in July that evidence to support a further reduction does not exist at present, and I know that that clarity was helpful in concentrating the minds of the United Kingdom Government to reach the same conclusion. For all other areas, we intend to make the same changes that will apply across the rest of the UK. Those include proposed levels of support, subject to a further short consultation, for higher levels of co-firing with biomass. That support will provide an option for the continued and cleaner operation of the large thermal generation at Longannet power station, and is therefore of strategic value. We will be looking at ways to ensure that the biomass fuel for such a venture is sourced from sustainable imports. Our desire for as consistent an approach as possible means that we will also be consulting shortly in the same terms as the UK Government on issues including solar photovoltaic banding, additional cost controls for biomass generation and the future of certain types of small-scale generation technology under the RO. This has been a lengthy process, but it was born of necessity. The changes in question will guide the development of renewables generation across Scotland for the next four years. It has been vital that the Scottish Government listen closely, consider carefully and decide appropriately. I am confident that we have done so, and that the RO will continue to deliver new generation at an affordable cost to consumers. I am happy to take questions regarding today’s announcement.

I am grateful for the support of Rhoda Grant and her Labour colleagues. I pay tribute in particular to Sarah Boyack for the work that she has done on the issue over the years. The matter has been taken forward on a largely cross-party basis, which is to be welcomed. On the point about tariffs for the islands, that is more a matter for debate later in the afternoon. If my doing so is acceptable, I will not comment on it at the moment, but will address it in my remarks in the ensuing debate, because it is not within the ambit of the announcement on ROCs that I have made. Rhoda Grant asked about the timescale for the consultation on the proposed banding for innovative offshore wind development. It is our intention that a consultation paper be issued in October, and that the parties that are most directly involved in considering those potential innovative solutions will be consulted, as will the whole renewables sector and all those who are involved in bringing down the costs of offshore wind developments, whether fixed or floating. In particular, I hope that that will be of interest to companies and organisations that might be considering developing, or working with Scotland-based companies to develop, some of the ports and harbours around our shores. I should not really get into specifics, but there is at least one well-known port—I see that Rhoda Grant is thinking of it as I speak—that might benefit from such development. We want to develop our renewables potential and create jobs in Scottish ports, towns, harbours and islands. That will be aided by the work that we want to do together with Rhoda Grant and her colleagues to take forward a specific Scottish solution to encouraging the innovative technology that is appropriate for deeper waters. Therefore, solutions that are not fixed to the seabed must be explored fully. We will take forward that work in the timescale that I have indicated.

I welcome the comments of Rhoda Grant— Members: Mary Scanlon! I am pleased that in Scotland and south of the border, we have maintained support for onshore wind. On the points about timing, in my statement I referred to the fact that applications that have already received planning permission will be treated differently, which is fair because they were made before the current consultation—they got in under the radar, if you like. That is the correct approach. Mary Scanlon is perfectly correct with regard to biomass. We have listened carefully to the interests of the timber sector in the broadest sense. A huge number of people are employed in that sector in Scotland, particularly in the area that she and I jointly represent. Leading Scottish companies such as BSW Timber Group—or Brownlie’s—in Boat of Garten and Fort William; John Gordon & Son in Nairn; and James Jones & Sons in Forres and many sawmills throughout the country have been concerned that very large-scale biomass for electricity only would consume much of the limited and finite source of timber in Scotland, and in so doing would receive a subsidy that is not available to sawmills. Of course, as Mary Scanlon well knows, Norbord has a substantial plant near Inverness. It is fair to say that we listened very carefully indeed to the views of those companies and to the views of the other respondees to the consultation—there were 139 in total. We also listened carefully to the views of members of all parties who wrote to us to raise environmental concerns about large-scale biomass for electricity only. We took all that into account; the preponderance of views that were expressed to us from representatives and in the consultation said that a 10MW cap is appropriate. That will still allow smaller-scale community biomass schemes to operate successfully in the Highlands. Mary Scanlon and I know that many companies operate well in that field. It is reasonable to mention HWEnergy, which has installed about 200 biomass boilers. I know that because I kind of opened one at the Black Isle Brewery last Friday.

Mike MacKenzie is absolutely right to draw attention to the importance of wave and tidal generation. I had great pleasure in attending with my United Kingdom counterpart, Greg Barker, the opening of the marine energy park in the Pentland Firth and Orkney waters, in the summer. I am therefore particularly pleased that the review outcome for wave and tidal generation is extremely positive on both sides of the border and that the UK is following Scotland’s lead in setting higher ROC levels—5 ROCs up to a 35MW project cap in respect of wave and 2 ROCs above the cap. The scale and potential of wave and tidal energy in Scotland are truly immense. The developments that are being contemplated are world beating. If they go ahead, they will be massive projects with huge potential to help sustain and foster job creation in many of the most rural areas and the islands. It is a massive opportunity and I am delighted that, together with our UK colleagues, we have achieved the result of incentivising those forms of energy. Scotland has a huge proportion of the potential of wave and tidal power—not just here, but in the whole of Europe.

I should not express a view about specific projects. That is not dodging the question, it is because projects may, with respect to planning, come before ministers. We heard earlier today about the ministerial code, so I adopt those remarks. In response to the question about why the Scottish Government continues to support energy from waste incineration under the RO, the RO has only ever supported energy from waste stations that capture and use the heat that is produced. That will remain the case. The fact that we have decided to do that reflects the responses that we received on the matter throughout the consultation. We also bear in mind—as Ken Macintosh will appreciate—that without that support those stations would, in fact, still be built, but many of them would operate much less efficiently. For those reasons we decided, following consultation, to maintain support at the current level of 1 ROC.

Angus MacDonald is right—I cannot and will not comment on specific proposals that may come before me or my colleagues. I have already explained in my response to Mary Scanlon the general thinking behind our decision on biomass, and putting the cap at 10MW. However, the cap applies to projects that involve producing electricity only—in other words, using biomass only to generate electricity—and does not apply where there is combined heat and power. Where there is combined heat and power and the heat can be used for industrial purposes to perhaps assist a large user of heat to defray and reduce energy bills, that provides an additional valuable contribution—potentially extremely valuable—especially to companies that currently have very high bills and which would seek thereby to reduce them. We intend to hold a brief consultation on the precise details. That is a chance for stakeholders to put final arguments on, for example, the size of the cap. The 10MW capacity ceiling was based on work that was conducted for us by the Forestry Commission’s forest research, North Energy and Xero Energy Ltd. I will try to follow the Presiding Officer’s admonition, so the last thing that I will say is that the proposal does not put an automatic halt to any project. Generators of any size can still proceed if they can—as they should—capture and use the heat.

I am pleased that there is such a consensus in support of maintaining onshore wind support at 0.9 ROCs. Claudia Beamish is correct to say that there will be closure of the band to new projects at or below 5MW from 1 April 2013. However, that will be subject to detailed consultation. I hope that that consultation paper, too, will be issued around October—I say “around October” rather than “in October”, because that is slightly different. We need to take, I say with respect, a little time to make absolutely sure—I think for some of the reasons to which Claudia Beamish alludes—that we get this right, because the overriding concern is to continue to incentivise support for smaller projects.

Solar PV has potential in Scotland, although perhaps not on a commercial scale. In common with the rest of the UK, solar PV installations have qualified for a band of 2 ROCs since 2009 and our proposal had been that that level of support be maintained. However, we have also noted the evidence that the UK Government has gathered on the changing picture on PV generation costs, which suggests that those have fallen considerably, which means that we need to look again at the ROC banding for the technology. It is reasonable for me to say that when I made my previous remarks in the chamber about the UK Government’s decision to reduce support for solar PV, I did so in a moderate way. I acknowledged at the time that there was a rationale for the decision to reduce that support, albeit that the method that the UK Government had chosen to use to implement it was—shall we say?—somewhat controversial. Revised proposals for solar PV will form part of a consultation that the Scottish Government will publish this autumn.

I believe and hope that people throughout the UK recognise that investor confidence and certainty is a sine qua non of developing our renewables sector. Today’s statement further demonstrates the Scottish Government’s credentials for providing the necessary support—using the levers that are in our power—to progress the developments that can arise only if that confidence exists. Renewable electricity generation in Scotland stood at nearly 14,000GWh at the end of 2011, and there was nearly 5GW of installed renewable electricity capacity. Statistics show that renewable electricity generation in Scotland reached nearly 5GWh for the first quarter of 2012, which was an increase of 45 per cent on the first quarter of 2011. That shows that we are already achieving success and need to move on to the next stage.

The decision on the closure of bands to new projects at or below 5MW was taken having had regard to consultation responses. However, the decision will be the subject of a consultation precisely because we want to receive representations from interested parties. I would be delighted to receive representations from Iain Gray or from his constituents’ businesses, and we will consider them very carefully.

Yes, I do. I acknowledge that Rob Gibson has been campaigning on the issue for many decades—if I may put it thus—and he is quite right to say that we need to bring down the cost of offshore wind. I am delighted that Andrew Jamieson has been appointed to head up the offshore renewable energy catapult. He will be tasked with reducing costs and with progressing the work that has already been done. That is excellent news. Only 10 years ago, the largest capacity for a turbine was about 800kW; it is now 10 times that. Great progress has been made on efficiency, and I have no doubt that the costs will come down further. The expertise of the offshore oil and gas sector—from companies such as the Wood Group—will greatly assist us in finding engineering solutions to drive down costs.

I welcome the first part of Patrick Harvie’s remarks. The Scottish Government’s announcement today reflects many genuine concerns from a great many people. Many of those people are outwith the industry and have nothing to do with it at all, but are simply concerned about the effect of megaplants on the environment in their part of Scotland. The statement also reflects the interests of respondents to the consultation. I should not comment on whether planning consent will be given to any particular plants.

I have every confidence that we will operate efficiently in conjunction with our friends south of the border.

I begin by saying that I was sorry to see the departure of Charles Hendry as Minister of State at the Department of Energy and Climate Change—my counterpart in the United Kingdom Government. I have worked closely with Charles Hendry, who has, it is fair to say, been a friend of Scotland. He was assiduous in attending with me, and co-hosting on some occasions, important events in Scotland with regard to renewable energy. When I heard the news that he was, as he put it, retreating to the back benches—he was too gentlemanly to say whether a jump or a push was involved—I was in Aberdeen, and it is fair to say that his reputation among the oil and gas sector was extremely high. This is the first appropriate opportunity that I have had to say that we had an excellent working relationship in Scotland, in London and in Brussels. I welcome the opportunity to bring the UK Government’s proposals to reform the electricity market back to the Scottish Parliament at an important stage in their development. The Scottish Parliament first debated the proposals in January 2011. Much has happened since then, including a Department of Energy and Climate Change white paper and a draft UK energy bill to implement the reforms. Throughout, Scottish ministers have worked closely and constructively with our UK counterparts to shape the reforms to ensure that they work for both Scotland and the UK. For us, the message is simple. The Scottish energy sector is essential to our present and future social, environmental, industrial and economic wellbeing and growth. The reforms will be fundamental to the energy sector in both Scotland and the rest of the UK. It is accepted on all sides that we must get them right and we must deliver them together. The scale of generation and transmission investment that is needed to deliver a sustainable low-carbon generating future is significant. Up to £110 billion is likely to be required by 2020—more than double the current rate of investment. The electricity market reform programme sets out to address that challenge by incentivising investment in low-carbon generation while ensuring security of supply in a cost-effective way. We now know broadly how the reforms are intended to operate, so it is right that, today, members have an opportunity to scrutinise the proposals. Over the past few years, we have seen real and tangible investment confidence in the energy sector in Scotland, and our ambitious renewable energy and climate change targets are playing a key part in creating and sustaining that confidence. The design of our electricity market and regulatory frameworks is also key to investor confidence. That is why we are working closely with our UK counterparts for closer integration of the UK electricity markets in the years ahead. We must maintain momentum across our energy sector, and to do that we have two priorities—to tackle inequalities in the transmission charging regime and to ensure that the electricity market reform proposals work in ways that help us to realise our energy potential. We remain determined to see real, tangible and enduring reductions in the high transmission charges that generators face in the areas of highest renewable energy resource in Scotland. We continue to work on that.

I am happy to support the Labour amendment, which refers to a “fair and equitable” system. We are currently working on such a system, so I am happy to provide an assurance. Since January, we have put forward a compromise proposal, and we believe that there should be a compromise. In other words, to be explicit, we no longer advocate the postage-stamp, socialised charge for which we originally argued. We have moved from that and recognise that there should be a compromise. Indeed, I am happy to say to Murdo Fraser that we hope to continue to work closely with our Westminster colleagues on the matter. I discussed it with Greg Barker—on the ferry to Orkney, as it happens—and it is under active consideration, as Rhoda Grant knows, by people such as Angus Campbell, the leader of Western Isles Council, and his colleagues, the leaders of Orkney Islands Council and Shetland Islands Council. I have also worked closely with Liam McArthur, Tavish Scott, Dr Alasdair Allan and all the other relevant representatives. We are all determined to find a fair and equitable compromise solution. On that basis, I hope that all parties in the chamber will be able to support the motion and the amendment, which will send out a dignified but nonetheless clear signal that Scotland wishes to go forward together to find a fair solution. I am grateful to have the opportunity to clarify those matters for Murdo Fraser. I turn to the detail of the proposals. Under the reforms, the renewables obligation will be replaced by a new support mechanism, a contract for difference—CFD—to provide long-term price certainty for low-carbon generation. As I outlined a moment ago, the RO is a vital component of our efforts to increase Scotland’s renewable electricity production. The Scottish Parliament has exercised devolved power over the RO judiciously, effectively and successfully to create a strong and effective framework of support. We have targeted that support to reflect Scottish priorities, such as our enormous wave and tidal energy potential. We believe that, properly designed, the CFD market mechanism can work to give similar and effective support for renewables technologies and for carbon capture and storage. However, let me be clear that the CFD must be at least as effective as the current support framework. It must be at least as capable of delivering new industry capacity as well as new jobs. It must also replicate the discretion and flexibility in the RO system to target support where it is needed—what, in the EMR debate in January 2011, Liam McArthur summarised as “Scottish discretion, to capitalise on Scottish strengths.”—[Official Report, 13 January 2011; c 32224.] We are some of the way towards that in the CFD proposals. The Scottish ministers will have, I am pleased to say, a statutory role in the forthcoming UK energy bill, which will set out the design, delivery and operation of the contracts for difference framework. However, more work is needed on how that will operate in practice and how powers similar to those that the Scottish Parliament currently holds can be replicated in the decision making about setting long-term price levels for different types of renewable energy. We are also clear that the Scottish ministers must have a statutory role in the on-going monitoring and governance arrangements for the body that will deliver the CFD, which is National Grid. There is more work to do with our UK counterparts, but we shall continue to work with the UK Government to ensure that our role in those processes is clear and enduring. Of course, we are clear that our support for the proposals is contingent on securing a proper role for the Scottish ministers and the Scottish Parliament in the new arrangements. The other parts of the EMR propose a UK-wide emissions performance standard to cap emissions from unabated fossil fuel plant. Although discussions on the detail continue, we are minded to support UK-wide application of the emissions performance standard at the level set out in the proposals, namely 450g per kilowatt hour. Again, there is more work to do with the UK Government to properly reflect our devolved powers in relation to the application, enforcement and monitoring of the EPS and to ensure that the powers of this Parliament are fully and fairly respected in the forthcoming UK energy bill. The reforms propose a capacity market during the transition to a low-carbon generating mix, by incentivising short-run plant that can come on supply quickly to generate and maintain security of supply and accommodate increased renewable energy on the grid. There is more work to do to understand how that will operate for gas generators in Scotland, while encouraging demand-side response in areas where Scotland has strengths, such as pump-storage hydro. As well as positives in EMR, there are concerns. Industry leaders have made it clear that, to make investment decisions, they need clarity and certainty on support from the Government. On one level, there are arguments that the electricity market reform process has created delays, confusion and uncertainty. SSE has said of EMR: “These proposals are too complex—they are unworkable”. Scottish Power, RWE and others have suggested that we are seeing an investment hiatus because of uncertainty, and the Westminster Energy and Climate Change Committee, which is chaired by Tim Yeo, has been critical of the workability and legality of some of the proposals. The Scottish Government has concerns that there is currently the possibility that EMR may deliver subsidy support for new nuclear power, possibly at the expense of renewables in Scotland. The Scottish Government’s position on new-build nuclear power stations remains clear: we do not propose or favour new nuclear power stations. Major questions exist about the levels of EMR support that may be given to new nuclear build, and there must be more transparency in the support negotiations. The Westminster select committee has echoed those concerns. It has said: “the proposed process for setting the nuclear strike price lacks sufficient transparency” and “could be highly damaging to the low-carbon agenda and ... undermine consumer trust in energy companies.” A possible consequence of the levy control framework within which Her Majesty’s Treasury is pressing DECC to deliver EMR is that new nuclear projects will absorb a significant amount of the overall levy control framework budget at the expense of renewables. We are concerned to ensure that there remains sufficient incentivisation for renewables. In conclusion, the proposals have significant implications for our energy sector and the Parliament’s devolved powers. There are significant opportunities for Scotland, but also significant challenges. EMR must deliver for both Scotland and the rest of the UK a system that does not undermine the huge progress that we have made to date, which supports our ambitions, and which delivers support to the technologies of the future. The Scottish ministers will work ceaselessly to help to achieve that and work constructively with the UK Government to ensure that the proposed reforms support our renewable energy and climate change targets and priorities. I urge members to support us in that vital work. I move, That the Parliament notes the UK Government’s electricity market reform (EMR) proposals; supports the objectives of supporting investment in low-carbon generation, delivering a balanced energy mix and meeting renewable energy and climate change reduction targets while minimising costs to consumers; believes that the reforms must build on Scotland’s strengths and successes, protecting and enhancing industry and investor confidence in renewables, demand-reduction measures and carbon-capture and storage technologies; welcomes the proposals for statutory roles for Scottish ministers in the proposed framework of support for low-carbon generation, in setting the strategic direction of Ofgem and in monitoring and enforcement of the Emissions Performance Standard, and believes that the UK and the Scottish Government should work constructively to deliver a strong, thriving, competitive and integrated electricity market.

I would be delighted to meet Liam McArthur to discuss that issue—I was keen to make that suggestion, but he has taken it from me. I am keen to find some imaginative solutions to that problem, of which I was recently made aware.

I clarify for Iain Gray that the Scottish Government believes that it is important that the capacity mechanism under EMR should support and incentivise storage.

I have thoroughly enjoyed this debate. We have heard a large number of very useful contributions across the chamber and I will try to reply to many of those in a moment. In drafting the motion with others, I set out to try to provide the wording that would allow Parliament to unite, because we have more common ground on this subject than one might think. The debate has illustrated that point, and I am confident that all parties will unite at decision time. I am grateful to members in all parties for the work prior to the debate and their contributions to it. I also wish to make an undertaking and a reflection. The undertaking is that I will ask my officials to study all the contributions, not just in the debate but in the question and answer session on the statement about renewables obligation contracts that preceded it. There were some points from members—such as those made by Claudia Beamish—that I do not think I answered with sufficient clarity earlier and also some contributions to the debate which merit some thought. After all, the purpose of debates in the Parliament is not just to fill the time or just to allow us to express our views; it is also to allow the Government to formulate better policy for the future. The debate will allow us to achieve that and those who have made positive contributions—the vast majority if not all contributions—will do that. Patrick Harvie pointed out that demand reduction is not in the motion, but I think that we all subscribe to it, as does the UK Government. It is not directly relevant to EMR as such, but we are all entirely committed to demand reduction for the reasons that Murdo Fraser and Patrick Harvie gave.

You can and I will. The Scottish Government’s policy on electricity generation is that we should seek to deliver a number of objectives. Our contributions in the debate have illustrated that these are the objectives that we all share. First, there must be a secure source of electricity supply. It must include an element of variety in order to be secure. Secondly, electricity must be affordable for consumers. Thirdly, electricity generation must be largely decarbonised by 2030, for the reasons that Stewart Stevenson so eloquently set out. Finally, it must achieve the greatest possible economic benefits and competitive advantage for Scotland, including opportunities for community ownership and community benefits. Many members set out very clearly the need for more measures to tackle fuel poverty. Mary Scanlon, Rhoda Grant and Claudia Beamish set out the arguments, as did Kevin Stewart and John Wilson. The case was well made. We need to take a variety of measures to tackle fuel poverty, involving the electricity companies, the Government and policy formulation. I will give two examples of how the success in onshore wind power can help to tackle fuel poverty. Some amusement was had at my expense, I think, in Mr. Macintosh’s contribution—I certainly enjoyed it—regarding my very pleasant visit to Hunterston, where I was delighted to open the new centre for education so that young people will be allowed to see how all forms of electricity are generated. It is good for the purposes of education to have knowledge about all techniques, irrespective of who approves or disapproves. I enjoyed my day out in Hunterston. The reason I mention that is that EDF is also behind renewables projects, including the Stornoway wind farm, to which consent was recently granted by moi. [Laughter.] It is, after all, a French company—c’est bon. [Laughter.] I had not actually intended to say that, but there we are—shucks, as they say. According to reports that I have read, the community benefit from that wind farm project will be £2 million a year. Surely that is enough to make serious inroads into tackling fuel poverty in the Western Isles, where, as Dr Alasdair Allan has told me—and as Claudia Beamish argued this afternoon when she referred to rural areas that are off-gas grid—the situation is among the most serious in our country. If that money can be harnessed to tackle fuel poverty, that must be a good thing. Equally, I am told that the combined community benefit from the Shetland Viking project will be between £20 million and £30 million. Of course, it is up to the local people and their representatives to decide how those windfalls are deployed, but surely such projects will have huge advantages and create golden opportunities to tackle fuel poverty in this country once and for all. I commend the speeches on that topic.

That is the sort of intervention that I would have expected from a proto-communist. Up to now, I thought that the Conservatives were in favour of companies making profits. I am afraid to say that I have not studied the EDF balance sheet, but I was pleased to see that its community benefit tariff is close to the £5,000 per megawatt yardstick provided by the Forestry Commission, SSE and RWE. Indeed, I think that we are all pleased about that—well, just about all of us. With regard to storage, I will read Iain Gray’s extremely worthwhile speech and ask my officials, too, to read it. He is absolutely right and, as other members, including Mary Scanlon, to begin with, have mentioned, storage—hydro, in particular—is a perfect complement to wind power, which is intermittent in nature. I am delighted that, in my constituency, Highview Power Storage has installed a compressed liquid nitrogen energy storage system that, in a cross-border partnership, has been manufactured in Inverness and assembled in Slough. In other disciplines, I am pleased to say that an exciting initiative involving hydrogen is taking place in Aberdeen. Our academics and universities, to which Dennis Robertson rightly paid tribute, and indeed our colleges lead the world in the advancement of technology in many renewable energy areas. As an example of the breadth of the work in Scotland on renewables, I will mention Professor Martin Tangney and his work on biofuels. As we move to the close of the debate, I am conscious of the amount of claim and counter-claim over whether wind power is more expensive, so I will go over the facts with the chamber to ensure that we are in agreement. First of all, the renewables obligation cost to the average household is £15 a year, which we estimate will rise to £50 by 2017. On the other hand, between 2004 and 2010, volatile fuel prices from fossil fuels added almost £300 to bills. The canard that onshore wind is more expensive is precisely that. Of course, this is not a pick-and-mix package. The success of onshore wind has led to the rationale behind Ofgem and National Grid’s investment of £7,000 million in improving and strengthening our grid. Without strengthening the grid, there can be no offshore wind, wave or tidal power. Onshore wind power has led to the rationale behind the grid improvements; in turn, that rationale has led to the potential to exploit our wave and tidal energy, which has given us the opportunity to be the world’s pioneer in marine energy. This is no pick-and-mix, and I think that that argument is gradually becoming understood. As President Barack Obama has said, the country that leads the development of new forms of energy will be the country that leads the world economy. That sounds like a good enough ambition for us all to share this evening.

The west of Scotland is promoted throughout VisitScotland’s suite of marketing activity, including on the organisation’s national tourism website, which receives circa 13 million visits annually.

I thank the member for advance notice of the content of his supplementary question. Doors open day gives visitors free access to hundreds of fascinating buildings throughout Scotland that are normally closed to the public, such as the Irn Bru factory, which members may be interested in visiting. The point of the event is to open the doors of buildings that are normally closed to the public. I am advised that Newark castle is already open to the public seven days a week from 1 April to 30 September and that it was for that reason that Historic Scotland decided not to include it in this year’s event. I take the opportunity to recommend that colleagues pay a visit to Newark castle before 30 September.

In the face of United Kingdom Government cuts to the Scottish capital budget of over 30 per cent, the Scottish Government is maximising its capital expenditure to support infrastructure investment and jobs across Scotland. We are switching more than £700 million from resource to capital spending over the spending review period. We are also taking forward a new programme of non-profit distribution investment worth £2,500 million. As a result, total capital spending will be more than 25 per cent higher in 2014-15 than in 2011-12.

We certainly agree and are acutely aware of the difficulties that the construction sector faces across Scotland. Michael McMahon knows that we make every effort to engage with businesses; we will certainly do so in the Terex case since he has raised it in the chamber. I undertake to look personally into that case and to report back to him as quickly as possible. I also engaged with Michael McMahon on the W J Harte case. In that very difficult case, the partnership action for continuing employment response was welcomed by Mr McMahon and the employees who had the opportunity of receiving PACE services. In fact, 38 out of the 48 who attended one of the events said that it could not really have been better, which was a tribute from people who, in a particularly difficult situation, were able to recognise that the PACE service in Scotland has been very good during successive terms of Government. These are very serious matters. We have brought forward a range of construction projects—I do not have time to read out the whole list—but we have transferred money to capital precisely to address the issues that Michael McMahon has fairly raised today.

Scottish ministers and officials are in regular contact with the United Kingdom Government regarding the future of Remploy factories in Scotland. I have been engaged directly in dialogue with Maria Miller, the former UK Minister for Disabled People. Following the UK Cabinet reshuffle, the new minister, Esther McVey, will meet me during a visit to the Scottish Parliament in October. Parallel to that ministerial engagement, I have set up a stakeholder group which includes the Department for Work and Pensions, Remploy, the trade unions GMB and Unite, Scottish Enterprise, Just Enterprise, the voluntary sector, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and partnership action for continuing employment—Scotland’s redundancy support and advice service. The group has met under my chairmanship on three occasions and will meet again on 19 September. It is working with the DWP to ensure the best possible outcomes for Remploy staff.

Bob Doris has raised the issue of Springburn in his constituency and members from all parties have raised the plight of the Remploy workforce. I cannot think of any workforce that is more deserving of our support, or that is more vulnerable, than the Remploy workforce. At all stages of the process, we have made crystal clear our views about the UK Government’s decisions, and we adhere to those views. Our duty now is to do the very best with the situation as it is, rather than as we would prefer it to be. We will continue to do everything possible to assist the workers who are affected in Remploy factories throughout Scotland—not only those who are in phase 1 and who face the prospect of immediate redundancy, but those in other factories whose futures are uncertain. I am sure that we will come back to the issue many times in this chamber in the months ahead.

I am afraid that I am not aware of all those matters. In particular, I am not aware of any detailed proposals having been received, but I say to Patricia Ferguson that I undertake to look into that and at any correspondence that has been received, and to reply as swiftly as possible. Plainly, we will consider seriously any appropriate and workable suggestions for measures that could be undertaken. That is why we work so closely with people who are involved, such as the trade union representatives who sit with other colleagues on the stakeholder group that I have chaired on three occasions, and will chair again on 19 September. We are also looking—my colleague Nicola Sturgeon will pursue this—at ways in which we can assist supported workplaces through local government procurement. That is an area in which we have done sterling work, which I believe offers hope for the future. Finally—albeit that we are not in the driving seat because we are not in charge of the process of trying to ensure that the Remploy factories that face closure have every chance of continuing under new ownership or management—we hope that that can be achieved for as many of the factories as possible. It is a challenging task, but we look forward to working with all members in pursuing it over the very short period of the next few weeks.

In April, I wrote to the UK minister Norman Lamb seeking greater regulation of payday loans and urging the UK Government to consider a cap on interest rates for high-interest and payday lending. Further to that letter, the UK Government has reached an agreement with the industry’s four main trade associations to strengthen the industry’s code of practice.

I am particularly interested in the idea that there is a technology that can detect whether individual potential borrowers already have previous debts. That should be explored. On the proposal for regulation along the lines of regulation in the USA, where payday lending is illegal in 13 states and regulated in 37, we have already raised the idea of a cap with the UK Government. The issue is serious and there are very strong arguments in favour of a cap. I am not persuaded that the UK Government’s approach will be sufficient to address the problem, although I recognise that some progress has been made. Therefore, we will repeat and renew our efforts to regulate payday loans. If only we had the full range of powers in Scotland, we would certainly regulate.

I am honoured and proud to join colleagues in recognising the steelworkers of Scotland and, as other members have done, I thank Clare Adamson for securing the debate, which has been characterised by members describing their connections with the industry. I was particularly struck by John Pentland’s saying that he had spent perhaps the majority of his adult life in the industry. His eloquent contribution plainly informed the debate. I pay homage to the steelworkers who literally built this country, the Commonwealth and the empire. I acknowledge the presence in the gallery of members of the supercounty civic group, who themselves are former steelworkers. As we have heard, many of them have very personal reasons for starting the steelworkers memorial fund. Wherever we go in the world, we are reminded of the reach and the breadth of our steel-making heritage. Although many plaques remind us where the iron and steel that made bridges and buildings came from, there is a dearth of recognition of the men who put their lives at risk working in the harshest of conditions, as we have heard. At that time only men did that work. I thought the section of Clare Adamson’s speech when she alluded to the working conditions of the time was particularly moving. As recently as the mid-1970s, manufacture of steel involved the dangerous production of iron in a blast furnace and then transfer of cold pig iron or liquid iron to an open furnace to be mixed and melted and to be poured, moulded or fabricated. The open furnaces have been replaced by oxygen furnaces. A process that lasted ten hours has been reduced drastically, and along with that—happily—there has been a reduction in the daily risks that face today’s workers.

Nigel Don is correct. The role of the trade unions in achieving the establishment of health and safety legislation across many industries is well documented. The existence of that legislation has enabled us to avoid even greater loss of life. Therefore, that is a debt that we rightly acknowledge tonight. Ravenscraig was western Europe’s largest producer of hot stripped steel, which was processed at Gartcosh. It also produced slab steel for shipbuilding and offshore oil platform construction. As this is the 20th anniversary of the closure of Ravenscraig, which at its height supported 13,000 Lanarkshire jobs, it is fitting that we remember the significant contribution and sacrifices of our steel workers to our economic and social history. The site is now extremely different, of course. I am pleased that we will see Ravenscraig as the country’s first new town in more than 50 years and one of the largest regeneration projects in Europe, covering 450 hectares—an area that is equivalent to 700 football pitches and that is, I am told, twice the size of Monaco. Ravenscraig will become home to more than 10,000 people and is expected to create 12,000 jobs and to attract in excess of £1,200 million of private sector investment over the next 15 to 20 years. That, in itself, is a form of tribute. The creation of a memorial on the site would provide a lasting reminder to the new residents and their families of the important place that Ravenscraig has in our industrial history. I was struck by the number of speeches by members who have personal connections with Ravenscraig, whether through family or through political campaigning and other activity of various types over the years. I am sure that all of us in the chamber will very much welcome the call for recognition of the contribution of the workforce, and for a lasting memorial. Future generations will also—as they should—be able to remember our steelworking heritage. I recommend the Education Scotland website as an excellent resource for anyone, but particularly for any young person who wants to know more about the history of steel making in Scotland. The resource on the website includes a site record of the Ravenscraig steelworks by the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland, which includes digital images, drawings and facts about the mill. Those are a poignant reminder of the size and scope of Ravenscraig, and a reminder of the people who worked there. That website is a form of virtual memorial to the people who worked there for such a long time and who gave so much to Scotland. I pay tribute to the eloquent speeches that members from all parties have made. It is a fitting debate that has been dignified and interesting. I am delighted that we have had the opportunity to discuss the subject and I pay particular thanks to Clare Adamson for bringing the debate to Parliament. I am sure that her grandfather would be proud of her. I am equally sure that the planned memorial, which is to be designed by Andy Scott, will be a fitting tribute to Scotland’s steelworkers. Meeting closed at 17:52.

Scottish Development International has long appreciated the importance of Turkey as a market for Scottish companies. It will continue to work to strengthen trade links with Turkey in sectors where we can add value to both countries. SDI has been pursuing discussions with Turkey’s main oil and gas pipeline contractor and operator, BOTAS, on the possibility of a joint Scottish-Turkish workshop for pipeline-related industries, to be held in Scotland. SDI also plans to lead another energy-focused trade delegation to Turkey in 2013.

Angus MacDonald is absolutely right to highlight the opportunities that exist in Turkey for Scottish companies. I am delighted to say that one of SDI’s leading officials, Hadi Fawzy—whom I have had the pleasure of meeting—has led delegations to Turkey every year and is doing so once again. I wish to ensure that that engagement deepens as the Turkish economy continues to grow and I will encourage SDI to work closely with UKTI and other relevant bodies to ensure that we maximise the opportunities for Scottish companies that wish to engage with that rapidly growing market.

Many of the issues that are identified in the report are reserved to Westminster. The Scottish Government believes that the powers involved—for example, on fuel taxation—should be devolved to the Scottish Parliament, which would allow us to address the issues directly.

Rob Gibson is right. I, too, understand that Highland Council deals with the procurement of diesel as part of the business of running harbours, which is its duty. It does not have a duty to run fuel distribution networks, which are intensely complex, and the council says that fuel may end up being even more costly if it were to undertake that burden. With the news yesterday that the Chief Secretary to the Treasury has announced that fuel tax is to be increased by a further 3p, the burden that is borne by Rob Gibson’s constituents and others throughout Scotland, which is already massive and disproportionate, will increase. According to the table of European Union statistics that I have before me, the tax on diesel in the United Kingdom is the highest in the EU, at 56 per cent. Apparently, Westminster is unable to manage its financial affairs as well as the other 26 EU states are managing theirs.

Two out of five commercial premises in Scotland pay no or low business rates under the small business bonus scheme. Since its introduction by this Government, the scheme has reduced the tax paid as business rates by £420 million. The Scottish Government estimates that the scheme has sustained many thousands of jobs in small and medium-sized businesses throughout the country.

I used to run a small business. If anyone had said then that I could get help to reduce my business rates, I would have known that that was a great thing. It is puzzling that, in its manifesto, the Scottish Labour Party wanted to continue with the small business bonus scheme. Now it appears that it is against the scheme. It is for it and it is against it; it is not sure; it is on the fence. That used to be the prerogative of the Liberal Democrats in Scotland. In Lanarkshire, 6,914 businesses benefit from the scheme. Does the Labour Party want to take that benefit away? We should be told.

It is only 15 weeks since we last debated tourism in the chamber. As the minister with responsibility for tourism, I am delighted to be in a position so soon to report much progress. One benefit of bringing members back to the topic so early is that the key contributions of tourism are fresh in all our minds and I do not need to labour them. The visitor economy contributes over £4 billion of gross value added to the Scottish economy every year. It impacts on many sectors—food and drink, transport, agriculture and retail—and on all areas of the country, urban and rural. Tourism is truly a national industry. It enhances our reputation worldwide and helps us to attract inward investment. The opportunities over the next few years are unsurpassed, and we are hosting globally important events such as the 2014 Ryder cup and the Commonwealth games. Since we last spoke on tourism much has been achieved. We have seen the full-year tourism figures for 2011. I commend tourism businesses across the country for achieving a 9 per cent increase in overnight visitor numbers in challenging economic circumstances. Overnight spend is at its highest since 2007. Day-visitor statistics also look good. Day-visitor data for Scotland was produced for the first time in 2011 and showed that 134 million day-tourist trips were taken in Scotland. In March, recognising the contribution of business visitors, we launched the conference bid fund, which made £2 million available over three years to strengthen bids to bring major conferences to Scotland. In only four months the bid fund, which has received matching contributions from Glasgow City Council, has supported Glasgow City Marketing Bureau and its partners to the tune of £213,500 to compete successfully against other cities, including big hitters such as Tokyo and San Francisco, and bring seven new conferences to Scotland since March. In all, 16,900 extra delegates will visit Scotland, which will bring an expected economic impact of £27 million. That is a return of £63 for every single pound invested from the bid fund. I hope that all members will pay tribute to all those involved in Glasgow City Council, Glasgow City Marketing Bureau, the Scottish Exhibition and Conference Centre and to all their partners and colleagues and celebrate what appears to be the start of something quite exciting with the bid fund. I would be grateful for suggestions from members about how we can extend the benefits of that fund to all parts of Scotland. I would like to see all our cities and all parts of Scotland benefit. I have asked VisitScotland to work with all other destinations to ensure similar success across Scotland. Since March, we have seen the winning years become a reality. Last week, huge crowds turned out to see the Olympic torch and stunning images of the torch in Scotland were broadcast far and wide. On Monday, the world had its first opportunity to see Scotland as depicted in the Disney Pixar film “Brave”, when it premièred in Los Angeles. The First Minister was invited. I am not at all miffed that, as tourism minister, my invitation was not in the post. The red carpet will be rolled out here in Edinburgh when the European première of “Brave” takes place at the end of the month. There will be screenings of the film at a special event in Inverness the following day, to which I have been invited. I hope that Rhoda Grant and David Stewart will also be invited. If not—

There is universal generosity and courtesy. Of course, I hope that Mary Scanlon will also be able to attend. The First Minister yesterday said that my four-year-old daughter will thoroughly enjoy it but that I might find it scary in parts. The chair of VisitScotland recently said that “if VisitScotland were to commission a movie, we could not ask for more than Brave”. I entirely endorse that statement. “Brave” showcases Scotland’s rich history and captures the beauty, nature, magic and humour of Scotland and it is simply the biggest ever film opportunity to get Scotland seen on the worldwide stage. “Brave” is being released in 72 countries and it is anticipated that it will be seen by 200 million people in the United Kingdom and Europe alone. The film has been translated into more than 30 languages, which means that Disney Pixar has had the interesting challenge of finding more than 30 Billy Connolly sound-alikes. I recently visited VisitScotland’s offices in Leith, where I spoke to some of the staff and saw for myself the efforts being made by VisitScotland to convert cinema-goers into visitors to Scotland. Through a combination of Disney’s worldwide reach and VisitScotland’s marketing expertise, we are confident that “Brave” will boost the Scottish economy by £140 million. VisitScotland has also been busy launching a revitalised website promoting Scotland across the world. It has worked hard to iron out initial teething issues and the site has received positive feedback from many quarters. Most important of all, this week I witnessed the tourism industry itself, through the tourism leadership group, launch a new tourism strategy for Scotland. It is a first: a strategy developed for the industry, by the industry. The strategy stresses the importance of industry leadership and participation, of strong leadership in businesses and of all businesses being actively involved in local tourism groups and working together to develop customers’ overall experience. As all members know, of course, many tourism businesses and business leaders are already community leaders, and perhaps they promote their areas with more vigour and enthusiasm than anybody else. The strategy celebrates what has already been done and invokes and invites colleagues to achieve even more. The Scottish Tourism Alliance, which is the industry membership body, will bring all those groups together. It will provide leadership and support, and will monitor progress. The strategy shows how growth will come from turning our assets into top-quality experiences, and notes that all of us at the national, local and business levels must know our customers and their expectations, and act on that knowledge. It is relentlessly focused on the customer and the customer’s needs so that they have a memorable and pleasant visit to this country. I record my sincere thanks to the chair of the tourism leadership group, Stephen Leckie. I think that he is in the chamber somewhere, although I have not spotted him, which is unusual, as he is a person whom it is difficult not to spot.

Excellent. I welcome him and thank him and all his colleagues on the tourism leadership group for their work on the strategy. The strategy was not devised in a few weeks; it is the result of thousands of hours of work and meetings throughout the country, and is a major step forward. As the STA moves into the action planning and delivery phase, our agencies will collaborate closely to ensure that we are all working together. As a starting point, VisitScotland and the enterprise agencies have updated the tourism intelligence Scotland “Knowing our Markets” guide to provide businesses with more information on the markets that are highlighted in the strategy. I will work with ministers on areas such as food and drink; route development, which the Conservatives raised, fairly, in their amendment; broadband infrastructure, which is important; and access to finance for investment. All those areas are highlighted in the strategy. I will also look to the enterprise agencies to do what they can to encourage and support investment in tourism, especially in the accommodation sector, although I acknowledge that that is difficult because of competition law. The development of international trade is a top priority for the Scottish Government. Scottish Development International will continue to develop its overseas activity programme with VisitScotland and will use its extensive expertise and networks on the ground, especially in the international markets that are identified in the strategy. I will look to VisitScotland to further develop genuine partnerships with the tourism industry. That will mean building our campaigns and doing our work not only in the public sector, but with the industry fully engaged and involved in the formulation stage, as it should be if we are to achieve our potential. Some of the levers that would support the industry are in the hands of the UK Government. The Scottish Government continues to make a strong case for the devolution of air passenger duty. Improving our air connectivity is vital for business and in-bound tourism. We wish to use the devolution of APD to better align aviation taxation to Scottish circumstances and incentivise links to Scotland. We will continue to voice our concerns about the high VAT rate that the UK Government is maintaining on hospitality and tourism. The uncompetitive VAT rate compared with the rates of our European competitors places Scotland at a significant disadvantage. Some 24 of the 27 European Union countries have made reductions in their VAT rates for the hospitality and tourism sectors. With the existing burden of VAT and other taxes, the Scottish Government would not support the introduction of new taxes on tourism. I have had discussions with the leadership of the City of Edinburgh Council, which is, we understand, looking at a range of other options to increase revenues from tourism. We support the council in that, but the Scottish Government has been clear from the start that we have no plans to add any new tax burdens on the tourism sector. The UK Government recently sought to impose 20 per cent VAT on the sale of new static caravans, which were previously zero rated. After an excellent meeting with industry stakeholders in a committee room in the Parliament—people involved in the caravan sector throughout the country were involved in that meeting—I wrote to the UK chancellor to set out all the concerns that we heard at it. I am very pleased to say that, following the representations, the UK Government has stepped back from the change. I express to my Conservative colleagues who are in the chamber my genuine appreciation that concerns were listened to and acted on, which are not easy things to do—I do not wish to make light of or play politics with the issue. The rate is now 5 per cent, which is a welcome reduction from 20 per cent. I commend the industry for sustaining growth in difficult times and for its proactive and valuable work in defining a new strategy. We will work harder than ever to secure even greater success for our tourism sector. I urge destinations to make the most of the conference bid fund and I call on the UK Government to give further consideration to the competitiveness of our industry. It is the people who work in the industry who make it succeed. I commend people in tourism all over Scotland for their success and I wish them success in future. I move, That the Parliament recognises the achievements of tourism businesses across Scotland in achieving a 14% increase in overnight visitor revenues in 2011; welcomes the new tourism strategy prepared by the industry, for the industry, which focuses on the importance of industry leadership, the quality that visitors encounter across their whole journey in Scotland and using Scotland’s assets to create the experiences that visitors are looking for; commends the efforts of the industry-led Tourism Leadership Group in developing the strategy and recognises the important role to be played by relevant agencies and non-departmental public bodies in supporting the industry’s strategy; renews calls on the UK Government to play its part by devolving air passenger duty and to consider a reduction of VAT rates for the sector; recognises the enormous opportunity for tourism in Scotland presented by The Winning Years and the Disney/Pixar film, Brave, in particular; congratulates Glasgow on its success in winning several additional conferences with the support of the Conference Bid Fund announced in March 2012, and encourages other destinations in Scotland to use the fund to win further business for Scotland.

I am extremely grateful to Helen Eadie for raising the matter. The work that VisitScotland is doing to allow people with a disability to enjoy a holiday is first class and we are determined to pursue it. I am in total agreement with everything that she has said in that respect.

While recognising that we always wish to do more, would Ken Macintosh agree that the bid fund that we launched in March, working with Glasgow City Council and others, has been a marked success thus far?

I am happy to move swiftly on from Dante’s “Inferno”—not a place that I would like to go to on holiday. The debate has been unexpectedly revelatory—I did not realise, for example, that Dalgety Bay was not included on the weather map. What a disgraceful omission. I am pleased that we have Helen Eadie to make sure that such scandals are swiftly corrected. Nor did I realise until Fiona McLeod mentioned it—and therefore it must be true—that Strathkelvin and Bearsden is in fact a hotbed of radicals and troublemakers. Then we moved on to Dennis Robertson’s speech, where we deradicalised somewhat as we visited Balmoral and the environs. I am pleased—having had the pleasure of hearing Dennis speak on a couple of previous occasions—that we managed to extend the term of this session of Parliament to five years so that there will be sufficient time for him to work his way through all of the manifold attractions in his constituency. There have been great successes in Scotland attributable to the work of many across councils, Governments, parties, the private sector, the social sector and others. Just look at some of the investment that there has been in tourism facilities across Scotland of late. Mr Malik mentioned additional conferences coming to Glasgow—the Scottish hydro arena at the Scottish exhibition and conference centre is a truly exciting development that paves the way for many new events to come to Glasgow. The Edinburgh international conference centre expansion that I had the pleasure of visiting in the company of the redoubtable Hans Rissmann will double the capacity of the EICC and pave the way to even greater success. Then there are the Edinburgh military tattoo stands—my friend Brigadier David Allfrey is in charge now, and a finer, stronger leader you could not find. I am proud to be an ambassador for the tattoo and I hope that all members will take the time, if they can, to visit the tattoo this summer. In addition, there are the Riverside museum—Glasgow’s transport museum—which was also mentioned by Mr Malik; Stirling castle, where I will be dining this evening with the British-Irish Council; the Robert Burns Birthplace museum, which I have visited with my family; and the redevelopment of John o’ Groats, which I had the pleasure of visiting on a ministerial visit and which will transform what has recently become a bit of an eyesore. We have seen a huge amount of investment—I can go on—including investment in the Scottish national portrait gallery and in the national museum of Scotland. Gordon Rintoul was rightly honoured recently for making the national museum of Scotland the most visited tourism attraction in the whole of the UK outside London. Members rightly pointed out that we must not be complacent. I will respond to some of members’ points—I apologise if I do not respond to them all. Helen Eadie is right that we must always seek to have the highest standards and that we should not tolerate lower standards. Across society, we must strive towards that end. However, the visitor experience survey for 2011 showed that 94 per cent of people were satisfied with their visit in Scotland; that 72 per cent were very satisfied indeed; and that 88 per cent would recommend Scotland to others. We would like a 100 per cent rating, but the industry is plainly doing well and serving customers well. Mary Scanlon is right about the importance of walking, hillwalking and climbing, which should not be omitted. I am pleased that VisitScotland has a dedicated walking section on its website as well as several other initiatives on the issue. Rhoda Grant is right that we can do more on eco-tourism. Of the visitors surveyed in 2011, a sizeable number—11 per cent—said that they chose Scotland because it has a good reputation on sustainable tourism. One in 10 people chose to come here precisely because of that. Renewables can enhance the attractions of Scotland. The Cream o’ Galloway visitor centre in Dumfries has 70,000 visitors. Members might have seen this week that Scottish Power has joined the Association of Scottish Visitor Attractions in respect of the visitor attraction at Whitelee wind farm, which has attracted nearly a quarter of a million people, including children, who learn how electricity is generated. I know, because I have visited it myself. Several members went on about whisky quite a lot. I am not sure whether this is revelatory, but I have enjoyed the whisky experience quite a lot, although it was only earlier this month that I visited the Scotch Whisky Experience near Edinburgh castle. What a terrific asset for Scotland that is. For those who have not had the chance to go there, please do, enjoy the experience and wet your thrapple. Mr Malik rightly pointed out concerns, which we share, about the difficulty with getting visas. Helen Eadie mentioned that in relation to east Europeans. On that issue, we are behind President Obama, who said—appropriately enough, it was in Orlando—that the visa application process for visitors from China would be made easier. If one of the most security-conscious countries in the world can recognise the value that the Chinese market offers, we challenge the UK Government to follow suit. Fiona McLeod, Dennis Robertson and Ken Macintosh mentioned the importance of the mountain bike to tourism. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth recently attended the Union Cycliste Internationale world cup event at Aonach Mòr on 10 June, which was supported by EventScotland funding. I know that Mike Matheson participated and went on the course. I can tell members that people have to be a bit of a daredevil to do that, so we even have daredevils among the Scottish ministerial ranks. What a revelation the debate is proving to be. All members have recognised the common sense, leadership and benefits in the recent piece of work by the Scottish Tourism Alliance. It recognises fresh focus and new goals and sets an ambition for the industry, which was devised following long consultation with the industry, to break from the status quo and to achieve an annual visitor spend of between £5.5 billion and £6.5 billion by 2020, which would be an extra £1 billion or more. We cannot support the Conservative or Labour amendments, although that is more in sorrow than in anger, because the debate has been good.

I am just closing. The Labour amendment unfortunately makes a mistake with the year—it says 2016 when it should be 2015. Unfortunately, that would see our ambitions slip, which we do not want to happen. I commend the efforts of Stephen Leckie and his colleagues on the tourism leadership group. The work that Marc Crothall, the chief executive of the STA, will take forward will for the first time ever involve the public and private sectors working in tandem to achieve the enormous success that lies ahead, in the winning years, for this marvellous country of ours.

Such assistance is delivered by the enterprise network and the business gateway, with support from business representative bodies and voluntary organisations. In addition, initiatives such as Entrepreneurial Spark support growth businesses. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth officially opened the Entrepreneurial Spark facility in Tom Hunter’s premises in Dundonald earlier today.

Yes. We want all parts of Scotland to benefit as far as they can. As far as the west of Scotland is concerned, the member will be aware of the major test and demonstration site at Hunterston, which is an excellent example of the benefits that are accruing to the west coast. Recently, at the all-energy conference in Aberdeen, which I attended, the First Minister announced the first national renewables infrastructure fund project, which involves a £1.3 million investment in the 53 hectare Westway industrial site and adjoining dock in Renfrewshire. In addition to that, in the west of Scotland we have a number of successful businesses. A great number of jobs have been created and are being sustained by Scottish and Southern Energy in Glasgow, Scottish Power Renewables in Glasgow, Gamesa in Bellshill, Steel Engineering in Renfrew, Mainstream Renewable Power in Glasgow, Atkins in Glasgow, Gaia-Wind in Glasgow, Gareloch Support Services in Helensburgh and Mott MacDonald in Glasgow. Time does not permit me to add to the list, but there are lots more—and lots more to come.

The subsea sector makes an immense contribution to the Scottish economy. The extraction of oil and gas contributed to nearly £12,000 million of gross value added to the Scottish economy in 2009, and related services contributed a further £2,500 million.

Dennis Robertson is absolutely right. I am aware of his extensive engagement in Westhill in his constituency. The Scottish Government has committed to the funding of 500 modern apprenticeships in energy and climate change each year, half in the oil and gas sector. Last year, the First Minister announced new investment of £2 million to support an additional 1,000 flexible training places. In addition, we work very closely with a number of companies in the subsea sector to create more jobs. Last week, I opened a newly expanded office for FMC Technologies in Bellshill. Yesterday, I visited Oceaneering at Rosyth and heard about its exciting new investment in the subsea sector. Later this afternoon, I will again meet representatives of Subsea 7. There are immense opportunities in the oil and gas sector, which will be around in Scotland for the next 50 or 100 years.

The UK Government is taking forward a wide-ranging review of employment law. Official-level exchanges have confirmed that the Beecroft report was commissioned to contribute to that on-going work and that not all its recommendations are expected to be adopted.

I am struggling to work out which part of my answer was equivocal. It was a perfectly clear, direct answer to the question, which was about discussions. There was no lack of clarity in my response. We are, of course, extremely concerned that employers and employees should be treated fairly and appropriately. We have made known to the UK Government our views on a number of aspects of the report. However, as I said, we understand that some of the proposals are not expected to be adopted.

I am working with a range of partners including Remploy, the Department for Work and Pensions, Scottish Enterprise, Skills Development Scotland and trade unions, to look at how new enterprises could be grown from the affected factories, or to support individuals into new employment. More generally, significant progress has been made in the past year to implement our supported employment framework for disabled people. That includes the development by the Scottish Qualifications Authority of a supported employment qualification, which will help to raise standards in delivery. The qualification will be ready for use in the summer. We have commissioned an independent review of supported businesses, and a reserved framework under article 19 for use by the Scottish public sector is currently out to tender. We anticipate that it will be in place by September.

Yes, I am happy to meet Mr Doris to discuss the matter, and I would be grateful to receive more detail on his concerns, so that we can consider them fully, as is appropriate. The Scottish Government is very concerned about the issue. I have chaired two meetings of stakeholders, most recently on 16 May. I am due to have a teleconference with Maria Miller next week and I will meet her in London on 16 July, to express the concern that is felt across Parliament about the way in which disabled people are being dealt with in this matter.

I, too, am a member of the Law Society of Scotland, albeit as a non-practising solicitor. Amendment 6 would have the effect of barring the keeper from reflecting in the title sheet, when registering a disposition, an inhibition dated later than the date on which the missives were concluded. Murdo Fraser said that the amendment is necessary because of the problem created by section 160 of the 2007 act. The issue is whether section 160 replaces the common-law rule that an inhibition strikes only at voluntary dealings with the inhibited land by a debtor. A sale by a debtor under missives that were concluded before an inhibition was registered is not a voluntary dealing and so is not affected by the inhibition. To be fair, I think that Mr Fraser made that point. However, the amendment does not affect or clarify whether such an inhibition is effective against the disposition. It simply instructs the keeper to act in a certain way, regardless of the underlying legal position. One of the purposes of the bill is to bring registration law into line with property law by, for example, removing the complex structure of bijuralism created by the Land Registration (Scotland) Act 1979. Bijuralism is the term used by the Scottish Law Commission to describe the simultaneous application of two different systems of law: the special rules of registration of title and the ordinary rules of property law. Instead, the bill tries to simplify the position by requiring the land register, where possible, to reflect the property law position. Requiring the keeper to ignore certain inhibitions is undesirable, as it risks reintroducing the confusing principles of bijuralism that the bill seeks to eliminate. In addition, I do not believe that amendment 6 will help conveyancers or those who use the land register for other purposes. Indeed, it may well hinder the conveyancing process. An inhibition or other entry in the register of inhibitions will be effective, or ineffective, as a matter of law, whether or not the keeper notes its existence on the title sheet. To make that change would go some way towards undermining one of the main purposes of the land register: that of keeping relevant information about the title on the title sheet where necessary. The place to deal with section 160 of the 2007 act is in a bill about diligence, not this bill. Part 4 of the bill, on advance notices, already provides a practical solution to the issue that Murdo Fraser raises. As a result of section 58B, an advance notice will protect a named deed from, among other things, inhibitions entered in the register of inhibitions during the protected period. An advance notice granted on the conclusion of missives, or a day or two before, will protect the grantee from an inhibition registered before registration of the disposition for 35 days. A further advance notice may be used if the protected period is coming to an end. As such, the grantee of such a disposition will be protected by the advance notice without the uncertainty introduced by amendment 6. However, I say to Mr Fraser that the Government will continue to monitor the issue. I respect the fact that the Law Society has raised the issue. I have given the technical arguments for why we do not think that amendment 6 is the correct way to deal with it and outlined how we believe that it can be dealt with through another route.

I think that Annabel Goldie is asking me to speculate on what is in the mind of purchasers. I am not sure how I can answer that question. However, I can say that the law, as I have set out, is fairly clear that an inhibition after the conclusion of missives would not vitiate the transaction, because inhibitions affect only voluntary grants, and therefore an inhibition after the conclusion of missives would not be effective. However, I cannot be expected to know what is in the mind of purchasers. We will continue to work with the Law Society of Scotland. If it becomes clear that there is a continuing problem and that advance notices have not in practice removed any difficulties in this area, the Scottish Government will, as is appropriate, look for an opportunity to consider making appropriate provision in the law in this area in other legislation. Amending the bill is not the appropriate means of so doing. For the reasons that I have outlined, I cannot support amendment 6 and ask Mr Fraser to withdraw it.

I thank members for their contributions to this debate on an issue that was debated at great length during stage 2. Rhoda Grant’s amendment 1 is similar to amendments that she lodged at stage 2, which the committee rejected. I understand the sentiments behind amendment 1, but it is as unworkable and undesirable as I suggested that her stage 2 amendments were. I will say why that is the case. The land register is, of course, open and transparent and shows who owns land in Scotland, as does the register of sasines, albeit not in the same modernised, map-based form. The land register is for registering titles. It allows for the creation of real rights in land and publicises key information that allows the conveyancing process to operate. I reminded myself this morning that a body no less august than the United Nations commended the importance of countries having a land register for economic development purposes. Such a register is important so that trade can be conducted and securities over land can be created. I am sure that members will recall that that is stated in the bill’s policy memorandum. The purpose of the land register is not to allow every piece of information relating to an area of land or its owner to be public knowledge. Its primary purpose is to allow trade to be conducted, property rights to be acquired and economic development to be pursued. I think that amendment 1 is intended to allow certain as yet unspecified extra information to be entered on a title sheet at the request of a third party with no interest at all in the land, but it does not specify in any way whatsoever what that information would be. As Rob Gibson correctly pointed out, section 111(1)(e) already provides for the keeper to require information to be provided on the title sheet. The result of the amendment would be a disincentive to people buying and selling land in Scotland, and it could add quite considerable costs for people who use the land register. In other words, it would put up the costs of buying or selling property in Scotland. I respectfully submit that that is the very last thing that we would wish to do at a time when it is very difficult for first-time buyers to get into the property market. During the previous stages of the bill, we debated the importance of the completion of the land register. In a later speech, I will outline the significant progress that we will make towards that end as a result of the bill. I mention that because, if the keeper were required to do all the extra work of an unspecified nature to enter on the title sheet details of the shareholdings of every property owned in Scotland and to keep track of that—I presume that that would be on a daily basis, as shareholdings are transacted on a daily basis—no matter how that was dealt with, there would be an additional burden. That burden would be imposed on the keeper’s staff at a time when the Parliament will, I hope, support the principle that we want the keeper to extend the land register to cover as many properties in Scotland as possible and to focus the resources of their excellent staff on that task rather than on unspecified tasks that would confer very little, if any, real benefit. I understand and respect members’ sentiments and confirm that we looked carefully at options that were theoretically available to us. However, for the reasons that I have given, I cannot support amendment 1, and I respectfully ask Rhoda Grant to seek to withdraw it.

These minor and technical amendments are all related to commencement. Amendments 2 and 5 form a pair and seek to split the commencement of section 110’s subsections (1) and (2). Currently, all of section 110 will come into force on the day after royal assent. That is usual practice for definitions of the type that is contained in section 110(1), and amendment 2 seeks to ensure that that subsection can be commenced on that day. However, as section 110(2) is not merely a definition, but a gloss for construing references to “registering” elsewhere on the statute book, it might have an effect if commenced on the day after royal assent. Accordingly, amendment 5 seeks to ensures that section 110(2) comes into force on the designated day along with the bill’s other main provisions, in particular sections 30 and 31 on registration. Amendments 3 and 4 seek to ensure that certain delegated powers in the bill can be commenced by order so as to be exercised before the bill’s main provisions come into force on the designated day. It is important that ministers have that ability to ensure that the necessary implementation work can be undertaken ahead of the main parts of the bill coming into force. I move amendment 2. Amendment 2 agreed to. Amendments 3 to 5 moved—[Fergus Ewing]—and agreed to. Schedule 5—Minor and consequential modifications

I fully understand the difficulty that has arisen for conveyancers, lenders and home owners as a result of the clarification of the procedures in relation to power of sale by the Supreme Court in the case of RBS v Wilson. However, I cannot see quite how amendment 7 would help to resolve the mischief that is at the root of the issue. Conveyancers and lenders are now fully aware of the decision in RBS v Wilson and have, I understand, amended their procedures accordingly; practitioners are to be praised for their swift action. As a result, amendment 7 is unnecessary because proper procedures are now clear and are being followed. There remains a possible difficulty for a relatively small number of cases that were completed or were on-going at the time of RBS v Wilson. Technically, the change that amendment 7 proposes may not be a retrospective change to the law, but it is not clear how it would work. Crucially, it could remove the rights of those who might be adversely affected by the subsequent sale to seek redress in line with their rights as declared by the Supreme Court. If amendment 7 is intended merely to clarify the law, it appears to the Government that it would go much further than is necessary. The difficulty in the existing cases is limited to the failure to issue a calling-up notice. Amendment 7 would operate on any and all failures by the creditor to follow the law on calling-up procedure. That would be a quite extraordinary result, and the potential for unintended consequences is considerable. In the Home Owner and Debtor Protection (Scotland) Act 2010, Parliament passed legislation that is designed to offer protection to home owners, which is absolutely crucial in the current climate. Therefore, I cannot support an amendment that risks cutting across such protection.

Yes—I will be pleased to do that. Murdo Fraser has quite properly brought to Parliament a matter of particular significance and importance to a number of people in Scotland who may be affected by the RBS v Wilson case. I do not think that a legislative solution is appropriate, but I will take up Mr Fraser’s suggestion. In discussions with my officials yesterday evening, I was minded to act in such a way. I have instructed my officials to work closely and promptly with the Law Society and others, including the Council of Mortgage of Lenders, to see what assistance, if any, the Scottish Government can provide to progress the relatively small number of cases that are affected. I am happy to provide that assurance to Mr Fraser and Parliament. I cannot support amendment 7 for the reasons that I have outlined and which I hope Murdo Fraser will accept, so I respectfully ask him to withdraw it.

Thank you for your generosity, Presiding Officer. I am pleased to open the stage 3 debate on the Land Registration etc (Scotland) Bill. First, I thank the members of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, the Subordinate Legislation Committee, and the Finance Committee for their hard work and careful scrutiny of what is, in essence, a technical bill. I also thank all the organisations and individuals who provided oral and written evidence to the committee, and briefings for members on the bill’s provisions. I also pay tribute to the Scottish Law Commission for the work that it has carried out since 2002 in developing most of the policies that appear in the bill. I particularly thank the officials, especially the keeper of the registers of Scotland and her staff—many of whom I had the pleasure of meeting earlier this week—for the hard work and dedication that has gone into the preparation of the bill. The bill seeks to provide the people of Scotland with a land register that is fit for the 21st century. It will place on a statutory footing many of the sound policies and practices that have been developed by Registers of Scotland since the introduction of the land register in 1981. I remember that event because it occurred towards the end of my apprenticeship. The bill will also provide for a fairer and more balanced system of land registration. It is recognised internationally that an efficient and secure system of land and property registration is fundamental to the operation of the economy. Registers of Scotland and the land register are a key part of that process and they support the Scottish economy by underpinning a property market that can be worth more than £24 billion each year. Registers of Scotland sets the standard in how information about land and property is captured, held, analysed and made available to the people of Scotland. I believe that emerging evidence shows that our system of land registration is increasingly of interest to other countries with whom—as I learned earlier this week—the keeper’s staff are regularly in contact. That is an accolade to the quality of our land register and our system. Recent evidence of the importance of the role of the land register is shown by the purchase of Grangemouth oil refinery. The new owner, which is based outside Scotland, sought the surety of having title held on the land register. I am informed that, hitherto, the oil refinery’s title was based on a large number of farms that existed before the refinery was set up. The new owners sought a land-register based title and Registers of Scotland carried out that voluntary registration rapidly so that the transfer of ownership could be completed. I mention that because it is the kind of act that one does not read about in the newspapers, but it plays an important part in helping to promote economic development in Scotland. By bringing registration law more closely into line with general property law, the bill addresses legal tensions that have caused confusion and uncertainty for property owners since the introduction of the land register. The changes will ensure that the land register continues to underpin the Scottish economy. The bill also provides the legal framework that will allow the land register to be completed. There has been much debate in Parliament on this topic, including in this morning’s proceedings. I note and understand the eagerness of members of all parties that the land register be completed as soon as possible. So far, about 55 per cent of titles and about 22 per cent of the land mass of Scotland have been registered. The keeper is keen to expand coverage of the land register and plans are being put in place to take advantage of the power that is contained in the bill for keeper-induced registration in order to expand the title coverage of the land register. Research that has been carried out by the keeper indicates that some 700,000 properties, for which her staff have carried out some form of preliminary title examination, are not yet on the land register. The keeper is exploring options for bringing those properties onto the land register within this decade, and aspires to have the titles registered by 2017, to coincide with the 400th anniversary of the general register of sasines. Doing so would increase the percentage of titles on the land register from 55 per cent to almost 80 per cent, which would be consistent with my previous commitment in Parliament that there will be no keeper-induced registrations of large and complex titles during this parliamentary session. We do not want a system of compulsion; we want a system of increased triggers for registration, which includes keeper-induced registrations where appropriate, but which also includes the use of voluntary registration. Murdo Fraser (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con) rose— Patrick Harvie (Glasgow) (Green) rose—

I suspected that members might be interested in the answer to that question, so I consulted officials about it yesterday evening. Most of the 700,000 properties that we anticipate would be appropriate subjects of keeper-induced registrations are properties such as the last flat in a tenement block of six flats—in other words, the flat that is preventing the transfer of the whole block to the land register—or the last house in a modern housing estate of 30 or 40 houses. In such cases, completion of the land register requires removal of the whole estate or tenement from the register of sasines. They are the kinds of property, by and large, for which the keeper anticipates that keeper-induced registration will be used in transferring properties from the register of sasines to the land register. Let us not forget—I know that Mr Fraser would never forget this—that transferring properties to the land register means that processes will be simpler, clearer and cheaper. Those are three pretty good benefits. Patrick Harvie rose— I do not know whether Mr Fraser and Mr Harvie have the same question to ask; it would be a parliamentary first. Let me not be accused of dodging any question in this chamber. I will come to Mr Harvie in a moment: I have not quite finished with Mr Fraser. We do not expect coverage by area to advance as significantly. The answer is that it is likely to increase by a few percentage points. Nonetheless, moving from 55 per cent to 80 per cent of properties would be fairly solid and impressive progress.

We have made it clear that the process cannot happen overnight and will take many years to complete. Mr Harvie is entitled to suggest alternative approaches. Any alternative approach would involve compulsion and additional costs. We feel that that approach would not have been correct—especially in a recession, when the imposition of additional costs is not justifiable and would likely have caused considerable outcry, on the basis that the money might be used for better purposes, such as the creation of more employment. We think that the voluntary approach is correct, and I inform Parliament that it is working. It is working in relation to the Forestry Commission, which has excellent plans to include much more of what it owns on the land register, which will, over time, be a significant step in respect of the proportion of land that is shown on the register. I encourage public sector bodies, including local authorities, to follow the Forestry Commission’s example. I am sure that many public bodies are considering that.

The point of land registration legislation is to provide a state guarantee to title; the bill extends that protection. The protection of the public is also secured by the Solicitors (Scotland) Act 1980 and by the requirement that every solicitor have professional indemnity and fidelity insurance. The protections are substantial. To address Jenny Marra’s question directly, I will comment on the offence provision, which has caused controversy, but which we believe is absolutely essential. The level of fraud in Britain is extremely serious; it rose last year from £33,000 million to £73,000 million. In response to correspondence from me, the Law Society of Scotland has indicated that, sadly, there have been instances of mortgage fraud. The Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency has identified no fewer than 291 individuals—including lawyers, financiers, security experts and accountants—who are professional facilitators and specialists who are providing advice and support to organised crime groups. The problem is serious, which is why the offence provision is in the bill. I acknowledge that the Law Society of Scotland has concerns about the provision, but we addressed some of those concerns at stage 2. We believe that it is absolutely right that Parliament tackles fraud in every possible way. We are following the advice of the Lord Advocate—as given clearly to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee—and we believe that the measure will be effective. There are matters that I have not covered, but with your forbearance Presiding Officer, I might have the opportunity to do so in my closing speech. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Land Registration etc. (Scotland) Bill be passed.

This has been a useful and constructive debate. I thank all members for their contributions. The debate has demonstrated that members agree that this is an important bill. Any disagreement appeared to centre on how exciting it is. I am pleased that all speakers have acknowledged that it is a useful, solid piece of work that will allow us to make great progress with our land registration system. As has been mentioned, the register of sasines was revolutionary. In 1617, it was the first national land registration system in the world. For its time, it was pioneering. However, as those of us who spent many years in private practice dealing with conveyancing know, the old system involves poring over deeds, which are mostly handwritten and sometimes include quite vague descriptions of land. I remember one description that simply said, “All and whole of that three merk land of old extent.” Goodness me. That conveyancing description must have been drafted after an extended lunch, because it did not provide much clarity about the boundaries of the land involved. Equally, I am sure that Miss Goldie and Mr Fraser will remember spending far too many hours poring over handwritten documents such as contracts of excambion, charters of novodamus, feu contracts, feu dispositions, bonds and dispositions in security. Of course, one of the great benefits of the land register is not that those deeds are somehow dispensed with and rendered no longer relevant, because, often, they may still be relevant, even if some of them have fallen into desuetude; it is that most of them will now be shown on the burden section—called land obligations, now—of the title sheet, in typewritten form. That has the practical benefit for the people whom we represent that their lawyers are not spending hours—for which they are paying—poring over old handwritten deeds. It has been said that the purpose of this bill is purely transactional. I think that it is a good thing that we are helping to aid the process of making the job of land registration one that can benefit the people whom we represent who want to own their house. I do not think that it does justice to the work of the keeper or the profession to say that that is purely transactional. This morning, we are doing something that will benefit a great many people in Scotland and, in a modest way, will make Scotland a better place. The bill creates more triggers for registration, allowing the process to encompass more transaction. I inform the chamber that I am advised by the keeper that that is likely to result in 7,000 additional first registrations in the first year after the designated day. Earlier, I mentioned the Forestry Commission. I praise it for carrying out a survey of its land holdings in Scotland. The Forestry Commission owns 1,969 parcels of land covering 650,000 hectares, which accounts for 7.5 per cent of Scotland’s land mass. That is a substantial proportion of our land mass, and I welcome the willingness of the Forestry Commission to engage in how we take the issue forward.

The member will have to excuse me, but I really want to give the chamber some more information that I did not have time to give earlier. I understand from Registers of Scotland that, at a rough order of magnitude, the cost of the aspiration of undertaking the 700,000 keeper-induced registrations by 2017—I repeat, 700,000 registrations—is around £25 million. The keeper has set aside £10 million in the reserves in her trading fund, and the intention is to recoup the £15 million shortfall from the fee income over 10 financial years, which will have to be reflected in the biennial fee reviews. Of course, all these things are kept under review; of course, they are studied; and, of course, ambitious, major and detailed plans have been put in place and will be enacted to extend the coverage of Scotland’s land register. This is not minor progress; it is major progress that will happen not simply because we pass the bill—which, after all, is only words on a page, important though they are—but because team Scotland is working together to achieve the bill’s aims and to ensure the gradual completion of the land register. In fact, to pursue that aim, the keeper and I jointly wrote an article for The Journal of the Law Society of Scotland last year in which we encouraged landowners to get their titles registered. I take this opportunity to make the same encouragement to ensure that landowners receive the benefits of land registration. Indeed, plans are afoot to encourage landowners in this matter; for a start, Rhoda Grant was quite right to point out that because the fees have a maximum cap they represent an excellent deal. In some cases, the current fees do not reflect the total cost to the keeper of carrying out this work. I repeat my exhortation to landowners to seriously consider the offer. If they transfer their titles to the land register, they will find that the benefits can be considerable; for example, they might discover that they own land that they were not aware of and that it is easier to transact land for development. Those kinds of commercial benefits can be gleaned and I praise the keeper and her staff for their very detailed efforts in dealing with this matter. The bill makes a number of very important changes to land registration practices and adopts many of the sound practices that have developed over the years. For a start, it makes provision for defining inaccuracy in the land register and, more important, when and how titles can be rectified. As a matter of registration practice, the keeper has been proactive in bringing new procedures in line with recognised international standards and the mapping working group that I believe Mr Macintosh mentioned in his remarks and which comprises members of the Ordnance Survey, the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors, the Law Society and Registers of Scotland has been established. I must also thank Mike MacKenzie, who I think has been somewhat modest, because he did a power of work on this bill for the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee and brought a lot of knowledge to its scrutiny. Assisted by committee members, he lodged an important stage 2 amendment that in effect allows a case to be referred to the Lands Tribunal for Scotland instead of individuals having to go to the full expense and through the whole panoply of court action. Mr Park asked me to respond to his important point. Although in many cases it might be possible to refer underlying legal issues to the Lands Tribunal, I must, as I have before, indicate that, as I think Mr Park is aware, the Parliament has certain restrictions on its freedom to make law that alters existing property rights in live cases. Annabel Goldie accused me of indifference towards her, ignoring her entreaties and not taking seriously her inestimable contributions to this and previous debates on this matter—perish the thought. How could I now, in the past or in the future ever be indifferent to Miss Goldie’s entreaties? My difficulty is in preventing my beating heart from distracting me and in ensuring that my mind is engaged with her remarks. [Interruption.] I am told that I should move on, Presiding Officer.

In all seriousness, we believe that the offence provision in the bill is necessary. As the overwhelming majority of solicitors are honest, they will be neither inconvenienced nor subject to any difficulty. As someone who, as a solicitor with Leslie Wolfson 30 years ago, had experience of the previous Land Registration (Scotland) Bill, I am somewhat surprised but very pleased, proud and honoured to find myself playing a modest part in the updating, modernisation and improvement of the land registration system in this country.

Although Scotland is at liberty to lobby international organisations such as the European Union or the World Trade Organization, trade policy is a reserved matter. Trade promotion is delivered by the Scottish Government through its trade and investment arm, Scottish Development International. SDI field operations have a critical role to play in developing relationships in key overseas markets with private and public sector bodies that are critical to supporting trade. Scottish ministers also undertake a number of overseas programmes each year to promote Scotland’s trade agenda with business and Government ministerial counterparts.

As I said, trade policy is the responsibility of the UK Government. However, I will closely consider Paul Wheelhouse’s request and any evidence that he wishes to provide subsequently to me. The USA is Scotland’s largest export market; we export nearly £6 billion to the USA every year. Scottish companies, with the excellent assistance of the world-beating Scottish Development International, are succeeding to an ever greater extent in exports. If there are barriers such as that which has been identified by Mr Wheelhouse, we in the Scottish Government are determined to remove them .

That was worth waiting for, Presiding Officer. During the First Minister’s recent visit to Norway, he met the NorthConnect project team leaders and communicated his support for the venture to Norwegian ministers. Scottish Government engagement dates back to the project’s inception, when the First Minister announced the signing of the NorthConnect partnership agreement on 1 February 2011 and provided a letter in support. The Scottish European Green Energy Centre has contributed €50,000 to the cable-route survey.

We believe that it might be feasible. We very much welcome today’s news that progress has been made, in that a memorandum of understanding has been entered into between the United Kingdom Government and Iceland. If there is to be a connection to Iceland, geographically, Scotland is the logical place for it to connect to. Therefore, we will work with the UK Government to advance NorthConnect to Norway and a connection to Iceland. We want Scotland to be well connected with the world, not least in the development of renewable energy, which represents one of the foremost conceivable opportunities that this country could possess. It involves harnessing our unparalleled maritime renewable energy resources. We want Scotland to be connected to Iceland, Norway and many other countries.

This will be a very difficult time for staff who work for the UBC Group, and the Scottish Government is doing absolutely everything that is possible. We are working alongside the administrator and local councils to preserve or secure by other means as many of the jobs and as much of the business as possible. For those who face redundancy, Skills Development Scotland met staff on Monday 14 May and the partnership action for continuing employment team representatives have arranged an event for staff on 23 May.

I am acutely aware of all those matters. I have been personally engaged in the situation since the news was announced that the UBC Group was to go into administration. I am involved to a considerable extent in all the considerable work that is being done by the Scottish Government, the local council, the Hebridean partnership and people involved with UBC to secure the best possible result for all concerned. We are committed to doing that. The staff will have the opportunity to receive comprehensive and substantial support from PACE representatives, not least at the events that will be held in Stornoway and South Uist, as well as at the event in Inverness on 23 May.

Scottish ministers are always deeply disappointed to hear of potential redundancies and are aware of the impact on individuals, their families and the wider community. The Scottish Government acted immediately to provide support through the partnership action for continuing employment to all Mansell and Hall & Tawse employees and local PACE representatives are awaiting a response from the company regarding a suitable date for a meeting with all staff affected.

We will do as Mr McDonald suggests. He is quite right in what he says, which is why, despite the substantial cuts to its budget, the Government is continuing to support the construction sector in these difficult times by maintaining capital spend at £3,000 million in 2012-13.

Does Mr Macintosh favour scrapping the small business bonus scheme?

That should not be too difficult, Presiding Officer. It is with great pleasure that I speak in a debate about growing the economy. Of course, growing the economy means creating jobs, opportunities and all the benefits that flow from growth. That is not only a worthy objective but, as members have pointed out, a means to an end; it is about having a fulfilling life and a rewarding career and being able to look after oneself and one’s family in the way that one wishes. Growth is pivotal to this Government’s objectives and rightly runs through and permeates every one of its policies. Beneath the bluster, the colourful rhetoric, the overly negative criticism of policies by some of our opponents when it turns out that they support them, and the sturm und drang of the Opposition’s tone, what are we left with? Where are the alternatives? I do not know, Presiding Officer. I will take a different tack. I spent the morning in Mr Chisholm’s constituency at the annual general meeting of the organisation that helps to promote the success of one part of the tourism business in Scotland—the cruise industry. I learned a fact that I suspect very few people know—I did not know it until this morning—which is that, in 2000, only 45,000 people visited Scotland each year through our manifold ports and the attractions that they offer around the shores of this country. The figure is now 318,000. In a decade, the little segment of our tourism industry that is cruise Scotland has got together and, without masses of money or Government support, it has worked with the Government and others and transformed the industry. In a time of recession, it has seen growth in the number of people coming to Scotland and the amount of money that is spent in Scotland. I mention that not because it is hugely important to the overall scheme of the economy, but because one of the most important levers that we have in this country is the duty of all ministers to engage with Scottish society and go out and find out what it is up to, so that we can understand what is being done in our name, see the opportunities that are being created, and help people to achieve. It is not always about money; often, it is about practical arrangements. For example, where are the German-speaking tourist guides whom we need if we are to get more cruise liners from Germany, which is our second biggest market? How can we organise the luxury buses that those visitors want? That is the type of practical problem that takes up a lot of my time as minister, not the rather futile, high-level exchanges on who is right and who is wrong about the ebb and flow of macroeconomics. If the time that I have for my short contribution permits, I will answer some of the points that have been made during the debate. However, first I will run through some of the levers we have that have not been focused on during the debate. For example, the account management system of Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise is run so that each company across all sectors in Scotland, not just the growth sectors, is allocated an individual, specific person to assist it to get advice from the Scottish Government’s enterprise network about how it can be helped. Every company that I have met that has an account manager values that resource, because the company itself does not have time to look up websites and keep abreast of every development in the manifold Government assistance that is available. Those companies need someone to help them to achieve growth. The cabinet secretary alluded to growth in exports. The Scottish Leather Group Ltd of Bridge of Weir produces high-quality leather hides for most of the top marque cars in the world and has achieved almost £100 million of exports. Mary Scanlon and Gavin Brown made a number of sensible points, with which we agree, about the success of companies that export. Food exports have increased by 62 per cent since 2007—what an incredible achievement. There has also been a 50 per cent increase in whisky exports, and we heard about the success of the Scottish salmon industry with its quality recognition throughout the world. Individual sectors are seeing great success and they have the account management assistance. Another lever that has been alluded to is SDI. As you know, Presiding Officer, because we were there together in New York— Members: Oh! I shall say no more, Presiding Officer. My lips are sealed. To spare your blushes, I should say hastily that we were there with several thousand others at the tartan day parade. SDI does a marvellous job of selling Scotland throughout the world. At first hand, Mr Swinney, the First Minister, Mr Neil, Mr Lochhead and I are going out to other countries in the world and using SDI as a resource to bring back the goods for Scotland. My goodness, how we are succeeding in comparison with almost every one of our competitors. That is one of the levers that we have at the moment. By working with SDI, HIE and others, we have the capacity to increase this country’s economic success through inward investment, which leads to jobs, opportunity and success. The cabinet secretary alluded to the success of manufacturing, in which there has been stupendous growth in recent years. One of the most positive conferences that I have attended was not in New York but in Dunblane. There has rarely been a conference at which the mood among the delegates—who, in this case, represented a range of exporting companies in Scotland—has been as uplifting as it was at the Scottish Manufacturing Advisory Service’s conference. We are seeing tremendous success in the development of skills. John Park was quite right to mention the skills challenge. I agree that one of the key challenges that the country faces is to ensure that the skills are provided for the work that needs to be done. I have visited Carnegie College and I know what good work it does, along with Adam Smith College and all the other colleges and universities throughout the land. Last Thursday, I visited Nigg and saw for myself the skills academy that Global Energy Group has developed there. I saw the enthusiasm and commitment of the people who are doing a foreshortened apprenticeship in the hope of being part of a new and exciting industry. As the debate has illustrated, we have some—although by no means enough—tax powers. The small business bonus scheme has been commented on. I thought that Annabelle Ewing made a characteristically measured speech, in which she set out that 85,000 people can testify to the fact that the scheme is helping businesses throughout Scotland. As Labour members said, 98 per cent of businesses are small businesses. If Labour members want to find evidence of what small businesses think about the small business bonus scheme, I suggest that they go out and speak to some of them, as I did last Friday, when I visited Dalcross Logistics in my constituency.

We will simply have to agree to disagree on the statistics. It is absolutely clear that, were it not for the small business bonus, many of those who have received it would no longer be in business. That is undoubtedly the case. The member should go and ask some of the business owners in the Victorian arcade in Inverness in my constituency what they think about the prospect of running a small business without the help that the Scottish Government has provided. I found it slightly surprising that, instead of the constructive critique that we might have expected the principal Opposition party to provide, we got sustained condemnation of a number of our policies. As well as the small business bonus scheme, the enterprise areas and the public health levy were the subject of sustained criticism from Mr Macintosh. It emerged, however, that although Mr Macintosh was condemnatory about each of those policies, he supports all of them. Far be it from me to give advice to the official Opposition in this Parliament, but would it not be an idea for Labour to put forward some alternatives that it believes in, rather than ones that, it turns out, it does not believe in? I urge Labour to think again.

Well, all right. Why not?

I wish that I had longer; I am sure that I could fill in another hour or so, if members were patient. We in Scotland face many challenges, which we are tackling with the powers that we have. If we had the full powers of a normal country, we would be able to achieve the success that this country so richly deserves.

Such support is provided through our economic strategy and is delivered by the enterprise network and the business gateway, with assistance from business representative bodies and voluntary groups.

Mr Yousaf makes a reasonable point. Both the First Minister and John Swinney have had regular meetings with bank representatives and we are extremely active in encouraging the banks to return to acceptable levels of affordable lending so that viable businesses have access to the funding that they require to grow. I have met all the major banks and many others to emphasise the point, and we will continue to press the United Kingdom Government to use the powers that it has at its disposal to improve levels of lending by all the banks.

The Scottish Government is working closely with the enterprise agencies and the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council to enhance support for research and development in the SME sector in South Scotland.

Yes. I agree with the argument that Aileen McLeod makes in relation to South Scotland, and I entirely accept that universities and colleges are linked ever more closely with enterprise. For example, we have the knowledge transfer partnerships, which bring together companies and universities to see what opportunities and businesses can emerge from their working together. I commend participation in the EU horizon 2020 programme to which the member referred.

Our support includes encouragement of early awareness of credit unions among young people in schools through the curriculum for excellence and work with the United Kingdom Money Advice Service, which provides information about credit unions as part of its work to encourage everyone to manage their money effectively.

The member is perfectly correct to highlight the problems and the hazards that pay day loans can cause for many people. Members were united in that view in what was an excellent debate. To answer the specific question, as part of the third sector, credit unions will be eligible to apply for future funding streams, and they can also access business support and advice through the just enterprise programme. We are considering what further support can be provided. Legislation on pay day loans is of course a reserved matter. I recently made representations to Norman Lamb of the United Kingdom Government, urging that consideration be given to using such powers to regulate pay day loans effectively in the whole of the UK.

Since this Government introduced it, the small business bonus scheme has reduced business rates taxation for South Lanarkshire businesses, which include businesses in the East Kilbride area, by a total of £21.3 million—3,558 businesses have received assistance by paying lower or no business rates. We have committed to maintaining the bonus scheme for the lifetime of the parliamentary session, to support tens of thousands of small and medium-sized businesses throughout the country.

The business gateway provides advice to those who want to set up a small business or develop one. In addition, many recipients of the small business bonus have been able to use the money that has been saved to provide more training to new staff and young people. Last week, I visited Dalcross Logistics, in my constituency, to highlight the huge advantages of the small business bonus. The fact that 85,000 businesses have received benefit from the small business bonus has not only enabled them to survive, but has enabled many young people to gain opportunities to work in those small businesses. The Federation of Small Businesses points out that, thanks to the small business bonus, there are an increasing number of dynamic opportunities for our young people.

Scottish Renewables has estimated that more than 11,000 jobs are already supported by the renewables sector in Scotland. A number of major renewables investment announcements in the first few months of this year will result in hundreds of jobs across Scotland, while our skills investment plan estimates that the sector will offer 40,000 job opportunities by 2020.

I have so engaged with several of the institutes of engineers and have received the benefit of their advice and support. I will continue to do so. The member is absolutely correct to point to the opportunities in the area. Last Thursday, I visited Nigg, in the Highlands, where Global Energy Group has set up a Nigg training academy. I spoke to many of those who are now receiving the fast-track training to become full-time employees in the sector and I have never seen such commitment or enthusiasm among young people. Truly, Scotland is on the verge of a range of hugely exciting opportunities. I assume that all parties in the chamber will grasp those opportunities with both hands.

I am happy to learn about the details of any particular case, although I must think carefully about having a meeting to discuss the merits of any case. I am keen to advance the issues in the way that the member describes in a positive fashion. Since the member mentioned Portobello, I take the opportunity to say that, just along the road in Leith, Gamesa has chosen to invest in Scotland to the huge advantage of young people in this city and of the Scottish economy, which has received a massive boost of confidence from yet another global investor.

I have not looked down that particular side alley of statistical research. What I can say—I am sure that Mary Scanlon welcomes this—is that more than £7,000 million will be invested in the grid of Scotland, ahead of England, because we are making more progress. When we consider that, Gamesa coming to Scotland, Samsung investing in Scotland. Mitsubishi looking at Scotland and all the investments in Scotland, Glasgow, Edinburgh and the Highlands, surely the Conservatives can bring themselves to say, as their Prime Minister did recently, that there is truly a massive opportunity for this country.

Exciting plans. [Laughter.]

A range of extremely exciting announcements has recently been made for the west of Scotland. Steel Engineering is to create 180 jobs with an investment of £3 million; Gamesa is investing £180 million in research and development; the international technology and renewable energy zone—ITREZ—at the University of Strathclyde will provide 700 jobs with an £89 million investment; and Scottish Power and Scottish and Southern Energy are creating 3,000 jobs and investing £7,000 million. The member asked what plans we have: in addition to those announcements, we have other plans. We want to do more. We want to see the establishment of the international technology and renewable energy zone; the offshore renewable energy catapult; the power networks demonstration centre; the advanced forming research centre; and, of course, SSE’s Hunterston onshore test facility for offshore wind. The west of Scotland is at the heart of a great many marvellous opportunities in this country, and we will do our best to ensure that all those opportunities are converted into jobs for Scotland.

This is a very important debate. Charging for access to the electricity transmission network is an area of energy policy that is rarely spoken about, but which is absolutely central to the future of electricity generation in Scotland. What is at stake is no less than the future development of renewable energy in the Western Isles and northern isles. Our shared hope is for renewable energy to be an engine of economic growth with the potential to deliver high-quality jobs, significant inward investment and, not least, direct and lasting benefits to our communities—especially the most fragile communities on our islands, where clean energy resources are at their most abundant. However, the current charging regime discourages deployment of renewable energy projects in those areas of finest resource. Its having previously recognised our concerns, it is highly disappointing to find that the new proposals for charging that the Office of the Gas and Electricity Markets has made in project transmit would continue to discriminate against the islands to a marked and grotesque degree. They would see charges of £1 per kilowatt for a connection to the grid in the south-west of England, £60 for Orkney, £67 for Shetland, and £77 for the Western Isles. Ofgem said that it has “less confidence” in its proposals as they would affect the islands. Why then make those proposals? Surely that is an extraordinary way to proceed and one that begs questions about Ofgem’s commitment to the process of change. Ofgem will give its views on project transmit to its board in the near future, but it must do so on the basis that a fairer deal for the islands is an absolute necessity. As a Parliament, we must send Ofgem a strong message that leaving the islands in the “too difficult” box is not an option. [Interruption.]

Different companies will be affected in different ways. Today, with the support of Tavish Scott and all the other parties, I hope to argue that when the Ofgem board meets to consider the proposals, it must consider the anomalous consequences of accepting the draft proposals that would discriminate against the islands, as I have set out. I recognise that there are pressures on Ofgem, but to make a proposal under which the islands would be subject to a 77 times greater cost than other parts of the UK is astonishing, so I hope that all parties can unite behind me. I want to depart from my script—as the Presiding Officer knows I do occasionally—to say that I welcome the support and engagement of all parties on the issue.

This is not the end of the process; that is Mary Scanlon’s point. Incidentally, I have deliberately not mentioned, nor have I addressed my remarks to, the United Kingdom Government. The process involves Ofgem, and I entirely accept that Ofgem is not at the end of the process. However, we are at an important point in the process. The purpose of today’s debate is that Parliament can speak with one voice and deliver a clear message. That is why I sought and called for the debate; that is why I worked with all parties to broker a solution, as Tavish Scott knows from the meeting that I think Mr McArthur attended on 13 January in Inverness; that is why Robert Armour extended his services pro bono; that is why a compromise solution has been worked out; and that is why a huge raft of work has been carried out by people across the party divide in order to get a fair solution for the Western Isles and northern isles. Sustained pressure from Parliament calling for a review of transmission charging in January 2010 in part has brought about the review. We therefore have the chance to press to see the matter through. Just before the debate, I spoke to Alistair Buchanan, who is the chief executive of Ofgem, and I once again reminded him of the need to find an equitable and enduring solution to the pressing issue of transmission charges. After a long and commendably transparent process—during which Ofgem commissioned a report from the University of Exeter that concluded that transmission charging is an effective and suitable means of encouraging renewables—Ofgem published final recommendations in December 2011. Although the Scottish Government’s preferred option of a postage stamp charge was ruled out—I am not alone in disagreeing with Ofgem’s analysis that shows that the option would be too expensive for consumers—I welcomed in part the proposals for an improved and more cost-effective regime. The new proposals are not all bad; the costs for mainland renewable generators would fall from a staggering £28.53 per kilowatt to a much more realistic figure of less than £10, which is within the range that the First Minister called for in conversation and correspondence with Alistair Buchanan early on in the process.

I am not sure that I entirely understand that point. I apologise for that. The point that I was trying to make was that the Government has compromised. We think that generators should be treated in the same way across the UK—that is the postage stamp solution—but we have compromised to try to get a practicable and deliverable result in recognition of the countervailing pressures that exist. Yesterday’s announcement of charges by National Grid again reminds us of the perverse outcomes that so-called cost-effective methods can still produce. Such outcomes demonstrate clearly that the basis of charging regimes in the Great Britain electricity market is inadequate; 20th century principles that reward those who are closest to centres of demand while penalising those who are further away from them should surely no longer hold. Successful Scottish generators, including the generators of the renewable energy that will contribute 40 per cent of the UK’s renewables output by 2020, will be made to pay even higher charges than they pay at present to use the transmission network next year and in subsequent years, in order to cover the cost of the generation gap from which England is suffering. After our coal helped to power the industrial revolution in the 19th century and our North Sea oil and gas boom saw Aberdeen become a global centre of energy excellence and innovation, we find ourselves poised to exploit some of the most outstanding wind, wave and tidal energy resources in the world, but we cannot do that with a system that deters investment. Our island communities are among our most fragile. The renewables potential of the three main island groups is such that its full exploitation would provide jobs, investment and economic security that could underpin the sustainable long-term success of communities there. Those are absolutely priority matters for the Government. I record my recognition of all the support from island MSPs in the long work that we have done on the issue. Ofgem acknowledged the problem in December, but has still not given a firm direction on how the problem should be addressed or resolved. It has proposed that the issue might be solved with additional renewables obligation certificates or by a cap on charges from the UK energy minister. At best, those would be stop-gap measures that in only a short time would create further uncertainty in an industry in which too much uncertainty already exists, thanks to the lack of clarity on electricity market reform. At worst, the proposals would take too long to implement and would be unworkable. As the First Minister has said, transmission problems should have transmission solutions. It is for Ofgem to deliver the solution through project transmit. I see that I have come to the end of my time, Presiding Officer. I conclude by repeating that this is a very important debate. Ofgem is represented in the gallery and is listening to the debate. I hope that this will be an opportunity for every party in the chamber to add its support for the shared objective of finding a just, fair and workable solution that will unleash the massive potential that all our islands have to benefit themselves and the planet. I move, That the Parliament opposes the current locational charging approach, which levies the highest charges on electricity generators across Scotland, including the areas of the best renewable energy resource, and acts as a barrier to renewable projects that can benefit local communities and contribute to Scottish, UK and EU renewable energy and carbon-reduction targets; continues to support the Scottish Government’s call for significant change to the existing charging regime, recognising that there remain strong arguments for change to a flat rate of charging for all generators; recognises and supports Project TransmiT, the independent review of transmission charging by Ofgem called for by the Parliament in April 2010; supports a transparent, thorough and effective assessment for improvements in the charging regime; welcomes the emerging outcomes for both renewable and conventional generators on the mainland, which will move away from the current status-quo approach by reducing the scale of the variance in charges currently faced by generators in mainland Scotland; urges Ofgem to deliver effective change quickly; supports calls for Ofgem to deliver a pricing structure that does not penalise the development of renewable energy in the Western Isles, Orkney and Shetland, and further urges Ofgem to recognise that the significant renewable energy resources of these island groups have potential benefits for both Scottish and UK consumers that will be best met by their integration with the wider GB market.

To address the point that Mary Scanlon makes, I say to her that we do not accept that the costings that Ofgem gave to justify the refusal to accept the postage stamp model are valid. Although the motion refers to the postage stamp option, the member is free to vote for the motion without being committed to the option—we simply point out that there are strong arguments for it. We hope that the Conservatives will unite and support the islands of Scotland this afternoon.

Can Mr Fraser confirm that the Conservative position is that, when the process concludes—I accept that we are in a process—it is necessary and only fair that, if a significantly better solution emerges for the islands, it will demonstrate that the current charges for the islands are far too high?

This has been a useful debate. As Ken Macintosh has just said, although we might not have thought so at certain times during the debate, there is far more agreement than disagreement. I want to foster the agreement and eliminate the disagreement, if I can, although I know that I might be being ambitious in looking for total unanimity.

I am always delighted to get some help from a coalition partner to persuade their colleagues to do the right thing.

I will deal expressly with that point later, if I may. It is recognised throughout the chamber that proposals that would see considerable progress on the mainland of Scotland are broadly welcomed. As Mr Pentland said, that is a step in the right direction and we made that clear early on, as soon as Ofgem’s draft proposals were announced. However, Ken Macintosh was right to point out the caveat that Niall Stuart of Scottish Renewables has asked for confirmation that what is proposed is what will be delivered and that there is no suggestion that the proposed level of charges will not apply in areas where there can be no balancing provision—where there are no conventional power stations to balance the charge and supply electricity to the grid when wind power is not available because it is intermittent, as Mr Fraser likes to point out. Broadly speaking, we welcome the compromise. I hope that, during my opening remarks, I indicated that we take a pragmatic approach to the proposals, and we have put a lot of effort into finding a solution to the problem rather than taking an absolutist stance, which we have not done. We have worked with Ofgem, MSPs, the leaders of all three island local authorities, and Highlands and Islands Enterprise to find a solution, and we believe that we have found a compromise. That has been studied, but it needs to be modelled further. We have encouraged Ofgem to look very carefully at that solution and we hope that it will still do so. When Ofgem meets tomorrow, I hope—given that its draft proposals perhaps imply that it is less than confident in the proposals as they relate to the islands and that more work needs to be done—that it will agree to move a step forward and say that more work needs to be done to study the compromise proposals that we have brought forward, working together, following the meeting on 13 January, to which I referred and which Mr McArthur and all island councils attended. Of course, we did not just have one meeting. The First Minister made his views known at a meeting with Mr Buchanan that I attended. On 23 March, I wrote a letter to Charles Hendry MP; it was co-signed by the leaders of all three island councils. In that letter, I pointed out: “According to the modelling we have seen, UK consumers will potentially be over £3bn better off over the 20 year life of 1GW of Island wind compared with an identical amount of a technology attracting 2 ROCS - ie offshore wind. This strongly supports the case for encouraging island generation, and this can easily be done by addressing high transmission charges through Project TransmiT”. The £3 billion figure reflects the fact that wind farms that operate in the islands have a higher level of efficiency than those elsewhere because the islands tend to be windier. Applying the science of that analysis, we have calculated that there will be a £3 billion saving to the consumer, provided that the islands’ potential for wind power can be addressed. I recently approved the 370MW—or thereabouts—Viking wind farm proposal in Shetland that was alluded to. That is in part a community benefit scheme that will provide more than £30 million a year to the communities of Shetland and which could, inter alia, eliminate fuel poverty. Much of what Ken Macintosh has said is correct. We think that the social benefits should be taken into account. However, to be fair to Ofgem, it is entitled to take account only of matters per statute. Its remit is statutorily defined and therefore we cannot blame it for not taking into account something that it expressly may not take into account. Where I slightly disagree is that the solution of renewables obligation certificates is a lever that is intended to incentivise investment and revenue for various types of renewable energy. To apply that lever to transmission charges, which is something else entirely, is really not the best way to go about this. We think that the best way to solve a transmission charge problem is with a transmission charge solution. Section 185 of the Energy Act 2004 has not been mentioned. It is a sort of fallback option, but it would provide only a limited period of confidence of a maximum of 10 years, although it could in theory be only one year. We therefore think that that does not offer a solution, and I believe that that opinion is shared by those in the islands. I think that Mr Fraser expressed a basic and fundamental agreement with us, which I hope can be expressed in the vote this evening. I say that in the genuine hope that the Conservatives will look again at the wording of the motion. I know that it is unusual in the Parliament to try to persuade somebody in the course of a debate, although I guess that, outwith the chamber, people think that that is the purpose of a debate. The motion refers to the fact that “there remain strong arguments for change to a flat rate of charging”.

Hang on a second. Let me develop the argument and then I will happily take another intervention from Mary Scanlon. The motion goes on to state that the Parliament “welcomes the emerging outcomes for both renewable and conventional generators on the mainland, which will move away from the current status-quo approach”. I have repeated twice that we welcome the compromise proposals that have emerged. Therefore, Mary Scanlon’s point that there would somehow be additional charges to consumers is wrong, because it is based on the assumption that we do not welcome those proposals and we adhere to the postage stamp proposal, but we do not. Therefore, that charge is wrong. In any event, we do not accept—more to the point, Scottish industry does not accept—that the calculation of an additional £7 billion cost is correct. That is disputed. Unfortunately, the details of the modelling and assumptions on which the calculation was based have not been shared with us or anybody else. The motion does not commit the Parliament to the postage stamp solution. It says that we welcome the progress that has been made, but that we want a solution for the islands. I very much hope that, now that I have pointed that out in a spirit of co-operation, the Conservatives will consider the issue again so that we can have agreement not just among the SNP, Labour, Liberal and Green members, but across the board from every party in the Parliament.

The motion simply does not do what Mary Scanlon says it does. I commend the motion to the Parliament. This is a vital debate. There is a process ahead, and I hope that we will all seek to ensure that it is successful. For it to succeed, Ofgem should change tack at its meeting tomorrow. That would be a key step in getting the right solution for Scotland and the islands of Scotland.

I am delighted to accept the invitation in the wording of the motion to reaffirm Scotland’s commitment to its ambitious, world-leading climate change targets. We will harness the best of our country’s assets—our people, our natural resources and our ingenuity—to ensure that Scotland leads the way in renewable and low-carbon energy. As Patrick Harvie mentioned, public support is being built, and it will continue to be built. This week, 11,000 jobs have been created in the renewables sector, benefiting communities such as Orkney and the Highlands and many rural parts of Scotland. Our draft electricity generation policy statement sets out an energy policy that will provide the key pillars of delivering secure and affordable energy and a cut in greenhouse gas emissions, achieving maximum economic benefit for Scotland. Electricity is just part of the story. We need to reduce demand and improve energy efficiency. We also need to make significant progress on renewable and low-carbon heat, as well as sustainable transport. I commend to members a visit to the newly opened Scottish and Southern Energy centre at One Waterloo Street in Glasgow—a museum of modern renewable energy, where one can hire an electric car for an hour or so at a reasonable rate. Perhaps Mr Harvie might like to take up that option to learn to love the motor car, albeit the electric one. While I acknowledge the perception in some quarters that the renewables agenda benefits only big business, that bears no relation to reality in Scotland. Our target for 500MW of community and locally owned renewables by 2020 could be worth up to £2,400 million to Scottish communities and rural businesses over the lifetime of those projects.

We clearly and explicitly want to encourage communities to own renewables schemes. There is no dubiety about that so far as I am aware. That is the best model—in which there is ownership, and not just the receipt of a cheque, albeit a bigger cheque than used to be the case, because the tariff is now moving up to £5,000 per megawatt. The best model—the one to which we aspire—is one in which communities have a stake in the ownership, such as Falck Renewables in Fintry. We want Scotland’s communities to benefit as owners and not just as recipients of cheques, no matter that that in itself creates great benefit. Once again, Mr Harvie and I are in agreement. Our community and renewable energy scheme will provide some £25 million over the next three years to support community and locally owned renewables projects across Scotland. The SFT and COSLA have been working to highlight examples of public sector involvement in renewables and the main commercial structures for local authorities to take forward those schemes. We welcome that work and we will support it where possible. However, the suggestion that local authorities should form local energy companies to enter the energy wholesale market is a different matter. It raises a challenging and complex set of issues, in which market participants take on significant contractual and financial liabilities and are exposed to significant market and financial risk. That is extremely uncomfortable territory for public sector bodies on fixed budgets, which, they tell us, are already stretched to the limit. The market is challenging for new entrants. The vast majority—up to 90 per cent—of wholesale electricity market trading happens between generation and supply businesses in vertically integrated companies: the big six are Scottish and Southern Energy, Scottish Power, RWE npower, EDF Energy, Centrica and E.ON. The remaining over-the-counter business happens either through third-party brokerage or on trading platforms for electricity products—power exchanges—where there are membership fees and other requirements. The key point is that taking part in that market demands that challenging credit and collateral requirements are met. Market participants must be able to access and agree credit, the cost of which fluctuates proportionately to their perceived capability to manage risk. They must post collateral as security for their trading activities and must have the institutional capacity and capability to understand how the market works. They must also properly resource their risk—that is essential in protecting consumers from the unacceptable costs of short-term or irresponsible trading and from a market player going bust. It is not an attractive proposition for a local authority.

Those are suppliers of capacity, not retailers of electricity—there is a difference. We are happy to look carefully at the emerging possibilities. The current market arrangements are not perfect—far from it. The lack of competition and the difficulties that new entrants to the market face are significant issues, which we want to address with the relevant bodies including the Office of the Gas and Electricity Markets. We support more competition in the market. However, as Liam McArthur and others will agree, it would be foolish and irresponsible of us to ignore the practical, serious and massive financial liabilities that can be associated with entering the market. We are happy to accept the Labour amendment. Government is accountable to Parliament and it is correct that we should report to Parliament, and that is what we will do. That is a sensible proposal. To Mr Harvie, I suggest that there are real, significant and unavoidable barriers to and risks in local authority engagement in the electricity market and that a clearer and more obvious path is through public and community bodies playing a stronger role in developing renewable energy projects for the benefit of local communities. I move amendment S4M-02523.1, to leave out from “creation of public energy companies” to end and insert: “work being done by the Scottish Futures Trust in partnership with COSLA to help local authorities realise this ambition, highlighting opportunities to provide exemplary community benefits from renewables schemes on the public estate, publicly owned renewables and the lease of public assets to appropriate renewable energy developers; believes that public sector involvement in the renewables sector can generate clean energy as well as revenue for valuable new public services such as energy efficiency investment and support for community-owned renewables projects and that the shared and community benefits would help to foster public support for renewable energy, and calls on the Scottish Government and the Scottish Futures Trust to continue to work with COSLA, local authorities and other organisations in developing proposals.”

The debate has been excellent, and I am grateful to the Scottish Green Party for bringing the topic to the Parliament. Many members of all parties made useful and informative speeches, and the debate has been revelatory of just how much activity there is in the field in communities throughout Scotland. We have heard from members about schemes from Orkney, Finzean, Aboyne, Glasgow, Eigg and Caithness. That is a sign of the success of such schemes and the growing interest of communities throughout Scotland in them. As minister, I want to work with all parties in pursuing the objectives that the Government has set out. I am especially keen to continue to work with the Green party. The principal reason why we could not accept the motion, although we approached it from the standpoint of wishing to work as closely as possible with the Greens, is the statement that local authorities should “buy energy on the wholesale market to become a domestic supplier in the local community”. We do not rule that out—there is no regulatory barrier to it; it is possible, legal and permissible. However, it is important to separate the two issues. We all recognise that locally owned generation projects, projects that provide local community benefit and projects that local authorities lead and drive forward through ownership or working with local communities are all good things. Where I differ from Patrick Harvie—it is a genuine difference—is that I think that it is extremely risky for local authorities to enter into the retail and wholesale markets and I am not convinced that it would be wise and prudent for them to do that. However, if Mr Harvie wishes to discuss the details of the proposal with my officials, I would be delighted for him to do so. I make that offer to him and hope that he takes it up because we are most sincerely determined to continue to work with him and his colleagues—and all parties—on matters on which we are fundamentally in agreement. I have lots more technical stuff, but I will leave it because, were I to go into that territory, I would not have time to deal with anything else. I put it to one side. To respond to Sarah Boyack’s point, we are, and have been, giving a lead. I will spell out the facts, because facts speak louder than words. Since May 2007, more than 800 grants for community renewables, worth some £16 million, have been allocated through the community and renewable energy scheme—CARES—and its predecessor. I acknowledge the work that Sarah Boyack did in her time. She gave a lead; we are following that up and giving an equal lead. In 2011, we launched the CARES loan scheme. Grants are no longer permitted under the feed-in tariff—FIT—rules, so loans it has to be. They are for pre-planning costs and the scheme has a budget of £7.75 million. I inform members that 42 projects producing 56MW of renewable energy have been offered loans totalling £4 million. From April—next month—there will be a public register of community benefits, which will provide transparency about the community benefits that companies offer. That will move us into a new era. The public estate is giving the lead and offering a higher financial response—£5,000 a megawatt for the Forestry Commission and, from next month, community-owned schemes in which the public sector is involved will require a much higher contribution than that. We are driving up the tariff and companies are following. From meetings and discussions that I have had with companies, and not just big companies, I can report that many—probably not all, but many—desire to move away from paying as little as possible and want communities to feel that they are involved and valued, not exploited and abused. That is a very good thing and I strongly welcome it. I agree entirely with Mary Scanlon’s comment that we must analyse these things very carefully. Of course, the Eigg scheme has been very successful; however, the problem with the scheme in Caithness was that it was a bit too sophisticated. We must have an honest and open recognition of the need to proceed with great care. As many members have pointed out, the Scottish Government can play an important leadership role; however, it also has an important role in ensuring that advice is given. Indeed, we have provided substantial support to the Carbon Trust and other bodies to provide advice on all manner of schemes, including schemes for energy efficiency and reduction, which I believe are coming more to the fore partly because of the work that the Greens have been doing over the years and to which I pay tribute. Many people are talking about this. It is just not enough to say, “We’ll reduce carbon emissions and have more renewable energy”; we need to focus on the two different but related issues of cutting energy use and ensuring more energy efficiency. We are giving advice on these matters to people throughout the country and it is vital that we continue that work.

I am very sorry; I would have taken the intervention but I have only 20 seconds left. I am looking forward to the time when, with the will of all members, the Parliament might have more time—perhaps another day in the week—to debate these issues. I felt that time was constrained this morning and that members wanted to say more. I strongly believe that if Parliament had another day to discuss these issues it would be an excellent thing. Indeed, even Mr Harvie would have more time to speak, which is something that I am sure we would all thoroughly enjoy. In that spirit of good will and consensus, I am happy to contribute to the debate.

Ha ha—thank you, Presiding Officer. It is my pleasure to respond to this debate. We have seen a lively and entertaining series of discussions, and full and frank exchanges. At times, I have felt that the temperature in the chamber was almost as high as the ambient temperature in Aboyne yesterday—a record-breaking 23°. That was great for the Scottish tourism sector—a sector that has not been mentioned so far in this debate. Before I do my best to respond to points that members have raised, as tourism minister I will say that we were disappointed that the budget did not contain measures to tackle two particular matters. I am not someone who advocates uncosted measures, and we acknowledge the difficulties that have been pointed out by members right across the chamber—not least by the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth.

I ask Mr Rennie to let me make my point first, and then we can move on. As I was saying, two issues arise. The first is air passenger duty, and the second is VAT. The 2012 budget documents confirm that, in addition to the increase in the air passenger duty rate that has already been announced from April, a further rise will apply from April 2013, related to the retail prices index at that time. The Treasury has estimated that the revenues will increase from £2.7 billion in 2011-12 to £3.9 billion in 2016-17. The managing directors of the airports in Aberdeen, Edinburgh and Glasgow wrote jointly to the chancellor before the budget, urging him to reverse this year’s increase. They said that APD is regularly cited as a barrier to growth. All but two members of the European Union have reduced VAT on accommodation. France has a rate of 5.5 per cent, Germany’s is 7 per cent and Italy’s is 10 per cent. Even Ireland, with the economic difficulties that we all acknowledge that it faces, has managed to reduce its rate. The point of doing that is to attract more visitors to the country and to gain, in fairly short order, more revenue by ceasing to be at such a competitive disadvantage. I am not criticising the Government for not making a substantial reduction in this budget, because we acknowledge its difficulties. However—and this is a serious point—we need to avoid being regarded as a too-high-cost destination.

I would have shortened that intervention if I were the member. I point out that the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth raised those matters in his letter to the right hon George Osborne on 9 March. Among the various topics that Willie Rennie mentioned was the price of postage stamps. Now that the first-class stamp is 60p, I doubt that the Westminster cheque will be in the Holyrood post. I turn to matters that were raised in the debate. The issue of personal allowances was a major issue, with claims and counter-claims being made. Some members were keen to highlight the benefit of the increase in the income tax personal allowance. The SNP is in favour of progressive taxation—that has always been the case, in a moderate way—so we believe that, in principle, that is a good move. However, as some members have said, budgets must be judged in the round and on the impacts of all their measures—that is the key to understanding how to set a budget and must always be borne in mind. It is an unavoidable fact that, as a direct result of the UK Government’s policies, the average Scottish household will be almost £800 worse off next year. That point was made by Kenneth Gibson, who quoted quite a few other statistics that I will not repeat. He was correct to point out that many of his constituents will be worse off, even if they have notionally benefited from the rise in personal allowances, because of the rises in other taxation—for example, the rise in fuel duty, which the cabinet secretary mentioned. They will be worse off in the round. That is what the people outwith the chamber whom we represent will look at. People tend not to remember specific details about budgets other than measures that are insulting, such as the 75p increase in the state pension, or measures that cause untold damage through undermining confidence in business, such as the tax raid on the oil and gas sector last year. According to people such as Sir Ian Wood, who is better placed to opine on those matters than anyone in this chamber, that undermined confidence in boardrooms throughout the world. I turn to personal allowances for pensioners. Members have argued that the withdrawal of age-related personal allowances is a mere simplification exercise. Let us be clear: it is not, it is a tax rise. The Institute for Fiscal Studies concluded that the chancellor “should have avoided dressing up what is clearly a tax increase merely as a simplification.” That is a fairly damning verdict. Willie Rennie mentioned the triple lock, but the basic state pension will increase only in line with the consumer price index in April 2012 and it is expected to increase only in line with the CPI in April 2013, too.

Hang on a second. That means that the state pension will remain unchanged in real terms—that is a fact. Corporation tax was another of the three or four main themes in the debate. Mr Swinney made it clear that he welcomed certain measures in the budget. I thought that Mr Brown was somewhat churlish, in his opening remarks at least, although he contradicted himself three or four minutes into his speech when he acknowledged that Mr Swinney had welcomed some measures. We want Scotland to become an ever-more competitive place for business. However, a uniform corporation tax for the whole of the UK is neither desirable nor economically efficient. Parts of London have an in-built competitive advantage, and devolving corporation tax would provide a range of options to address imbalance. Grant Baird, who I think was the First Minister’s predecessor as Royal Bank of Scotland chief economist, once said that contiguous tax regimes are good for competition.

No. My vision is of a Scotland that is succeeding to a greater extent than it is currently doing. I referred briefly to changes to the oil and gas fiscal regime. Last year, the increase to more than 80 per cent in the supplementary petroleum tax for pre-1993 fields caused more damage than any other budget in the UK has done for many years. The reason it caused so much damage was because it was totally unheralded. There had been no pre-legislative consultation, as happens in the Netherlands—under legislation—and the tax increase came as a total shock to companies that have to plan oil and gas projects over decades. Anyone who has to invest in a project over decades wants stability and certainty, in so far as those exist on this planet. Suddenly, the rug was pulled from under companies. In boardrooms throughout the world, confidence has been undermined. I hope that that damage can and will be repaired as we go forward. As members know, I have a good relationship with Charles Hendry and others on such matters. I welcome the new measures on fuel allowances and decommissioning. However, they do not entirely make up for the damage that was done last year.

No, and I think that I have covered that point more than sufficiently in previous debates. That was a poor point. A huge opportunity has been missed as a result of the failure to boost the economy, at a time when that was so needed, by financing the shovel-ready projects that many members mentioned, such as Dundee central waterfront, Fife energy park, Inverness campus, Forres enterprise park, Lews castle, David Marshall lodge and various road and university projects. All round the country, jobs could be created if projects that are or are nearly shovel ready were allowed to proceed. That is also the view of Michael Levack, of the Scottish Building Federation, who said: “The value of construction output from infrastructure projects last year was around £1.3 billion, or 12 per cent of total industry output ... our own analysis suggests that ... additional funding could potentially have boosted direct employment in the construction industry alone by up to almost 5,000 jobs.” It is tragic that such an opportunity has been missed. That is how the budget will be remembered.

I will set out the Scottish Government’s intentions for the fossil fuel levy. The Scottish Government spent more than five years negotiating with the United Kingdom Government to secure an acceptable deal to release the fossil fuel levy moneys. Members of the Parliament and colleagues in Scotland’s renewables industry made a significant contribution to the debate and should be commended on the role that they played in finally securing the funding. We agreed with the UK Government last year that £103 million would be released to the Scottish Government in financial year 2012-13, with the remaining £103 million being channelled into the green investment bank. Given the significant efforts that so many people made to secure those funds, it is important that we use them in a way that will add most value to Scotland’s renewables sector. I will set out how we intend to do that. By using Scotland’s massive green energy resources and our proven track record in energy innovation, we aim to maximise the economic benefits for Scotland and its people. We have set some of the most ambitious renewable energy targets in the world. Through them, we have forged our reputation as a country that gives strong leadership on, and support for, renewables. That hard-won international repute helps to provide the opportunity to create tens of thousands of new jobs and to secure billions of pounds-worth of investment in our economy. Renewable industry investment will re-industrialise Scotland’s communities; it is already re-industrialising them. Communities such as Nigg, and Arnish in the Western Isles, are already benefiting from key investment. In Orkney, infrastructure developments, activity at the world-leading European Marine Energy Centre and activity at our northern ports have seen the area emerge as the global headquarters of marine energy. That is why renewable energy is a key priority for the Government. Members need only look at the spending review settlement to understand the strength of our commitment; we have committed £200 million to renewables. That funding is focused on stimulating research, development and innovation; on accelerating the deployment of the first commercial marine renewables arrays through the marine renewables commercialisation fund; on transforming our ports and harbours through the national renewables infrastructure fund; and on encouraging inward investors to develop their offshore wind turbines using the POWERS—prototyping for offshore wind energy renewables Scotland—scheme. I am delighted that Edinburgh has been chosen—and has been chosen on its merits—as the headquarters for the green investment bank. That decision acknowledges Scotland’s position at the vanguard of the renewables industry and follows an excellent and professional bid campaign. It demonstrates the effectiveness of the unity that was built across the political, academic and geographical spectrums to argue Edinburgh’s and Scotland’s case. It also underlines the importance of the £103 million from Scotland’s fossil fuel levy that we agreed to capitalise for the green investment bank. It is great news for Edinburgh’s economy and for Scotland’s thriving low-carbon sector. The green investment bank will not cover the whole spectrum of green investment. It intends to invest in projects that are “almost commercial” and to focus on technologies such as offshore wind, energy-from-waste generation and energy efficiency—including support for the green deal. Many attractive large-scale projects in Scotland are ideal investment territory for the green investment bank. Its activities will complement, on a larger scale, the support that we already offer through the NRIF and POWERS. Other equally important renewables sectors that are at an earlier stage of development, or that have community rather than commercial aims, also need investment to realise their ambitions. The fossil fuel levy moneys could, and should, be part of that solution. We have considered how best to utilise the funds, and have drawn on three principles, the first of which is additionality: the funds should be additional to the £200 million of spending review funds that have already been committed, but must also be complementary to those and to other available funds, such as funds from the green investment bank. The second principle is leverage: we will use the funds to attract additional finance from other sources. The final principle is that there must be a legacy: a suitable structure will be found that allows longevity of support and ensures that the right type of investment is committed to projects at the right time. With those three principles strongly in our minds, I today announce our intention to create a renewable energy investment fund, using the £103 million of fossil fuel levy moneys, in order to create a delivery mechanism that has the scope to attract other investors, to offer longer-term support and to offer early support to specific renewables sectors. In building on the experience of the Scottish Investment Bank model, the renewable energy investment fund will, from the next financial year, look to invest in early-stage technologies or community sectors, and to attract interested private sector investors as fund partners. I stress the word “invest”; our intention is not to replicate existing grant support. The fund will focus on investment that complements, rather than duplicates, current funding routes. I have established to work on assessing the key sectors for investment a team that brings together the Scottish Government, Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise, and which includes experts from the Scottish Investment Bank. I expect a strong focus of the fund to be on innovative renewable technologies—in particular, marine, wave and tidal renewables. We have supported technology developers—including Pelamis Wave Power Ltd, Aquamarine Power Ltd and AWS Ocean Energy Ltd—in developing and testing their prototype devices, which has built momentum across the industry. We will continue to support technologies in wave and tidal renewables as they emerge. The sector is now approaching an exciting milestone as it looks to develop and deploy arrays of devices in the water for testing. The new fund will give an extra boost to the sector to deploy more and larger arrays in the future. Another priority area will be support for district heating. There are many benefits to district heating systems, which will offer some protection from rising energy bills and will reduce reliance on imported energy. District heating projects such as the original one in Aviemore, which used biomass—it was fired by locally sourced woodchip—to heat more than 130 homes, and the scheme in Seaton in Aberdeen that serves more than 500 flats, including sheltered accommodation, a sports changing facility and Aberdeen City Council’s beachfront complex, have delivered real benefits to their local communities. Despite that, and despite the many benefits of district heating and more than £5 million in Scottish Government grants since 2007, we still have so little of it. We expect our district heating loan scheme, which has been operating for a year, to be oversubscribed in future years. To make provision for funding district heating within the proposed renewable energy investment fund is the right move, and will ensure that that important sector gets the support that it needs to take off. Lastly, we are leading the way in the UK and beyond in supporting communities and rural businesses to develop their own local renewables projects. Our 2020 500MW target for community and locally owned projects could be worth up to £2.4 billion in revenue, so it represents a huge opportunity to bring the benefits of renewable resources directly to Scotland’s communities, including a great many communities in rural Scotland and our islands. We already support communities through loans to projects, but we are concerned that the market may not be prepared to offer finance for capital build to allow communities to retain 100 per cent ownership. The renewable energy investment fund will look to address that shortfall. We know that the need of the communities sector to find finance is very pressing, which is why I am making available £2 million for community projects in 2012-13. From April, the community and renewable energy scheme will provide post-planning finance to community and locally owned renewables projects, alongside a CARES infrastructure fund to stimulate innovation in connection and in demand management. Now that we have announced our intentions, the joint team is working to design the most appropriate delivery mechanism for the renewable energy investment fund. It will engage with developers, local authorities, universities and other parties to assess the key areas for investment. I am also keen that it work closely with potential funders, including the European Investment Bank, the team that is setting up the green investment bank and private sector finance bodies, in order to ensure that we maximise the leverage that the fund can deliver. We have a lot of work to do over the next few months, but I will endeavour to return to the chamber to provide an update on the progress that is being made. As with the recent decision on the location of the green investment bank, securing access to this part of the fossil fuel levy money was a significant win for Scotland. Through the creation of the renewable energy investment fund, we will ensure that the £103 million is used in a way that will deliver additionality, leverage and legacy, and which will provide another significant win for our renewables industry and Scotland’s economy.

I thank Ken Macintosh and the Labour Party for their support. We will continue to work closely with Mr Macintosh and his colleagues on all these matters. I am happy to confirm that we are determined to ensure that the interests of communities will be fully acknowledged and that we consider social justice issues as part of the approach that we take. I have announced an allocation of £2 million for community renewables. Since May 2007, there have been, for community renewables, more than 800 grants worth some £16 million, so there has been a measure of success, but there is more to do. The difficulties in making some community schemes a reality are clear and manifest and we are committed to working with all parties and with people outwith the chamber to overcome the hurdles and to make such schemes a reality. Ken Macintosh is also right to say that the GIB is for near-commercial projects and the renewables energy investment fund is for more nascent technologies in their earlier stages. He is also right to say that because that is the case, the nascent technologies involve greater risk than those that are nearer commercial deployment. I think that that is a matter on which everyone would agree. The purpose of the renewable energy investment fund, however, is to incentivise and assist the development of wave and tidal energy, among other methods. I am delighted that so many companies in the world have chosen Scotland in general and the Pentland Firth in particular to develop their devices. The potential benefits that wave and tidal energy can bring to Scotland and the world cannot be overstated. There are risks and we will consider them carefully, but I think that we all agree that we are embarked on a worthwhile and sensible journey.

Yes. I am happy to give that confirmation. We spend a great deal of time seeking to ensure that Scottish companies will have the opportunity to bid for and, we hope, to obtain the necessary work, and that Scottish ports—in particular ports, harbours and businesses in the Highlands and Islands—have the opportunity so to do. I commend to Mary Scanlon the progress that has been made in Campbeltown, Arnish, Nigg, Ardersier, Kishorn, Wick, Scrabster and the Orkney ports. There is a great deal to be done, but we are already achieving a great deal and the potential is enormous.

I was very happy to visit Fife Chamber of Commerce last week, as well as to visit Methil on—if my notes are correct—19 December. Fife is in the vanguard of the progress that is being made. I want in particular to pay tribute to Burntisland Fabrications Ltd—which is leading so much of the work there—and to Samsung for its investment. Samsung has chosen to have its European location in Fife energy park and is planning to make a substantial investment of up to £100 million, which is expected to create more than 500 new jobs in Scotland.

I have just announced that specific provision will be made for community renewables projects that follow the various projects that have been undertaken under CARES and its predecessor scheme. I acknowledge the work that Sarah Boyack and others carried out in that regard. We are continuing work that Labour Party members and their Liberal colleagues initiated, so this is an important cross-party effort. We need to try to de-risk the process of community renewables investment. Communities often do not have financial expertise and are unfamiliar with tasks such as getting a grid connection, dealing with corporate matters, setting up as the appropriate company and dealing with other parties who are involved. It is appropriate that the required assistance and advice are provided on all such matters. We are determined to ensure that the mechanics—if I can put it in that way—work as effectively as possible and with minimum risk to the communities involved. We have a reasonable track record of success in that regard, but we are always happy to consider further specific measures that will mean that more community renewables schemes proceed.

Yes. I had the pleasure of visiting Rob Gibson’s constituency—as he knows, because he was with me—on 12 March, where we saw the great progress that is being made at Scrabster, and discussed the progress that it is hoped will be made at Wick. Both harbours are well placed to take advantage of the opportunities and both are led by people who are determined to ensure that the opportunities do not slip from their grasp. The answer to the member’s question about smaller companies and new entrants who were excluded from the leasing round is yes—we want to help them. I met one such company just yesterday. There are projects for 1.7GW of wave and tidal power in the Pentland Firth, which presents a massive opportunity for the part of Scotland that Mr Gibson represents. We fully intend to ensure that that potential is realised.

Yes. I agree with Sarah Boyack and I am keen to explore the idea. I visited Dumfries and Galloway Council yesterday, which is taking an active interest in the matter, and I understand that Glasgow City Council is involved in a number of projects that could well be early candidates for consideration by the green investment bank. We want more work to be done on district heating, which I agree has been slow to take off. Once again, I think that we stand four square with the member in that regard.

Many of the engineering skills that are required in fabrication of the devices and apparatus of the renewables industry, and of the support vessels and equipment for the industry, can and are being used. There is a crossover between oil and gas and renewables and there should be a crossover between shipbuilding and renewables. I am keen to encourage the work that is done in—or near—the member’s part of the world; for example in relation to the possibility of upgrading the dock at Westway and dredging the River Cart, which might assist steel engineering companies to grow their renewables business. There are no parts of Scotland that should not be able to benefit from the renewables revolution.

I give Patrick Harvie that assurance; we are happy to work with all the bodies to which he refers. In addition, if we can be of assistance to any scheme in the constituency of any member of any party in this chamber, we would be happy to do so.

It would be inappropriate for me comment on any application that may come before me for decision as a minister. However, I can say in general terms that there are considerable opportunities. Mr Dey’s constituency is close to the location of several of them, in particular in Dundee and Montrose. I visited Montrose harbour fairly recently. I know that Montrose was disappointed about not being included as a national renewables infrastructure plan port—it was the next one on the list—but it is well placed, for example for operations and maintenance. The east coast of Scotland is set to see a jobs windfall resulting in tens of thousands of Scots and their families developing careers that will be needed for centuries.

I was unaware that I was going to have the pleasure of meeting Claudia Beamish next week, but I look forward to it. I am happy to confirm that co-operatives can play a vital part in renewables, as they do in so many areas of Scottish life. I acknowledge the part that is played by many banks, including the Co-operative Bank, in that respect. There are cases in which communities that do not have vast amounts of money—or any money—are unable to proceed because they cannot get the last 5, 10 or 15 per cent. As I said in the statement, the fund will bridge that gap. It gives us the opportunity to make those schemes happen.

Yes. I have mentioned the areas on which I think the fund is likely to focus, but we will not exclude biofuels from consideration. We have to consider each proposal carefully, but I am happy to confirm that proposals of the type that Nigel Don mentioned are not debarred from applying to the fund. I am happy to work with him to develop that further.

Scotland has some of the world’s leading experts in just about every discipline of renewable energy. I am delighted to accept the member’s invitation to meet the experts at Edinburgh university

In November 2007, the then Secretary of State for Work and Pensions, Peter Hain, approved a five-year modernisation programme, which resulted in the closure of 29 sites, including one in Hillington in Scotland. In 2010—three years into that five-year process—the current UK Government commissioned Liz Sayce of Disability Rights UK to undertake a review of specialist disability employment support by the Department for Work and Pensions. That review resulted in the DWP’s decision to move Remploy out of Government ownership and close four of the nine remaining factories in Scotland, with the loss of 111 jobs and putting a further 251 jobs at risk. The Scottish Government is deeply disappointed by that decision and the manner in which it was made. We are seeing a steady erosion of supported employment support by the UK Government. In today’s challenging labour market, finding a job in any circumstances can be challenging; that is doubly so for disabled people. It is true that most disabled people in Scotland do not work in a supported business, but it is also true that, for some, working in a supported environment may be their only chance of accessing employment. We know that supported employment can be very effective in helping disabled people into work, so we remain firmly committed to the implementation of the supported employment framework in Scotland, which we published in February 2010. Although we recognise that many people in supported employment in Scotland do not work in supported businesses, we simply cannot underestimate the impact that supported businesses across Scotland have on those who work in them and their families. Information that Scotland’s supported businesses provided last year suggested that more than 1,600 disabled people are employed by supported businesses in Scotland, including in Erskine, Remploy, Forth Sector and Haven Products. However, there is no doubt that some of those businesses are struggling, and I want to ensure that we are taking steps to support those businesses where we can. I attended an event in February.

I will take an intervention from the lady first.

I will deal with that matter in more detail later, but the member has a point. There is patchiness. At the event in February to which I was referring, I heard from a business in Lanarkshire—Beltane Products—that had excellent support. Obviously, we would like to see that level of support replicated across the way, but I will come back to that and talk more about it.

There are various questions there. I will deal with the first point. I recognise that charities that are involved in assisting people with a disability have different views on these matters, and it would be wrong for me to spend too much time characterising them. I hope that the rest of my remarks will address the other points that the member made. In order to do what we can, we will shortly commission a review of Scotland’s supported businesses. I have asked that it be taken forward as quickly as possible to ensure that we offer as much support as we can to Scotland’s supported businesses in the coming months. The meeting in February helped—and was partly designed and intended—to determine the content of the review. In other words, the Government did not say of the review, “This is the way it is going to be.” We asked people who are involved in Remploy and the other businesses to share in the construction of the remit for the review. It was clear that those who attended the meeting believed that the review should involve a mixture of individual site visits and thematic seminars to allow people to come together and share knowledge and information. Among the support available to third sector bodies is that provided by the just enterprise consortium, which was launched in July 2011 and which involves a budget of £3 million over three years. It provides business support and learning services to enterprising third sector organisations to enable their development. To date, more than 500 organisations from all the local authority areas in Scotland have been approved to receive business support through the programme, although a relatively small number of supported businesses have applied for support—I should make that clear. Just enterprise support complements the economic development infrastructure in Scotland—Scottish Enterprise, Highlands and Islands Enterprise and the business gateway. Those Remploy businesses that are looking to move to a social enterprise model could benefit from the just enterprise programme. They could also make use of the services to support the third sector and to develop volunteering through the network of local third sector interfaces. Should they show the potential to successfully adopt the social enterprise model, they could become eligible for direct funding through our programme of investment, which is expected to become available next year. I turn to public sector procurement. It is clear that the key to the sustainability of supported businesses in Scotland is the ability to bring in business. We are certain that supported businesses can make a valuable contribution to the economy, and we have been working with them to realise that ambition. The sustainable procurement action plan asks all Scottish public bodies to have a strategy for awarding at least one contract to a supported business or factory under the provisions of article 19 of the European public procurement directive.

It is not for me to determine what local government should do at this point. I have already said that the plan asks each public body to award at least one contract to a supported business or factory. Knowing, as I do, councillors across all parties in Scotland, I am sure that every councillor in every party or none wants to do all that they can in this area.

I ask the member to let me carry on, because I am about to cover many of the matters that, I imagine, will be of interest to her and others. In contrast to the way in which Westminster has handled the matter, we in the Scottish Government believe that more can be done to examine and analyse the future of supported businesses in Scotland. First, we introduced the supplier finder directory, which allows buyers to search for supported businesses to fulfil a contract. Secondly, we changed public contracts Scotland, the online portal for finding public sector work, so that buyers are automatically alerted whenever a supported business can fulfil the requirements of the planned contract, and they are offered the facility to reserve the contract under article 19. Thirdly, we have provided free tender-writing workshops to supported businesses and other third sector organisations. Those measures will not, in themselves, be the answer to all the questions, but nonetheless they are all practical, meaningful and necessary steps. There are further steps. In 2010, we worked with the British Association for Supported Employment to publish a brochure that promotes Scotland’s supported businesses. This year, we will put in place a framework reserved contract for supported businesses and factories. The framework will be open for use by the entire Scottish public sector and it will include contracts for furniture, document management and textiles, including uniforms. I am advised that the framework will be in place by the autumn. Finally, during the current session of Parliament, we will introduce a sustainable procurement bill. In consultation, we want to consider what further measures might be appropriate to assist supported businesses in Scotland as part of that bill. That is a significant step forward. Never will it have been easier for public bodies to award contracts to supported businesses. I hope that all parties will support that measure. We expect the contract notice and invitation to tender documents to be published in the coming weeks. This is no handout or sympathy vote. If they wish to get public contracts, the firms will have to demonstrate that they can offer the taxpayer value for money. Members should be in no doubt about the professionalism, capability and dynamism of Scotland’s supported businesses and factories; I have every confidence in them. I am clear that we want as many Remploy employees as possible and the services that they provide to be a part of the process. On the Remploy DWP support package, the UK Government’s decision on Remploy is nothing short of a devastating blow to those who are involved. It is not just about individual employees; the loss of jobs will have a profound effect on their families. Last Thursday, I met Maria Miller to discuss the matter. This week, I have met trade union representatives from Remploy. At my meeting with the UK minister, I made it clear that I expect the DWP to provide every support to Remploy staff whose workplaces might close, and to do so for as long as necessary.

Those issues were broadly discussed and, indeed, that is the final major item that I will cover in the time that remains available to me. The UK minister and I agreed that we need to work co-operatively to get the very best possible outcomes for Remploy employees in Scotland, whether they move to new jobs or get involved in new businesses that arise on the existing sites, to answer Mark McDonald’s point. When I met the trade union representatives this week, we agreed that every effort should be made to seek viable business alternatives for those sites. The DWP support is all about helping people to move out; we want to look at what is there and consider what new enterprises could be grown from the existing sites and equipment and, most important, the skills of the Remploy workers. To that end, I have agreed with Scottish Enterprise that, along with key partners, it will engage with those who are involved to analyse and provide support to anyone with an interest in the businesses, whether it be employees, private businesses, or social enterprise. Scottish Enterprise stands ready to consider any realistic proposal that might emerge. To support that work, I also asked the DWP to provide us with any information that could assist employees, third sector businesses and agencies in securing alternative business models or future employment for the Remploy workforce. There might be bids from organisations to take over the sites or equipment. I also asked the DWP to make sure that the Scottish Government is part of any process to assess those bids. It remains to be seen whether the package of support that the DWP is offering will be sufficient to help those who want to find alternative employment. I intend to monitor the work every step of the way. I want to mobilise whatever Scottish services are necessary through our partnership action for continuing employment team, and I believe that PACE could be the best conduit for the DWP support package. I believe that Remploy will meet PACE representatives soon to discuss the offer of support, and we await a decision from Maria Miller on that. I will meet the chairman of Remploy tomorrow and Angela Constance will meet Remploy next week. I genuinely hope that we can all work together to get positive outcomes for everyone concerned from this very challenging situation. I move, That the Parliament is deeply disappointed by the UK Government’s decision to close four Remploy factories in Scotland with the loss of 111 jobs and to place the future of five further factories, affecting a further 251 people, in doubt; notes that the Scottish Government has requested information from the Department for Work and Pensions that could assist employees, the third sector, business and agencies in securing alternative business models, demonstrating a sustainable future for the remaining factories and ensuring future employment for the Remploy workforce; further notes that, should alternative solutions not be found, support for individuals should be directed through Partnership Action for Continuing Employment (PACE) in partnership with JobCentre Plus; welcomes the actions taken by the Scottish Government to increase public sector contracting opportunities with supported businesses, accounting for £24.1 million in 2010-11, and looks forward to the delivery of the framework for the provision of goods through supported businesses, which includes provision of textiles and furniture.

I give Helen Eadie a cast-iron assurance that the review will not prevent us from giving help and devoting attention as required over the coming weeks and months.

I warmly congratulate Sarah Boyack on securing the debate and I entirely agree with her analysis. The choice of Edinburgh as the location for the green investment bank was the result of a number of things, but above all it was the result of the unity of purpose in the campaign and in the leadership of the Edinburgh Chamber of Commerce and Scottish Financial Enterprise. Members of all parties in the Scottish Parliament were united, and Glasgow and Edinburgh were at one in their co-operation—that is perhaps not an alliance of natural bedfellows—and the universities all fell in behind the bid. It was truly a united campaign, although it was not one in which the outcome could be taken for granted—I suspect that it was a close-run thing. However, the case was made strongly across the board, and I congratulate all members. Sarah Boyack’s tone was upbeat, in an Edinburgh sort of way—a kind of douce and restrained jubilation. Just before the debate on 22 February, in which most members in this debate took part, there was a united photo call, which took place in the penthouse suite of one of the offices of Quayle Munro on a very windy day, as befits the campaign for a body that will hopefully fund some of our offshore wind developments. Sarah Boyack, Alison Johnstone, Liam McArthur and I attended that windswept photo shoot. As Marco Biagi said, we are entitled to slap ourselves on the back. At the same time, though, we should be thinking about the future. The practical points that Mr Brown raised are all absolutely correct; I want to touch on some of those. We have been in touch with the UK GIB, as it is at the moment. It is in the incubation stage, which I understand is the junior tadpole stage of a bank, as it transmogrifies to become a fully fledged, grown-up bank. It will start doing business in April and it will be looking for early hits. My officials have had discussions with the organisation. We will keep fully in touch with it and I look forward to meeting the appropriate staff as soon as possible. We should keep working together in the alliance that we have formed with the Edinburgh Chamber of Commerce, the SFE and so on. We need some form of support group to keep that unity of purpose going. Individuals who have given leadership to the campaign and who, in the case of Owen Kelly and his colleagues, helped us to win the campaign will be able to play a strong part in making things happen. We are looking at all that and there is unity of purpose. Alison Johnstone mentioned the large numbers for the scale of investment that is needed to achieve our ambitions—£200 billion is a figure that one sees frequently. I always mistrust large numbers, but it certainly will be a large figure in this case; we just do not know quite how large. The point is that the bank will only have £3 billion, so it needs to lever in lots of private money. Above all, the key will be to create an environment in which private sector investors have confidence to invest. A number of factors are involved here. For example the costs of offshore wind have to be bought down, which is a challenge for the industry. It is aware of that challenge; it is up for it and it is addressing it. However, we also need private sector finance. As it happens, I was at a Chatham house rules meeting in London this week with a number of financiers, at which I learned that there are substantial private sector funds for renewables. That is excellent news. I met Charles Hendry, with whom I enjoy a good working relationship. We are working hard to win the vote in the referendum, and I believe that he is shortly to become a Scottish resident, although that may be an uphill struggle. However, Charles and I get on just fine. I think that we both acknowledge that one of the challenges is that we have to set the ground rules on electricity market reform. There is a danger at the moment of a bit of an investment hiatus in some sectors, for example in hydro power. We all want to move swiftly to make EMR work; that is a shared purpose. We have suggested that as part of the institutional framework for EMR, the Scottish Government and the devolved Administrations play a part in a kind of delivery committee. That proposal is on the table. We look forward to working constructively with the Westminster Government because the Scottish National Party believes that, irrespective of the outcome of the referendum, an integrated UK energy market will be needed on both sides of the border. England needs our renewable energy and Scotland needs England’s demand for our renewable energy. That mutual need is one of the drivers for a policy of common shared purpose. Marco Biagi quite rightly referred to transmission charges. I hope that, before very long, we can have a debate in the Parliament on transmission charges and project transmit, and that we will have the same unity of purpose in persuading the Office of the Gas and Electricity Markets that, although it has moved a step in the right direction with its draft proposals, we urgently require it to include a solution in its “minded to” letter—which will be issued on 19 April, I think—that recognises that the islands are part of the UK, too, and cannot be excluded from the proposals. I believe that the compromise proposal has the support of the Liberal party and SNP elected representatives, and I believe, hope and expect that it has the support of the islands councils. We are waiting for confirmation of that. I hope that we will unite so that the islands are not prevented from harnessing the potential benefits of renewable energy. I will finish with an observation. Before I became a politician in 1999, I was a solicitor. That the method of arguing in the courts, where I used to appear before the sheriff, is somewhat different from political argument constantly has surprised and irked me—indeed, it still does from time to time. In the courts, one had to use reasoned arguments to the sheriff; if one strayed into personal comments, abuse or comments on the validity of one’s opponent’s arguments, one rapidly got shot down. Sometimes in politics, I have thought that extraneous arguments have far too much scope to play. The campaign for the green investment bank was won on the basis of the arguments. It was won because we united together, stood behind the arguments and did not get involved with party politics. Long may that approach continue. I congratulate every member and person who won the campaign for Edinburgh. We look forward to working closely in co-operation with our colleagues in the London Government and the London branch of the green investment bank. Meeting closed at 17:42.

Based on published figures for 2010, Scotland’s electricity generation percentages were 30.6 per cent from nuclear, 29.5 per cent from coal and 19.1 per cent from renewables. Last Monday, the Scottish Government launched a consultation on its draft electricity generation policy statement, which highlights how Scotland currently generates electricity to meet demand and outlines the pathway for the changes that are needed to meet our targets. The statement confirms that the 2020 target is achievable, while recognising it as a challenge to the energy supply sector, our renewables industry innovators and Scotland’s communities.

As I am the minister who will be required to deal with any such decision, it would be wholly inappropriate for me to make any comment on that matter. However, I can reassure the member with regard to the Hunterston nuclear power station. The position is crystal clear and is stated in paragraph 50 of the EGPS, which, as it happens, I have before me. That makes it absolutely clear that, if the office for nuclear regulation is “satisfied that high levels of safety and security could be maintained over the planned lifetime of the installation”, then, “Subject to the relevant safety cases being made, the Scottish Government would not oppose operating life extension applications” at Hunterston.

Six hundred and seven applications worth more than £50 million were received for the then £4 million enterprise growth fund. The fund was increased to £6 million in December last year. There was a two-stage application process. In the first stage, applications were assessed against specified fund outcomes and published criteria. Those that progressed to stage 2 were assessed on their financial information and business plans. Ultimately, 64 organisations were successful in receiving funding.

I am delighted that 64 organisations throughout Scotland were successful. That is a credit to them. Plainly, we want to improve further our contribution to the third sector, and we are happy to consider any productive and constructive suggestions towards that end.

On 13 March 2012, Scottish Natural Heritage published guidance on the siting and designing of small-scale wind turbines of between 15m and 50m in height; assessing the cumulative impacts of onshore wind energy developments; assessing connectivity with special protection areas; and assessing the impact of small-scale wind energy proposals on the natural heritage. The guidance documents are available on the SNH website.

As a general rule, I am always happy to share credit liberally across the chamber—

—with members from all parties, absent or present. I am slightly surprised, however, that the member wants to take credit for a measure that he does not seem to approve of. Setting aside that nit-picking observation, I should say, as the minister responsible for taking decisions on these matters, that each case is looked at very carefully on its merits. It would be wrong and misleading—not to say dangerous—to start to generalise, precisely because each application is considered on its merits.

I will certainly convey the member’s remarks to SNH. I am all for full engagement, meetings and working together with all parties to ensure that Scotland achieves her vast green energy potential for the benefit of the younger members of society, some of whom I note are watching these proceedings from the public gallery. I am not sure that I would necessarily use the term “Klondike”—but perhaps I am wrong. After all, there are huge benefits for Scotland’s communities. We have set a target of 500MW for community and locally owned renewables, which could be worth £2,400 million to communities across Scotland, and our £23.5 million community and renewable energy—or CARES—loan scheme enables communities to benefit from our renewable energy. Perhaps the member is right: there will be a Klondike, but a Klondike that will benefit communities throughout Scotland.

I thank Mark McDonald for bringing this debate to the chamber. I recognise the work that was done in Aberdeen, where he is a councillor. I understand that Aberdeen City Council implemented the measure in 2010 and repeated it in 2011, and that it has proved popular with the staff. I am told that Ewan Sutherland, the head of human resources, has confirmed that, although the measure is not a formal policy of the council, it will continue to be implemented unless there is a good reason for it not to be. The debate has demonstrated that the issue that we are discussing is one that affects many people’s lives, as they have to deal with having a six-week gap between the times when money comes into the house. It is a practical issue that affects people on low wages. Mr Macintosh referred to the proportion of people in society in Scotland—an alarmingly high proportion, if those figures are to be relied on—who are affected by the problem, with the worry that that entails. Margaret Burgess has spent a lifetime advising people who face those daily predicaments, and I used to advise people who had serious debt problems. Debt corrodes people’s spirit and often leads to family breakdown and exacerbates all sorts of other problems. Mr McDonald is also to be commended for the fact that he has proposed a solution. Very often, we have debates in which we have diagnosis but no prognosis—in which we complain about something but offer no solution. We must recognise that Mr McDonald has presented us with a practical solution, of a kind. It is not a total solution, but it is one that would alleviate the pressure for many. The way in which he has argued that the measure be introduced is the right way. It would be wrong to proceed by compulsion—indeed, it might not be possible to do so. As was recognised by many of the speakers, this is not a matter over which we have power, and private businesses will determine their own practices. Some businesses might determine pay cycles with regard to their cash flow. In some cases, their business might be seasonal, and they might not have much income coming in in January, which means that speeding up the payment of the January payroll by even a week would constitute a factor that would have to be taken into account. I will refer to the approaches that are taken in a few sectors of society. The Scottish Government gives staff the option of receiving a Christmas salary advance of up to £300, which is payable around 15 December and is recovered from end-December pay. In 2011, 250 staff used that facility. It provides the staff with an option to make up their own minds about whether to receive some of their December salary early. Also, there is no knock-on impact into the new year and January salary payments remain unaffected. The Scottish Government considered the possibility of paying December and January salaries early and there was a consultation with Scottish Government staff on the issue in 2008. That resulted in a broadly 50:50 outcome between those in favour of early payments and those against. Perhaps that is a danger of holding a referendum—whether that is an irrelevant comment, I will leave it to others to judge. In any event, no change was made because there was no clear result; December pay day remains the last working day of the month minus one and January pay day remains the last working day of the month. Local authorities are entitled to formulate their own policies, and I think that they would resist a national arrangement. COSLA has indicated that that is the case, highlighting the fact that not all local authority payrolls operate a four-weekly cycle, with some staff being paid on a fortnightly basis. In addition, the date on which salaries are paid is not uniform. Therefore, it would not be possible to implement a single approach across all local authorities. Nevertheless, as Dennis Robertson said, one can achieve quite a lot by reasoned argument and advocacy made to individual councils, as Mark McDonald’s example illustrates. Some national health service boards in Scotland have considered the proposal, and it has been considered elsewhere in the public sector. It is a matter that staff themselves can raise or ask to be raised directly with the management or through their trade union representatives. The Chartered Institute of Payroll Professionals points out that, in terms of company cash flow, there may be particular times of the month when the invoicing credit control procedures take place and income is expected. That will have been taken into account in making the decision about the date of the month on which pay day will fall. Bank closures may also be the reason why early payment is made in December in some cases, making it a matter of administrative necessity rather than an act of intended assistance. I strongly agree with the points that have been made about pay day loans. There are some circumstances in which the use of a pay day loan can mean that an individual avoids paying a substantial overdraft charge, for example, that could exceed the interest on a pay day loan if the loan is paid back at the end of the next month. However, we know of horrific examples of what happens if it is not repaid—if it is rolled over—which we debated when Margaret Burgess rightly raised this important topic some time ago in one of the first members’ business debates of the year. The Scottish Government is pursuing the matter in a number of ways. Pay day loans are what people resort to when the money runs out, and the situation could sometimes be alleviated were payment of January salaries to be made a week early. Those are precisely the circumstances in which some people resort to pay day loans, and Mark McDonald’s proposed solution could play a part in reducing the number of people who resort to pay day loans. As has been said, when somebody takes out a pay day loan, that can lead to a huge debt problem. Margaret Burgess concentrated her remarks on the phenomenon of debt: once it starts, it is like a snowball rolling down a hill, gaining momentum that cannot be pulled back from, with horrific consequences. That is the case not least because the annual percentage rates that are charged by some pay day loan companies if the loan is not paid back on time are horrendous. I have an example of a representative APR of 4,214 per cent from Wonga.com. Credit unions play an important part and I take this opportunity to pay tribute to their work. I hope that the Scottish Government and the UK Government will do more to promote credit unions. My final substantive point will be to, once again, promote the debt arrangement scheme. By coincidence, tomorrow I will visit Kilwinning to see Rosemary Winter-Scott, the Accountant in Bankruptcy, and her staff, who do a marvellous job of administering the debt arrangement scheme, which is a diligence and interest stopper. If people can get their debts sorted out and pay them off over a period of time to an agreed schedule, that will remove stress and anxiety in many cases because they will feel that they have coped with the problem and found a solution to address the issue. We should encourage that and I pay tribute to the Daily Record for the work that it did recently when we had some television advertising to promote the availability of the debt arrangement scheme. We encourage people to pay their debts, not just get relief from them by using bankruptcy or the trust deed option. When people can pay, we encourage them so to do. I recognise that people should resort to the debt arrangement scheme when they need to, and I hope that that is relevant and within the remit of tonight’s debate. I am conscious that my time is not only up but exceeded. I conclude by thanking Mr McDonald and all members who have stayed this evening to take part in the debate. There is no single solution, but public and private sector employers can and should talk to their employees to find a practical and mutually beneficial way of managing cash flow. I hope that these issues will be actively considered in Scotland to the betterment of all. Meeting closed at 17:37.

I thank the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee for its thorough and collaborative scrutiny of the Land Registration etc (Scotland) Bill. I also thank the Scottish Law Commission for its excellent work in developing most of the policies that appear in the bill, and I thank those who have given oral and written evidence to the committee at stage 1. The Land Registration (Scotland) Act 1979 introduced a modern map-based land register that provides clear information about land ownership, backed by a state guarantee to title. However, since rights on land began being registered in the land register, only 55 per cent of properties have been so registered. The bill will replace most of the 1979 act with a piece of 21st century legislation that will provide for completion of the land register and will place on a statutory footing the practices of the keeper of the registers of Scotland. The bill also addresses legal tensions that have caused confusion and uncertainty for property owners since the introduction of the land register, by realigning registration law with general property law in Scotland. In addition to those primary purposes, the bill has two significant secondary purposes. The first is to introduce a system of advance notices for use in conveyancing transactions, and the second is to amend the Requirements of Writing (Scotland) Act 1995 to allow electronic documents to be legally valid and to enable electronic registration of those documents. I have followed the committee’s stage 1 deliberations on the bill and commend committee members on their diligent and thorough report. The report requests clarification of a number of matters. The committee asks for clarification of what was meant when I said in my evidence to the committee: “there will be no keeper-induced registration of large and complex land titles in this parliamentary session”.—[Official Report, Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, 8 February 2012; c 949.] I confirm that, if resources allow it, Registers of Scotland may use the power to register titles within research areas, which are predominately urban areas, such as flats and houses. The committee also asks whether a fee will be payable for keeper-induced registrations. I confirm that no fees will be charged for such registrations during this parliamentary session, although the bill will allow fees to be payable for keeper-induced registration. The use of time-and-line fees has been raised. At present, fees are charged mainly on an ad valorem basis. I confirm that we are not considering moving to time-and-line charging for the majority of registrations. However, time-and-line charging may be considered for complex registrations of high-value properties. It is under consideration in relation to services such as the keeper’s pre-registration title investigation service. I assure the Parliament and the committee that the Scottish Government will consult stakeholders before introducing a fees order, which would be subject to affirmative procedure. The committee’s report recommends including in the bill aspirational targets for completion of the land register. I understand the importance of the aim, but do not favour that approach. On top of the extra triggers for registration that are in the bill, completion could be accelerated by keeper-induced registration and by promoting voluntary registration. The keeper and I are doing all that we can to encourage voluntary registrations. On keeper-induced registration, the keeper has shared with the committee her initial thinking on how to take the issue forward, and work to develop that is proceeding. I will pass the committee’s comments about mapping to the keeper’s mapping working group, and I will ensure that the keeper writes to the committee with an update from that group. I would like to reaffirm my commitment to lodge at stage 2 an amendment that will remove the requirement to prove that there has been seven years of abandonment of land before a person can become a prescriptive claimant under the bill. The committee recommends that the Scottish Government consider introducing a public process of advertising abandoned land. We feel that there are pros and cons to that suggestion. I will, therefore, consider the proposal further, in advance of stage 2. I welcome the committee’s view that it is content for the new statutory offence in section 108 to remain in the bill. The committee has heard much evidence in relation to the offence provision. In particular, I note the Law Society of Scotland’s opposition. As part of my on-going consideration of the provision, I have written to the president of the Law Society to request further information on fraud involving solicitors. The aim of the offence provision is to disrupt serious organised crime and to criminalise individuals who knowingly use the land register to facilitate criminal behaviour. It is not the Government’s intention to criminalise honest solicitors who make genuine errors in applications for registration. The keeper and the Solicitor General have told me that they will work with the Law Society of Scotland to help to provide guidance to the legal profession. In view of the concerns that the committee has expressed in its report, the Government will carefully consider in advance of stage 2 whether amendment to section 108 is appropriate. There has been some debate about whether one or two advance notices are required when a disposition and standard security are being granted. In those circumstances, two advance notices will be required if the lender wishes fully to protect the standard security. That is the scheme that was devised by the Scottish Law Commission and the Government is satisfied that it is simple and that it will work. On the provisions on shared plot title sheets, it appears that there are differing views in the evidence that the committee received on the policy. The aim of the policy is to clarify who owns land and to assist conveyancing practice so that a deed has to refer to only one title number. This is a complex subject, so I will provide an in-depth answer in my written response to the committee’s report. The committee specifically asked in its stage 1 report for clarification of certain miscellaneous matters that were raised by stakeholders. I do not propose to address those fully in my opening speech, due to the technical nature of many of those matters, but I am happy to speak about them later, if members wish it. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Land Registration etc. (Scotland) Bill.

I will consider further and respond in due course on reduced fees for voluntary registration. Does Mr Fraser agree that there is an incentive for voluntary registration of, for example, large landed estates, because the current ad valorem fee does not reflect the actual cost to the keeper of carrying out the work for those complex cases? Therefore, there is an incentive to landed estates and even to large estates that are held in the public sector, such as Forestry Commission estates, to take advantage of what might be regarded as bargain-basement fees, according to the existing table.

I do not want to interrupt the flow of Mr Fraser’s speech too frequently, but I ask him—as one solicitor to another—whether it is fair to say that the high cost of disputes has more to do with solicitors’ fees than with the keeper’s fees.

I have thoroughly enjoyed the debate. There have been useful contributions from all sides. If I do not reply in my short speech to some of the suggestions and, in particular, questions asked of me, I will ask my officials to ensure that I do so before stage 2 begins. I was not entirely expecting the revelation from Ken Macintosh that part of him is a communist. As far as I can recollect, we did not hear much about that during his leadership campaign, but it was an engaging revelation. In the light of that, I begin by addressing the remarks that Rhoda Grant, initially, made about the land reform agenda. The purpose of the bill is not to reform the law of property but to update, modernise and make more efficient, accessible and user friendly the law of registration of property in Scotland. That may be a pedantic, lawyerly point—others will be the judge of that—but this is therefore not the forum for reform of our property law, although I fully recognise the deeply held views that many members, from most of the parties represented in the chamber, have on the matter. In making that point, I do not belittle the arguments that were put, nor do I dismiss out of hand the points that were made; it is simply that it is not the function of the bill to deal with those matters. Nonetheless, as a minister who always prefers to concentrate on the good news rather than the negative, I am sure that Rhoda Grant will join me in congratulating the Scottish Government on the announcement on 20 February that the Scottish land fund will help more rural communities purchase their own land, with £6 million available over the next three financial years. I am sure that that point is understood. Beneficial ownership was raised, but that, too, goes beyond the province of the bill, because the position of the keeper is that the keeper must register who owns the land of Scotland. That is the keeper’s duty on receipt of an application for registration of land. It is not the purpose of the keeper to reform the law of trusts, of companies or of taxation. Indeed, the latter matter is largely reserved to Westminster. Patrick Harvie rose— I will carry on for a bit, if I may. Mr Harvie acknowledged that point, as did others. I can tell him that we have had some discussions on the matter and officials are looking to see whether we have the powers to deal with any of the matters referred to in relation to beneficial ownership, which might reduce the scope for tax evasion, tax avoidance and the use of tax havens but—before Mr Harvie gets up—I do not want to raise his hopes, because I think that that would require the transfer of the powers to the Scottish Parliament.

I always do that. Why are reserves necessary? First, because the keeper cannot have access to consolidated funds; she must balance her budget. She does not have recourse to knock on Mr Swinney’s door and ask for a top-up because things are not going well. The reserves have been far in excess of £75 million in the past 10 or 15 years. In a sense, that is a good thing, because it has allowed the keeper to deal with the losses that have been incurred over the past few years. I draw members’ attention to the fact that applications have reduced from 438,000 in 2007 to only 245,000 in 2010-11. They have nearly halved, so the income from them has nearly halved. The keeper must have reserves to deal with the loss-making potential because, sadly, such situations arise. Secondly, the keeper needs to keep reserves because land registration provides a state-backed indemnity. If something goes wrong, we pay out. That is one benefit of land registration. In one case south of the border, in England, our colleagues had to pay out £8 million for one case, so members can see that the keeper needs to be prudent. The keeper also needs a reserve for investment in, for example, ARTL. In that context, Stuart McMillan sensibly devoted his speech to a practical matter. I take seriously the evidence that we heard from various solicitors about the ARTL system’s efficiency, and we will ensure that we consult on all such matters. How long do I have, Presiding Officer?

Oh good. I thought that I needed to finish.

Members will be relieved that there was no premature conclusion to my remarks and that I am allowed to say a little more, which is jolly good, of course.

Well, why not?

I cannot really, although I discussed the matter with Rob Gibson in John o’Groats on Monday—and indeed in Thurso and Wick. The matter is important, but it is not in itself impeding the ability of people to develop businesses, jobs and opportunities. The primary purpose of the register is to provide a safe, effective and reliable means of transacting property in Scotland, as Mr Malik said. It is a commercial tool, first and foremost. That is its purpose and its function, and that is its benefit, as Ms Goldie said. Of course we all want to complete the register as quickly as possible, but the only way to do that would be by making registration compulsory, which would require people to pay fees to lawyers and to the keeper. We do not think that that is reasonable, especially in a recession. There are fine judgments to be made about whether public bodies use their scarce resources to spend money on voluntarily registering large tracts of Scotland. There is a case for an upgrade, as it were, in the number of titles of large properties, whether in the private or public sector, and I have argued that the current fees structure creates an in-built incentive to register. I have discussed the matter with, for example, Scottish Land and Estates, and I think that there was a meeting of minds about encouraging but not requiring registration. On keeper-induced registrations, I say in response to Annabel Goldie that section 29 is necessary, because there will be properties that the keeper, using her judgment, will feel that it is sensible to include, to complete the register. For example, if Acacia Drive has 29 semi-detached properties, one of which is not registered, it is advantageous to the keeper to bring the final property on to the land register. I think that people can see the sense of that from a practical, operational point of view. In those circumstances, there would of course be no fee to the person who was required to register their title.

I just want to finish my response to Mr McArthur, who quite rightly raised the issue—he did so in a perfectly fair way, which summed up the tone of today’s debate. We all want the register to progress as quickly as possible. We are using the voluntary registration method and the word “voluntary” is key; we want to encourage people to register and not compel them to do so. I am happy to take another intervention—I see that I do not have time to do so. I have to close, and so soon. I am grateful to the committee for its work, which helped us a great deal. There is much work to be done at stages 2 and 3. Section 108 is entirely necessary and is supported by the Lord Advocate, the Solicitor General for Scotland and the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency. Honest solicitors have nothing to fear, but the tiny minority of dishonest ones will not be happy when the provisions on the new offence become law. It will be a very good thing to stamp out mortgage fraud in this country.

I am delighted to secure this debate on tourism in Scotland. The Scottish Government very much welcomes the decision to locate the headquarters of the green investment bank in Edinburgh. That is a tribute to the campaign that was run by all those involved, including Edinburgh Chamber of Commerce and the financial sector in Edinburgh, as well as to the cross-party, united and informed campaign that was run by Scotland’s elected representatives—from every party. The decision will bring good news for the tourism sector, not least in attracting even more top-level conferences to the city, perhaps on the range of interests in finance and the green economy. Given the terms of Rhoda Grant’s amendment—which we are happy to accept—I am sure that she will comment on that news as well. I welcome the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee’s report on issues affecting Scottish tourism, which was published last week. Tourism is one of the priority sectors in the Scottish Government’s economic strategy. It contributes more than £4,000 million every year to the Scottish economy, and the other benefits from tourism are immense. It supports other high-yield sectors including food and drink, transport, agriculture and retail. Over and above its economic contribution, tourism showcases our manifold attractions to the world, boosting our exports, enhancing our reputation and attracting inward investment. The benefits of tourism are spread widely across the whole of Scotland, from our cities in the central belt to some of the most remote and fragile communities. Everywhere, tourism sustains vital local services such as post offices and petrol stations.

Yes—I do. I say that with the experience of having attended such events, as have other members. I have discussed the matter with Marina Huggett in the past two days, along with the many other MSPs who partook of the hospitality at the reception in the Scottish Parliament this week. Tourism in Scotland continues to grow, despite the worldwide recession. The latest statistics show that, in the first nine months of 2011, the number of visitors to Scotland rose by 8 per cent and visitor spend increased by 11 per cent. Those increases are pretty respectable in difficult economic times. The United Kingdom market is driving growth, with increases of 10 per cent in visitors and 21 per cent in spend in the first three quarters of 2011. Mainly because of challenges in European markets, the number of international visitors in the same nine-month period fell by 4 per cent. However, the North American market is beginning to recover, with an 18 per cent rise in visitors to Scotland.

We are considering the committee’s report carefully. I think that the committee did not express a particular view; rather, it drew attention to evidence that had been given to it. For my part, I am an optimist, and there is lots to be optimistic about, which I will come on to. We are in competition with many other countries that have a great deal to offer, but we are determined to make the most of Scotland’s fantastic assets and to take full advantage of opportunities to drive up visitor numbers and visitor spend. A number of significant events will take place on our doorstep this year and in the years ahead. In 2012, we have the year of creative Scotland, and I am advised that great success is already being achieved. The new Disney Pixar film “Brave”, which is set in Scotland and which showcases our landscape and heritage, will be released this year, when we will also see the London Olympics and Paralympics, for which we wish all competitors well. The Queen’s diamond jubilee will also occur; a number of events throughout the country will pay tribute to Her Majesty’s 60 years at the helm. In 2013, we will have the year of natural Scotland, when we will invite Scots to discover their own country, as well as the Open championship at Muirfield and the music of black origin—MOBO—awards in Glasgow. In 2014, we will have the Ryder cup, the Commonwealth games and the year of homecoming. We have provided funding to develop and market top-quality event programmes to maximise visitor spend. Support for the year of creative Scotland includes £400,000 for activities from the Scottish Government; Creative Scotland’s £6.5 million of support from the national lottery fund for events and activities; VisitScotland’s television advert, which is expected to reach 20 million viewers; and £1.14 million for our cultural infrastructure, which was announced in the debate on 1 February on the year of creative Scotland. VisitScotland is maximising benefits from the Olympic games with tactical Scotland promotions to target the getaway market and other markets. It is also investing about £1 million a year in golf events in Scotland as part of the preparations for the Ryder cup. Business tourism represents a huge opportunity for Scotland. At this moment, the Glasgow meeting of Diabetes UK is taking place, at which 2,750 delegates are expected, bringing more than £3 million in economic benefit to the city. Business tourism already contributes more than £800 million a year to the Scottish economy, but we want more than that. We are responding to requests directly from the industry, and I have today launched a new conference bid fund to make available £2 million over three years to support bids for major conferences that relate to Scotland’s key sectors. The fund will secure Scotland’s future competitiveness in business tourism. Competitiveness is also the focus of the tourism leadership group, which is refreshing the tourism strategy for Scotland. It will set out where the long-term opportunities for future growth lie and what needs to be done to secure that growth. It is talking to industry representatives in every walk of tourism life, and is looking carefully at the markets of the future and our assets. The revised strategy will be published in the summer. Our agencies are supporting the group in developing the revised strategy, and will work closely with the industry to deliver it. The Scottish Government will respond to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee report in due course. I particularly welcome the wide range of issues that the committee has touched on in its conclusions and recommendations. There is no doubt that tourism faces challenges. The worldwide recession has had an impact, and there are reserved matters that constrain the competitiveness of our industry. The 20 per cent VAT for hospitality businesses is the second highest in the European Union—some 26 countries in Europe have a reduced VAT rate for hotels. The air passenger duty that is imposed by the UK Government has taken the UK to fourth lowest in the world competitiveness ranking in terms of ticket taxes and airport charges in the World Economic Forum’s “Travel & Tourism Competitiveness Report 2011”. However, in spite of those challenges—and in spite of cuts in our budget from Westminster—the Scottish Government recognises the contribution and potential of tourism. We therefore continue to support VisitScotland to deliver effective marketing campaigns. VisitScotland’s European touring campaign generated nearly £97 million of additional expenditure in 2010. EventScotland, VisitScotland’s events directorate, invested £3.7 million in Scotland’s events industry last year, generating £57.5 million in additional revenue for Scotland’s economy. A return of that order must be praised and recognised. The Scottish Government provides extensive support to tourism through a wide range of activity. Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise support businesses, destinations and product areas with high growth potential, such as golf, mountain-biking, sailing and business tourism. Historic Scotland is the largest provider of visitor attractions in Scotland, with 345 properties, of which 78 are paid attractions. The national parks in Loch Lomond and the Cairngorms welcome 3.6 million visitors a year. Scottish Natural Heritage manages and promotes 47 national nature reserves that attract more than 1 million visitors each year. Forestry Commission Scotland manages 650,000 hectares of national forest estate that includes more than 2,500km of way-marked paths and trails—indeed, in my younger, fitter and thinner days, I used to run through some of those forests. I see that I have taken some members entirely by surprise—or perhaps I have woken them up; I do not know. The Scottish Government is involved in further activity that supports tourism. Skills Development Scotland funded 2,500 modern apprenticeships in the sector last year, and is on course to increase that number this year. Creative Scotland supports and develops the cultural product that our visitors enjoy. Scottish Enterprise has invested £22 million in the Scottish Exhibition and Conference Centre’s Scottish Hydro arena and £16 million in the Edinburgh International Conference Centre development, both of which will make a significant contribution to increasing business tourism in this country. Scottish Enterprise has also contributed more than £600,000 to support the developments at Abbotsford. Highlands and Islands Enterprise is investing £1.12 million towards the Kintyre resort development and £1.8 million to support the revitalisation of John o’Groats, whence I travel next Monday. Among Scottish Development International’s contributions are the securing of a new Malmaison in Dundee and an exclusive world-class hotel and golf resort at Taymouth castle I am keen to facilitate further investment in tourism. I have asked VisitScotland to develop a more strategic and proactive role in the planning process. Initially, VisitScotland will lead joint work with developers, planners and economic development agencies to prepare an evidence-based national investment plan. That will provide a clear steer for developers and planners on what tourism developments are needed and should be supported in different parts of Scotland. The Scottish Government is determined to build the competitiveness of Scottish tourism. Our agencies are working more closely than ever with the industry. We are creating opportunities for the benefit of businesses throughout Scotland so that tourism contributes to sustainable growth for the people of Scotland. It is a pleasure and a privilege to work with so many excellent people who work in Scotland’s tourism sector. Many of us met a number of those people, who work with a whole range of attractions, at the reception that was held in the Parliament earlier this week. I pay particular tribute to Mike Cantlay and Malcolm Roughead of VisitScotland, who are here today and who provide the strongest leadership that the organisation has ever enjoyed, and to Stephen Leckie of the Scottish Tourism Alliance—formerly the Scottish Tourism Forum—who is leading the private sector and with whom we are happy to work. I commend the motion and look forward to the debate. I move, That the Parliament recognises the important contribution that tourism makes across many sectors and all geographical areas of Scotland and commends the industry on its continuing growth in spite of harsh economic circumstances; recognises the importance of domestic tourism and the important roles played by businesses of all sizes in achieving this; acknowledges the importance of the work currently being undertaken by the industry-led Tourism Leadership Group to develop a refreshed strategy for tourism in Scotland, and commends the core work of agencies in promoting Scotland and its key assets, in particular Scotland’s cultural and natural heritage, to visitors, supporting businesses and destinations and investing in key facilities, skills development and a programme of sporting and cultural events across Scotland to ensure that Scotland maximises the opportunities available from the globally important events of the next three years, including the Olympics 2012, the Year of Creative Scotland 2012, the Year of Natural Scotland 2013, the Ryder Cup 2014, the Commonwealth Games in Glasgow and Homecoming 2014.

I have thoroughly enjoyed the debate, which has been extremely informative and entertaining. There has been a series of surprising and unexpected revelations, most recently about Ken Macintosh’s family. Such revelations are always entertaining. Until the debate, I did not realise that George Galloway is a recognised Scottish tourism attraction or that he works shoulder to shoulder, as one might say, alongside the Duke of Hamilton. The most unlikely alliances are being formed in contemporary Scotland. Members have rightly contributed information about, and passionate views on, attractions in their own parts of Scotland. That started with Siobhan McMahon, whose speech was so fulsome, informative and passionate that I was tempted to intervene to ask whether she is a tourist guide as well as an MSP. Her speech set the tone for a large number of speeches, and led me to the view that I should go to see the Summerlee museum. I certainly hope to do that some time and to visit Siobhan McMahon’s part of Scotland. I will make an effort to reply to some of the wide-ranging points that have been made. A number of members, starting with Rhoda Grant, mentioned issues relating to skills and tourism. Such issues are plainly important. We want to ensure that we are making it absolutely clear that there are great careers to be had in tourism and that we are increasing the appeal of tourism. Perhaps that has not been done in the past; I think Jean Urquhart alluded to that. We want to ensure that skills are developed and that, above all, there is helpful and friendly service without servility. I am pleased to say that a great deal of work is being done in, for example, Jewel and Esk College, Queen Margaret University and Preston Lodge high school in Prestonpans that Skills Development Scotland is supporting. In Gleneagles a couple of weeks ago, I heard about Springboard’s work in going into schools to promote opportunities in the industry. I heard about its events in places such as Govan and the Vale of Leven, and in schools. It has shown young people how to cook meals and it gets them to cook their own food, including chocolates. Apparently, in one location, some schoolboys who normally do not spend their afternoons at school were so rapt and persuaded that they did spend the afternoon at school, such was the enthusiasm that the ambassador engendered. Perhaps there is more that we can do. That came across in a number of speeches, such as those by Margaret McCulloch, Siobhan McMahon and Jean Urquhart. Jean Urquhart almost whispered how many years of her life she has spent serving in the tourism sector. I heard what she said but, to spare her blushes, I will not repeat it. She made the interesting point that there have been seismic changes in the tourism sector, which is perceived differently now as an industry; it is perceived as a success story that we are proud of. As Ken Macintosh said, the standard of fare—the food and drink—that we now expect has improved immeasurably. He reminded us of what things could have been like in the old days—30 or 40 years ago, say. Things have certainly improved on that front, and that is to be welcomed. Tavish Scott made an excellent speech. I will pursue a number of specific points that he was right to raise but which I will not have time to cover today. We are working with Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland in a number of ways, and I will give him details about that. He and Stuart McMillan pointed to the contribution that cruise liners make to Scottish tourism. Tens of thousands of people visit Shetland, Greenock, Inverness and other parts of Scotland, but a constraining factor is the availability of tourist guides with appropriate language skills. That is an important factor for cruise liners and those who organise holidays. More work is being done to focus on those matters, and I am keen to work with individual members thereanent. There are also questions about quality. VisitScotland’s experience survey showed that 72 per cent of those who were surveyed were very satisfied with a holiday experience in Scotland, 98 per cent would recommend the experience to their family and friends and 84 per cent would return, which means that 14 per cent would recommend Scotland to their family and friends but would not return. However, leaving that slightly wry reflection aside, it is nonetheless a vote of confidence in Scotland and one that tends to suggest that we are right to be optimistic. Claudia Beamish referred to the importance of eco-tourism or green tourism in her considered contribution. It is clear that Scotland is succeeding in that area. For example, on Monday I visited Whitelee wind farm—the biggest wind farm in Europe—and found that wind farms are also a massive attraction for schoolchildren, who can actually see in the visitor centre there how a wind turbine works. They do a little experiment in which they construct a wind turbine with plastic blades using a fan heater, which lights a light bulb when it is turned on. Since its opening, the centre has had nearly 200,000 visitors. On the business tourism contribution from conferences on renewable energy, there have been at least 14 events, which have brought over 13,000 delegates, in the past two years. Now that we will have the green investment bank, we can expect a new round of business conferences on the theme of the green economy and the opportunities therein. Chic Brodie was right to raise the importance of air passenger duty. Our APD is now the most expensive aviation duty in Europe, unfortunately. Standard rates vary from £12 for short-haul flights to £85 for long haul. Sadly, I am afraid that that does not help us to bring people to Scotland. David Stewart rightly raised the air route development issue. We expect to meet European Commission officials before May to discuss the progress of their review. We have consistently argued that there is a need for a state-aid-rules compliant mechanism, which would be effective in supporting our aspirations to improve Scotland’s international air links. Broadband has not been mentioned today, nor has the internet. [Interruption.]

Thank you, Presiding Officer. The internet is increasingly important. I understand from speaking to people in the industry that people who are aged under 40, and who are therefore perhaps younger than the average MSP, book not only their holidays but their entertainment online. For example, they will sit in conferences—perhaps some are doing so even today—with an app in their hand deciding where they will get the evening’s entertainment. It is critical that we cater for the under-40s, if I may put it thus. Jean Urquhart and others referred to the importance of VAT to tourism. Sadly, Britain is not one of the 24 of the 27 European Union countries and four non-EU countries that currently offer some form of reduced VAT to the hospitality and tourism sectors. For example, VAT on hotel accommodation, food and admission to amusement parks is 3 per cent in Luxembourg, 5.5 per cent in France and 9 per cent in Ireland, but it is 20 per cent in the UK. As members know, I am not someone who focuses or dwells on the negative in any way, but I have raised the point about VAT with John Penrose, and my colleague the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth has also raised it. I think that we all recognise that VAT is a serious matter on which we would like to see action, with the VAT rate going in the direction that it has gone in other European countries. I am proud to be the minister for tourism, which is a fantastic job. As I envisage it, it is rather like what being First Minister must be like, but without the stress and responsibility that goes with it. It gives me the opportunity to visit various parts of Scotland and to see all the marvellous attractions. It also lets me work with people such as Stephen Leckie, who is in the public gallery and who heads up the Scottish Tourism Alliance. I invite all tourism businesses in Scotland to get involved with the tourism alliance to support its activity in what is the most disparate and diverse industry in Scotland. It is extremely important that businesses back that new organisation and that in the work that we do as we go ahead, we have a close relationship with the industry to ensure that we always do the right thing in the right way. Finally, I thank VisitScotland for the excellent job that it does in marketing our country, which every member who spoke in the debate has recognised. That, surely, is a marvellous and somewhat unusual accolade.

People in rural communities are faced with high prices for fuel and online deliveries. The Scottish Government fully supports Citizens Advice Scotland’s call for online retailers to sign the pledge to display costs clearly prior to sale, ensure that charges are based on costs incurred and offer Royal Mail delivery wherever possible. I have written to the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills to ask for the United Kingdom Government’s support on the issue. The Scottish Government continues to lobby the UK Government on the scale and scope of the fuel derogation.

I am well aware of these matters and have campaigned with Mr Gibson on them for more decades than both of us really care to remember. The OFT has launched a call for evidence into the challenges faced by people in remote areas, including the issue of delivery charges, and I encourage people to submit evidence to that inquiry. As for the creation of a Scottish postal service, that is, I am sad to say, not an option, as postal services are reserved. Nevertheless, we have consistently emphasised to the UK Government the importance of retaining the universal service obligations and that Scottish consumers must not be put at a disadvantage.

It is my great pleasure to open the debate in support of Edinburgh’s bid to host the United Kingdom green investment bank. Of course, this is not the first time that Parliament has had an opportunity to discuss the matter; in June 2011, the Parliament welcomed a united campaign to bring the green investment bank to Edinburgh during the members’ business debate that was led by my colleague Marco Biagi, from whom we will no doubt hear later. I was pleased that in December last year I was able to write to Vince Cable to confirm all-party support for Edinburgh’s bid. I was heartened that my colleagues Rhoda Grant, Liam McArthur, Mary Scanlon and Patrick Harvie were able to join me in signing that letter on behalf of all the parties in the Parliament. Earlier today, I was pleased to take part in a photo call with members of all the parties that are represented in the Parliament. More unity of purpose one could not imagine. The support, of course, is not only political; it comes also from the business community, from a joint letter that Scotland’s universities have signed and from Glasgow City Council and the City of Edinburgh Council, which is an alliance that does not always necessarily exist—it is pleasing that Glasgow and Edinburgh have united on this important issue. Today, following the submission of Edinburgh’s bid and as we await the UK Government’s decision on where the green investment bank will be located, I ask that Parliament again show unanimity in recognising the strength of Edinburgh’s bid and the considerable benefits to the UK of the green investment bank’s being located in Edinburgh. I acknowledge the work of the Edinburgh green investment bank group in putting together such a compelling argument for the green investment bank to be located in Edinburgh. An impressive range of interests from industry, government and politics working together have produced a substantial bid. I ask that all the interests in Parliament show similar co-operation in endorsing the bid and in working together in the future to ensure that Scottish projects are successful in securing funding from the GIB, just as we wish projects elsewhere in the UK to be successful. I once again have departed slightly from my written text. I am sure that we are all convinced of the merits of the bid. Edinburgh has been ranked as the best large European city—that is, a city that has a population of between 500,000 and 1 million—for foreign direct investment in the recently announced FDI Intelligence Ltd’s European cities and regions of the future ranking. The fDi Magazine is a specialist division of the Financial Times Ltd. Edinburgh came top, ahead of all the cities in Europe, including important and beautiful cities such as Oslo, Gothenburg and Leipzig. Edinburgh is number 1. The list ranked cities and regions according to seven categories: economic potential, human resources, cost effectiveness, quality of life, infrastructure, business friendliness and promotion strategy. It is worth noting that several of those criteria are also key criteria for assessing bids to host the GIB. Therefore, that endorsement by a prestigious and influential division of the Financial Times significantly strengthens Edinburgh’s bid. I am delighted that the UK Government recently recognised Scotland’s leading role in the development of the green economy when it decided to locate the headquarters of the United Kingdom offshore renewable energy catapult centre—ORECAT—in Glasgow. The UK Government funding for ORECAT will be between £50 million and £100 million over 5 to 10 years. The decision demonstrates not only Scotland’s leading position in the development of offshore renewables, but a commitment to Scotland. The appetite for investment is stronger than ever. I trust that the UK Government will further strengthen its commitment by deciding to locate the GIB in Edinburgh. The decision on ORECAT also shows that the transition to a low-carbon economy that has been set out by the Government is delivering investment and jobs not only in Edinburgh but throughout Scotland.

To be candid, I did not come to the chamber to opine on that matter. However, the other side of the coin—if, indeed, we have seen one side of the coin—is that significant investment from banks in green projects is welcome. The Co-operative Bank, Barclays Bank, RBS and many others make significant investments in the green economy. Plainly, we would all like more to be done, but with all respect to Patrick Harvie and recognising his obvious commitment to the matters that are under discussion, I will decline the invitation to stray beyond the territory of the debate. We now have the opportunity to make Edinburgh and Scotland a pan-European and global hub for renewables investment. Locating the GIB in Edinburgh will help to cement a cluster of expertise that would be comprised of finance, academia and industry that are all centred here. However, we should not be complacent: Edinburgh is only one of 32 locations that are bidding to host the green investment bank. I will outline why I believe that it should prevail. Locations were asked to self-assess against the following criteria: the ability to recruit and retain specialist staff, the ability to enable the green investment bank to work closely with other parties in deals, and a location that provides good value for money. First, Scotland has a long and proud history in banking and it has a growing reputation as an innovative and high-quality hub for financial services, such as investment management and asset servicing. The green investment bank will bring between 50 and 100 full-time equivalent jobs and will be able to recruit from a cluster of top-quality financial services companies—a sector in which 60,000 people are employed across Edinburgh’s travel-to-work area. It is not just financial expertise that makes Edinburgh the correct location for the green investment bank. Edinburgh has an experienced pool of world-class professionals in engineering, green infrastructure, company clusters and university campuses, all of whom play vital roles in the areas in which the green investment bank will be active. The bank would be supported by world-class research and specialist skills in low-carbon technologies, which will come from Edinburgh’s strong and internationally connected academic and company base. I have had the fortunate experience of meeting a great many world leaders in research and intellectual activity in those areas in and around Edinburgh. Edinburgh is unique in being the only location in the United Kingdom that brings together finance and the clean energy industry in a single place. It has an unrivalled concentration of industries, skills and experience to support effective commercialisation. Given that Edinburgh is part of the UK’s leading region in green infrastructure and has a disproportionate share of renewables investment, locating the green investment bank in the city will ensure that the UK has the best possible chance to develop as the European centre of excellence in the sector. In addition, people wish to come to Edinburgh. It is recognised as having world-class quality of life and a global profile that has been proven to attract and retain the best in professional talent. Moreover, property and transaction costs in Edinburgh are highly competitive in comparison with those in other cities, and Edinburgh is one of the UK’s best-connected cities—it has strong domestic and international transport links, as well as world-class information and communications technology links, which are the sine qua non of success these days. I therefore ask the Parliament to join me in agreeing that, as is set out in the bid, “Given the quality of Edinburgh's transaction ecosystem, the GIB will have a greater economic impact at a UK level, than if the Bank were sited in other locations. This in turn will help the UK Government to deliver its low carbon objectives.” I turn to the support that the Government can offer to ensure the successful location of the green investment bank in Edinburgh. I believe that the Government must be able to demonstrate its credentials and its commitment to the aims of the bank—namely, that it will provide the necessary financial solutions and accelerate private sector investment in the transition to a green economy, for it is that that will create the certainty that must exist if we are to persuade people to take major investment decisions in Scotland’s favour. The Scottish Government has put a low-carbon economy at the centre of its economic agenda. Growth in the low-carbon energy sector, particularly in renewables, will be a significant contributor to that agenda. The green investment bank has the potential to deliver significant benefit to the green economy in Scotland. We have committed to achieving ambitious low-carbon headline targets by 2020 and 2050. As we move towards 2020, we have interim targets for carbon emissions reductions, particularly in the electricity generation sector, for a major increase of renewables in the energy mix and for improving energy efficiency. We have been crystal clear about our commitments. In June last year, we published our renewables route map, which outlines the actions that are required if we are to achieve the 100 per cent equivalent gross annual electricity consumption target. We will soon publish the updated electricity generation statement, which will give the latest position on the role of renewable electricity and fossil-fuel thermal generation from coal, gas and oil in Scotland’s future energy mix, and we will publish the second report on proposals and policies in the first half of 2012 or thereabouts, which will report on our progress on emissions reductions. We have been clear about our plans on how to achieve our objectives for a low-carbon economy. We can point to all those strategic facts that demonstrate our commitment to the green economy and which therefore contribute in a vital way to investor confidence. The Parliament has previously recognised the considerable benefits that the green investment bank would bring to Scotland and to Edinburgh. When I last spoke in Parliament on the matter, I stated that the task that was before us was for Edinburgh to be seen not, as Vince Cable described us, as “a front-runner” for location of the green investment bank, but as the front-runner and, ultimately, to be the chosen location. I commend that approach to Parliament, and I look forward to hearing all my colleagues’ contributions to the debate. I move, That the Parliament endorses the bid submitted to the UK Government to have the green investment bank (GIB) located in Edinburgh; believes that the Edinburgh bid fully satisfies the criteria set out by the UK Government and that Edinburgh is the ideal location for the new institution through its unique business ecosystem and highly advanced network of financiers, developers, investors, asset managers, researchers, academics, think tanks and government agencies; recognises the breadth of support for the Edinburgh bid across Scottish civic society, the academic sector and commerce, and acknowledges that Scotland’s ambitious low-carbon economic agenda will facilitate a GIB based in Edinburgh becoming an enduring financial institution with visibility and a distinct identity with which to mobilise significant investment into green projects across the UK.

I will try my best, Presiding Officer. The debate has been enjoyable and, as tends to happen, some surprising information has been imparted during its course. For example, we had a short seminar from Mr Macintosh—or perhaps it was from his children—on how smart meters work. Mr Griffin regaled us with his thoughts about a potential new career should his current one not work out too well, which was unexpected. It was also surprising to hear from Mr Brown that Murdo Fraser had run away; that really is unprecedented. The debate has been good humoured and consensual as well as useful. The compelling arguments for Edinburgh to be the home of the green investment bank have been well encapsulated by all speakers and all parties. The debate has also gone on to cover how the green investment bank will and should work, which is a perfectly legitimate area of concern. It is right that we have such debates. I like to think that we are not party automatons in this Parliament, and that we have the ability of independent thought, as we frequently hear from Mr Fraser. It is always interesting to listen to those with whom one usually disagrees. I have enjoyed the debate; the arguments have been made strongly. I start by congratulating those who have played a part but who are not here and to whom many members alluded. The large cast is set out in the campaign submission from the Edinburgh green investment bank group. As Gavin Brown and Sarah Boyack pointed out in their opening remarks, special mention should be made of Edinburgh Chamber of Commerce. Edinburgh Chamber of Commerce has been involved not just in this campaign but, as Sarah Boyack pointed out, in the issue over a long period. For example, it promoted the low-carbon investment conference, which, as Gavin Brown pointed out, has been a great success. More than 550 delegates came to its conference in 2010, and Al Gore came to the conference last year. It is redolent of the fact that Edinburgh is not only a strong candidate but a capital city. Surely an institution of such huge significance and potential value, not just to these islands but to the planet and with its aims and aspirations to increase and promote investment in green technologies, should be located in a capital city—not just a provincial city but a capital city. That point has not been made expressly or as they used to say—at least in the courts—ad longum, which tends to be the way in which I make arguments, particularly when I have 18 minutes to fill.

I am certainly keen to do so. If I have time, I will try to cover some of the points.

We want first to establish the objective of the campaign, which is to secure the green investment bank in Edinburgh. That is why we are here. However, Mr Malik is correct that that should not necessarily be an end to the aspirations for the institution. The bank is a fledgling institution—I believe that the term used is that it is in its incubation period. Therefore, we should see it formally established and go through the initial period, in which, as I think was pointed out by Mr Macintosh, it will operate as a fund rather than as a bank. It will then acquire borrowing powers provided that certain criteria are met by 2015. Although, initially at least, there would not be a branch of the green investment bank in Glasgow or Aberdeen—I am sorry to disappoint Mr Stewart, but that is not part of the modelling—

I will just finish my reply to Mr Malik first. The real point is that the benefit will be not simply to Edinburgh but to the whole of Scotland. The headquarters of companies such as Scottish Power are in Glasgow. Scottish Renewables and the Wood Group’s SgurrEnergy are based in Glasgow. Clyde Blowers is based in East Kilbride and Doosan Babcock is based in Renfrew. None of those places is far from here, and the transport links are reasonable and improving. The benefits of the green investment bank coming to this city will therefore go far beyond the boundaries of this city.

I do not want to seem as if I have no points of my own to make, because I have many—I could probably fill 58 minutes—but I will happily give way to Mr McArthur.

Mr McArthur is absolutely right. The campaign submission that I have referred to highlights the global connections that Edinburgh enjoys. The number of international destinations served by flights from Edinburgh airport has increased to 109—[Interruption.]

I hope that that was not someone booking a flight. Edinburgh airport carries more than 9 million passengers, with more than 40 airlines providing links to international hubs such as Heathrow, Paris Charles de Gaulle, Frankfurt and Newark airport in New York. Edinburgh is now three hours or less from major airport connections in Denmark, Finland, Norway and Sweden, where there are huge developments in clean energy. The connections with those countries are very important. A couple of weeks ago I had the pleasure of hosting a dinner in Edinburgh castle, where the invitees—the guests—were representatives of companies in Scotland that are German owned. Companies from Germany have a huge presence in Scotland and a large number of them are in the renewables sector. Similarly, other countries are represented in the capital city of Edinburgh. A point about UK connectivity that has not been made in the debate is that, in the financial sector, there is virtually a corridor between Edinburgh and London City airports, with early morning flights arriving in each city before 9 am. No other town or city in the UK has those connections with London, and that important point is well made in Edinburgh’s campaign submission. There are 40 trains between Edinburgh and London each weekday and 260 trains between Edinburgh and Glasgow each weekday. Connectivity will be very important for the operation of the bank, and the Edinburgh submission makes the case well.

I am happy to do that. Sarah Boyack is absolutely correct that locating the green investment bank in Edinburgh would be good for the whole of the UK. The prominence that its activities would achieve and attain is likely to be far greater in Edinburgh than in London. Colin Keir made the point that there was a danger that in London the GIB would be a minute institution that is lost among giants and megaliths in the City of London. It would have no visibility. This Monday, Sir Adrian Montague, who is the chair of the independent advisory board, pointed out that the post of chief executive of the green investment bank is not likely to attract a massive salary. He did not go into any figures, and one might speculate on what the figure may be. However, as a member has pointed out: if the salaries are low, what quality of people will the post attract in London? Those in the financial sector who are motivated simply by high salaries will have no particular urge to go to the green investment bank when it has been made clear that, correctly, there will not be massive salaries of the sort that have caused such public concern in recent times in relation to banks. For that reason alone, there would be benefits, but I do not think that that is what Sarah Boyack had in mind. I think that she had in mind the promotion of the renewable energy sector in particular and of green technologies more widely. The fact that the offshore renewable energy catapult centre has been won by Glasgow, so that investment is there; the fact that about a half of the renewable energy projects in Britain are in Scotland; and the fact that we have such a huge cluster of academe in Edinburgh—a member referred to the 11 universities and the point is also made in the Edinburgh submission—mean that in Edinburgh the activities of the green investment bank will achieve far greater prominence than they would if they were subsumed into London. I want to point out something that has not been said in the debate, although Mr Fraser alluded to it. If we want public bodies to operate in a cost-efficient manner—I know that Mr Fraser is very keen on that—it is worth remembering that the mean cost per square foot of office space is £82.50 in London’s west end, whereas it is £27.08 in Edinburgh. The Edinburgh submission has even identified several potential office premises that could be occupied by the green investment bank. I have visited some of those premises. They are excellent and are the cream of what Edinburgh has to offer. They provide access to the city centre, to the quality of life available in Edinburgh and to its attractions, which are second to none. They would do so at perhaps a third or half of the cost of premises in London city centre or its west end. All that information is in the submission on the case for locating the green investment bank in Edinburgh, which is detailed and cogent. The submission not only talks about the principle, but says, “Come on down—we have already identified the office premises for you.” It goes into that amount of detail. In order to buttress the arguments on the credentials of the institutions of Edinburgh, the submission stresses that Edinburgh is the centre of a whole host of significant institutions. It mentions the Chartered Institute of Bankers in Scotland, Scottish Investment Operations, the Chartered Insurance Institute, Scottish Financial Enterprise, the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland, the Financial Skills Partnership, the Institute and Faculty of Actuaries, the Insurance Society of Edinburgh, the centre for financial market research and the Chartered Institute for Securities and Investment centre of excellence at the University of Edinburgh, and, of course, Scottish Renewables. Who among us here could have given that whole list if I had asked them to do so—as some perverse form of quiz? I suspect very few. Indeed, I did not expect to read the list out myself, but there we are. We broadly support Vince Cable’s outline of how the bank should operate. I listened carefully to what Claudia Beamish and other Labour members said on the issue. We have to remember that the green investment bank is a bank, and Mr Macintosh said that we may need some clarification—he expounded his argument carefully—of how it will operate. If the bank is willing to take risks when technology is not close to commercial deployment, or not as close as we would like, the bank must do so responsibly, avoiding undue risks as it seeks to achieve positive portfolio returns. It must preserve and build up its loan capital over time. Mr McArthur spoke about wave and tidal projects in his constituency. From resources that it has recently obtained, the Government—[Interruption.]

I was talking about wave and tidal energy. During this debate, many members have spoken about the role of the green investment bank. The proposed approach is reasonable, although—as Mr McArthur suggested—we will review it from time to time. I was heartened by the conclusion reached in a recent report by a House of Commons committee chaired by Tim Yeo. He gave a thumping endorsement of the Scottish Government’s policies on wave and tidal power. He went on to say—although he did not use a form of words that I would necessarily use—that, when it comes to wave power, Britannia should surely rule the waves. His heart is in the right place. We find ourselves gaining support from the most unlikely of quarters. Sadly, I see that my time is approaching its close. Joking apart, I feel that this has been an excellent debate. It has allowed members in all parties to express their support for the campaign to bring the green investment bank to this city and this country. We have heard eloquent and detailed rehearsals of the arguments—from Sarah Boyack, Marco Biagi and many others. In my fairly substantial experience, the spirit of cross-party co-operation has been almost unprecedented, and it is very welcome. Mark Griffin has been here only for a short time, but he put it well when he said that this Parliament is perhaps at its best when we are able to unite behind a purpose. There is clearly an overwhelming case for a shared Scottish approach. That will serve us, our constituents and our nation well. It gives me great pleasure to say that I will be sending a copy of the Official Report to Vince Cable tomorrow morning. I hope and expect that the strength of the case will lead to Edinburgh being chosen as the location for the green investment bank.

Ministers regularly meet and correspond with retailers and business organisations such as the Scottish Retail Consortium as part of our on-going engagement with business sectors. My colleagues and I have recently had several meetings to discuss issues such as business rates, town centre regeneration and the economy. In addition, last month I had the pleasure of attending the Scottish Retail Consortium’s annual parliamentary reception, where I had the opportunity to listen to and discuss many of the points directly.

Christina McKelvie has identified a significant group of businesses that are finding things difficult. We can help them through town centre regeneration, and £60 million was made available in 2009-10 to support the regeneration and growth of town centres across Scotland. Many towns in Scotland, such as Falkirk, have also undertaken a business improvement district. I visited Falkirk, and terrific improvements have been made to the town centre there. It is germane to point out that, thanks to the small business bonus scheme, the rates burden for 85,200 premises in Scotland has been either removed or reduced. That is a huge advantage for small businesses in this country.

Yes, I have engaged with members of the Scottish Retail Consortium on the issue, and I am aware that Asda commissioned a report that concluded that supermarkets including Asda would face financial costs as a result of the levy. I am advised by the body concerned, the Centre for Economics and Business Research, that the public health supplement will reduce the profit margin of 240 stores by 0.5 per cent, from 5 to 4.5 per cent. That contrasts with the 10 per cent extra that businesses paid when the business rate was fixed by the Labour-Liberal Administrations for the first seven years of the reconvened Scottish Parliament. We propose an increase of 0.5 per cent for the biggest supermarkets in Scotland compared with up to 10 per cent extra for all businesses in Scotland under the previous Administration.

I am delighted that supermarkets are investing in Scotland. We value the contribution that they make to the economy and I am sure that all members do so at an individual level. I am pleased to welcome the announcement, on 23 January, that Asda is investing £500 million in new stores across the United Kingdom, including a replacement depot and three new stores in Tain, Inverness and Larkhall. I am delighted that there will be more jobs in those locations in Scotland.

Data on the number of recipients of support from the small business bonus scheme are held on a local authority, not a constituency, area basis. The number of recipients of support from the small business bonus scheme by local authority area at September 2011 was published on 27 October 2011 in the official statistics publication “Non-Domestic Rates Relief Statistics for Small Businesses in Scotland 2011”. In the Glasgow city area, 7,476 properties were in receipt of relief through the small business bonus scheme.

I entirely agree with Mr Mason’s proposition, and I hear that other members do so, too. I think that 63 per cent of shops receive support from the small business bonus scheme, and many small shops have been able to survive because of the measure, which the Scottish National Party Government introduced. As members know, I am not generally given to hyperbole, but I cannot think of a policy that has been introduced in Scotland since 1707 that has done more to help small businesses throughout this country.

I regularly engage with the STUC, and I met it fairly recently. To the best of my recollection, that topic was not among the topics that were raised with me then. I have been advised that the report contains errors, as the small business bonus thresholds from 2009-10 are quoted. That is not the appropriate analysis. The report says: “the STUC openly accepts that these statistics do not tell the full story about the impact of the SBBS”. I suspect that that quotation is familiar to Mr Fraser. I am happy to engage with my friends in the STUC and to tell them the part of the story that is not told in its report.

I refer the member to the answer given to question S4O-00642 from Christina McKelvie.

Margaret Mitchell and her colleagues overstate the case massively. The sum that is involved is £30 million a year. Let me go down memory lane to a time, 15 years ago, when the Conservatives had power over such matters. According to research by Craig Campbell of the Scottish Council for Development and Industry, which has never been challenged by the Conservatives, the extra tax that Scotland paid due to overtaxation in the period from 1990 to 1995—during the Conservative regime—was £1.2 billion. That is £250 million a year in extra taxation on Scotland. We are not taking lectures from the Conservatives on business rates in Scotland.

The Scottish Government has supplied a range of funds to East Dunbartonshire Council and West Dunbartonshire Council with a view to helping residents of those areas into work. West Dunbartonshire Council forms an integral part of the Clyde waterfront partnership. Since the partnership’s inception, a combined private and public investment of almost £1.8 billion, including £80 million from Scottish Enterprise, has been effective in creating more than 18,000 new jobs. Under priority 5 of the European social fund, we have allocated West Dunbartonshire community planning partnership £1.2 million to deliver a strategic skills pipeline. Through that pipeline, 1,600 people are targeted to receive support and 480 of them are expected to enter employment.

Yes—I certainly will do that and we will work closely with West Dunbartonshire Council. As the member knows, we recently announced £30 million of new investment to support youth employment and we have drafted a youth employment strategy to move that forward. It is relevant to say that, because we are proceeding with the public health levy, we will be able to continue the excellent work that will help young people—especially those from the most disadvantaged areas—who are most at risk from problems such as drug addiction and alcohol issues. A massive priority for the Government is helping the unfortunate minority of young people who need help. I welcome support from across the chamber from people who are committed to the essential objective of helping young people in Scotland.

I am grateful to Linda Fabiani for raising this important issue and for the work that she is doing on behalf of Guide Dogs Scotland. The contributions in the debate have all been extremely useful, so I thank all members for them. The facts of Linda Fabiani’s motion are entirely correct. The current arrangement, as HMRC explains on its website, is that all dogs, with the exception of working dogs, are classed as pets. Pet food is standard rated for VAT, so a product that is claimed to be suitable for all breeds, sizes and ages of dog is standard rated for VAT purposes. If a specially formulated food that is high in protein is available for sale exclusively for working dogs, it will fall within the scope of the VAT relief, unless it is biscuit or meal. When owners wish to provide their dogs with food that is not sold as pet food—commonly known, I believe, as dogs’ dinners—they are free so to do.

That assumes that the owners would not be willing to pay VAT to provide their dogs with the appropriate food. I do not know whether that is the case, but I appreciate that Jamie McGrigor has owned dogs all his life, which I have not. The UK tax position results in an outcome whereby food for working dogs that is high in protein is zero rated for VAT, whereas regular dog food that is eaten by assistance dogs such as guide dogs is not, so the full VAT rate applies. For VAT purposes at least, HMRC appears to treat guide dogs or other assistance dogs as pets simply because of the food that they eat. The point has been made—it was first made by Linda Fabiani, who did so clearly and well—that it seems extremely odd that, for the purposes of VAT, dogs are classified not by what they do but by what they eat. That seems to be an extremely odd criterion on which to formulate tax law—I use the word “odd” in a diplomatic sense, for want of another word. However, it seems to me that, as the UK Government has already accepted the principle that there is a justification for food for some dogs to be zero rated—it did not need to do that, but it has done it: working dogs are entitled to have food that is zero rated for VAT—the question is whether that rationale should be applied to dogs that serve other purposes. The case has been made beyond peradventure that zero rating should be extended to food for other types of dog that serve purposes that are useful. Indeed, it could be argued that the purposes that such dogs serve are more useful than those that working dogs serve. We heard from Dennis Robertson—he spoke very eloquently, as always, and acted as a sort of trade unionist for Mr Q—that some people who are blind might not have a guide dog for financial reasons. That is an extremely worrying possibility. I do not know whether it is an issue that could be explored further; perhaps the Guide Dogs for the Blind Association has looked into it.

That is an extremely helpful clarification, for which I am grateful. I think that we have established that the current law is illogical. We hope that the upshot of the debate will be that we can seek to persuade the UK Government to think again. Before I turn to how we may best do that, I endorse Christine Grahame’s comment that we should consider an exemption for hearing dogs for deaf people, as well as one for guide dogs for the blind. Hearing dogs alert deaf people to everyday sounds that hearing people take for granted, such as the alarm clock, the doorbell, a crying baby or a smoke alarm—or, indeed, the division bell of the Parliament. Instead of barking, the dog alerts the deaf person by touch using a paw to gain attention and then leads them back to the sound source. We should consider exemption for dogs for the disabled and dogs for children with physical disabilities. Support dogs have also been mentioned. Dogs that serve essential purposes should be considered for exemption, whether they do so as guide dogs or in one of those various other purposes. It would not be appropriate for the UK Government to fail to consider all relevant categories if it were to consider the matter, so I am grateful to Christine Grahame and others who mentioned that we also need to consider other dogs. I acknowledge the marvellous work that the Guide Dogs for the Blind Association does without, as I understand it, public subsidy. It has no Government support funding, so it depends entirely on public support for its massive operations, which a number of members explained well. There are 4,500 guide dog owners in the UK and the association is responsible for 8,000 dogs. The sum of VAT that was mentioned is, I think, £300,000. Perhaps I did not get that correct, but it is plainly a substantial amount of money. For a voluntary organisation that is entirely reliant on donations and not in receipt of Government subsidy, that is a serious matter indeed, as many members said. I am struck by the figure in the briefing that, I assume, emanates from the association originally, which says that the lifetime cost of a guide dog is around £50,000. That is a lot of money and a lot of VAT. For the UK Government, the cost of acting in a budget would be nugatory—it would be de minimis. There is a strong case for action. Members from various parties have urged me to write to the UK Chancellor of the Exchequer, and I will certainly do that. We will write to the UK Treasury and invite it to consider the case and to explain why it cannot act to zero rate. We will also ask it whether it has considered the option of reducing the VAT to 5 per cent as an alternative. We will invite the Treasury to act as quickly as possible, preferably in the budget that is forthcoming in a couple of months’ time. It has been said that a dog is a man’s best friend; we will see whether Governments can be dogs’ best friends. Meeting closed at 17:37.

This has been an excellent, wide-ranging and informative debate. As well as the many things that we have learned from many of the speeches, we have seen the emergence of potential professional tour guides in many parts of the country. If Dennis Robertson gets his way, what with the requests to visit Huntly, Braemar and here, there and everywhere, we will spend the whole summer in his constituency—which would be a fate devoutly to be wished, I am sure. Margaret McCulloch waxed lyrical about the various parks in Lanarkshire and the excellent attractions that it has to offer. She is perfectly right. Indeed, I spent Monday visiting Lanarkshire. I visited a hotel in Abington, the visitor centre in Lanark and the Biggar museum, so I have seen many of those attractions for myself. My visit brought to mind—I am not sure how relevant this is, but I will struggle on manfully—one of the first examples of the staycation, which was when Robert Burns visited this great city. This might be known to those members who have read James Mackay’s biography of Robert Burns. Of course, there was no internal combustion engine in those days, so the mode of travel was horse. He stopped over near Biggar—in Symington, I believe. He was a famous man even then, and a wee boy stood on top of a haystack and said, “He’s coming! He’s coming!” They had a great party, at which Robert Burns was the honoured guest. They sampled the food and, indeed, the drink, well and deeply, and the next day, the national bard got on his horse and made the second leg of the journey, from Lanarkshire to Edinburgh. When he got to Edinburgh, the first two days of his first staycation were taken up recovering from a pretty severe hangover. So there we are—that was an early example of the staycation. The speeches that we heard from all members who contributed to the debate illustrated the huge range of creative activity in Scotland. We learned about the different types of art and culture in different parts of the country. That was welcome. Jean Urquhart made the thoughtful speech that we would expect her to make, given that—at least in my mind, and I hope that she will forgive me for this—she will forever be associated with the Ceilidh Place and the many great times that many people have spent there, including me. She said that artists are the most precious people in the world. They will be remembered long after my speeches are well forgotten—which might not be that long, actually. [Laughter.] That sentiment seems to have attracted a measure of unanimity, if you can have a measure of unanimity. Seriously, Presiding Officer, artists are remembered long after most other human beings, who spend a brief time on this planet, are forgotten. Artists are remembered because they leave a legacy of beauty behind them, as we heard from many members. Scotland is proud to have had some of the most distinguished and outstanding artists in the world, some of whom are not as well known as they deserve to be. I am delighted that we have seen the Scottish national portrait gallery reopen and that we are bidding for the Turner prize award ceremony in 2015 or 2016, as Hanzala Malik rightly highlighted. I think of the Scottish colourists—of Peploe, Cadell and Fergusson. They were marvellous artists, in my humble opinion, but even though their paintings are hugely valued and cherished, they are perhaps not as well known as they should be.

I think that Mr Stewart is just trying to make up for his admission that he does not read romantic drama. [Laughter.] He is trying to rehabilitate his new man credentials with some other confessions of his leisure time pursuits. Scotland has distinguished artists in all spheres. I enjoy listening to jazz, including musicians such as the guitarist Martin Taylor, Tommy Smith on the saxophone, and the distinguished vocalist Annie Ross, who has achieved world fame. Not only are they brilliant exponents of their art, they give their time freely and at length to help young people in Scotland with things like the National Youth Jazz Orchestra of Scotland and festivals all round the country, including, I understand from the provost of Stirling, one in Callander—who would have thought it—and in Ayrshire, Glasgow, Edinburgh, Nairn and other places throughout the country. Every area of culture and every world will be represented this year. Every type of art and culture will have its champions, events and celebrations, and will be promoted throughout the country. That is all greatly to be welcomed. Many members have rightly highlighted the necessity of learning from past difficulties, and of spending money wisely. It is quite reasonable for Annabel Goldie, Patricia Ferguson and Kevin Stewart to have made that point—in Kevin Stewart’s case, before he got on to the confession-time part of his speech. That is absolutely proper. It is a key responsibility of any minister. We want and are determined to leave a lasting legacy. This year will not be a one-off. The purpose is not just to hold a series of new events. It is to promote and celebrate, to provoke new activity, and to encourage young people to take part in art and culture, such as they do in the big noise orchestra in Stirling, so that they can continue to experience, to enjoy, to broaden their minds, and to learn from some of the world’s greatest artistic experts. No matter how difficult those experts are—I know that they can be difficult—they always try to help young people. They might not like every politician, but everyone likes children. We are determined to leave a legacy for the generations yet to come. Of course, we are also determined to celebrate events in Scotland that are about the London Olympics. The torch relay events will visit all 32 local authorities in Scotland between 8 and 14 June before returning to Dumfries and Galloway on 21 June. Although I will probably adopt Fiona Hyslop’s body-swerve manoeuvre on the issue of the Olympic rings, I know that the famous chamber group that was established in the 1970s, the Kronos Quartet, will be the high point of an open-air festival in Glasgow. There will be many ways of celebrating the London Olympics in addition to the Scottish Government’s support for that event and the benefit that Scottish companies have had therefrom. I will move towards a conclusion, Presiding Officer. Members such as Margaret McCulloch, Hanzala Malik and Annabel Goldie talked about tourism and its importance to the country. Kevin Stewart rightly made the point that when we promote our culture, we take cognisance of its importance for tourism. I am here and making this speech because we entirely recognise that that point is very well made. Such activity might be partly Government-inspired, but the purpose is to move way beyond Government and the bodies that are involved and to promote interest and excitement among Scotland’s communities, as the Labour amendment rightly emphasises. It is more important in that than in any other area of Government activity that the relevant ministers—the cabinet secretary who is responsible for culture and I, who have portfolio responsibility for tourism—work together. We have a truly marvellous country that has had a most successful year of tourism, and despite the recession, the gloom, the woe and the depression, we have seen tourism grow pretty successfully. That is because we, as a nation, are getting better at it, with higher-quality visitor attractions, food and drink, and some of the best scenery in the world.

I certainly support the aim of promoting quality Scottish produce in every way possible. Indeed, when I make purchases by way of gifts and presents for my immediate loved ones—as of course I frequently do, at great expense to myself—I tend to see what I can do to do my bit for Scotland. I think that this debate has shown that we all have that attitude in this chamber, and a good thing it is, too.

Scottish planning policy paragraphs 187 to 189 outline the Scottish Government’s policy on spatial planning and cumulative impacts. Scottish Natural Heritage will shortly be publishing updated guidance on assessing cumulative effects and has previously published the document “Siting and Designing windfarms in the landscape”, which offers a steer on strategic planning for cumulative effects.

When ministers are invited to visit a constituency they do not do so in order to assess the preconceived conclusion of another MSP. They accept a visit in order to hear the views of local people—they do not do so on the basis of preconceptions. I suggest to the member that he carefully examine the Scottish planning policies that I referred to in my original answer, to which he did not allude. Those planning policies have largely been in place since the Labour-Liberal Administration held sway in this place.

I am not sure whether that is the official Labour Party policy from the front bench because if it is, many communities that broadly welcome the creation of renewable energy projects—for example, communities in the Highlands and Islands—will not receive those projects, nor the benefits that they bring, such as the increased payment of up to £5,000 per megawatt that was announced by Scottish and Southern Energy just a few weeks ago. In any event, as the member knows from an answer that I gave him in a previous debate and from my original answer to Neil Findlay, SNH is shortly to publish updated guidance on assessing cumulative effects. Such effects are increasingly a factor in determining onshore wind development proposals and, logically, their relevance will continue to grow. Correspondingly, they are a factor that the Scottish Government takes very seriously indeed.

I think that I accept that point in principle. Moreover, Mr Harvie makes a point that I understood was accepted by at least the front-bench spokespeople of all parties in the chamber. I work and will continue to work with members in trying successfully to promote community renewable energy schemes. Perhaps as well as a stake of ownership for communities, the best upshot from such developments—particularly for communities that are off gas grid and which do not have access to the same options as communities elsewhere in Scotland—is that those communities will have access to lower-cost electricity and heating bills and that there will be fuel justice, perhaps for the first time ever, in rural and island communities in Scotland. This Government will of course work with other members such as Rhoda Grant, who—in my understanding, at least—has been leading on the matter for the Labour Party in an official front-bench capacity. I very much hope that that will continue to be the policy of all parties in the chamber this year, when the matter will receive great priority from this Government.

Of course we will. It is axiomatic to say that every case is dealt with on its merits. Each case is different and turns on its facts, and as the minister I will continue to deal with each case under the law, on the basis of the case and taking regard of all the representations that are made. I therefore think that the point of principle that Mary Scanlon makes is correct and one with which I have no hesitation but to agree.

We provide funding for advice through the national debtline and local authorities, as well as funding for the training of free sector money advisers throughout Scotland. The Government also provides access to alternative debt management tools such as the debt arrangement scheme.

Bankruptcy has always offered individuals who are struggling with their debts the opportunity of a fresh start and therefore a method of relieving the extreme personal tensions and family pressures that can come from extreme debt. Bankruptcy exists in a civilised society for that primary purpose. We want to encourage those who can pay to pay their debts. That is why the debt arrangement scheme, which is being used by increasing numbers of people, is important. With regard to the second part of the member’s question, it would certainly help us to achieve all those objectives more effectively if this Parliament had all the necessary powers in respect of insolvency, both personal and corporate.

This has been an extremely useful debate. By and large, contributions have been positive; in many cases, they have been extremely thoughtful and useful. However, I would like to pay a special tribute to Margaret Burgess for bringing the debate to the chamber. I know that it is customary to do so—it is part of the procedure that we all adopt—but, in this case, we would all acknowledge that not only has Margaret Burgess brought to the chamber a matter of current and great concern to society in Scotland and south of the border, she has spent a large part of a lifetime working in this field and therefore speaks with passion, as we have heard, and with the authority of a person who has helped people who are the most vulnerable and the most at risk of pay day loans. She speaks with real knowledge, and we are grateful to her for today’s debate. It would be tempting to adopt a party-political or partisan approach to this speech, and it would be easy to do so and to score points about the lack of powers of this Parliament—of course, I would like this Parliament to have the powers of a normal nation to deal with this matter—but I do not want to adopt such an approach, because this is an extremely serious issue. The debate that Margaret Burgess has initiated today will not be over tomorrow. She has raised the topic in the Parliament for the first time in this session and it will be pursued, because throughout the Parliament there is a genuine and concerted desire for action. If we need to persuade another place to support us in that regard, so be it and so will we do. To that end and with a view to examining pay day loans more closely, I advise members that, earlier this year, I arranged to convene a meeting with chief executives from Citizens Advice Scotland, Money Advice Scotland and Scotwest Credit Union, which will take place next week, on 17 January. Following that meeting we will engage more widely—with civic society in Scotland, with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and with others. We will report back and we will involve all members who want to get involved and make positive suggestions in the work that we take forward. Margaret Burgess talked about the personal impact of debt. Before I became an MSP, I worked as a solicitor and acted in insolvency cases, almost always for the debtor. In the course of my work, I was struck that debt is not an abstract problem but a horrible reality, the consequences of which are often not appreciated. The consequences of debt for human existence in Scotland are truly dire, in every respect. They are dire because of the effect on individuals and their families, especially children. Debt leads to breakdown of relationships and marriages. It leads to ill health. It leads to the creation or exacerbation of addiction problems. It is a scourge on our society. People who charge usurious rates of interest in Scotland are perpetrating a practice that is simply not acceptable. Gavin Brown made a thoughtful and considered speech. He noted that two thirds of the people who were sampled in the R3 study said that they went to a pay day loan company because there was no alternative, and he made the perfectly valid point that, if they had not done so, they might have gone to loan sharks and faced even worse personal reprisals, including the physical reprisals that are sadly still a feature of the activity of the loan sharks who prey on the vulnerable in Scotland. That is a fair point, and we cannot ignore such commonsense points. However, Gavin Brown also said that a cap on interest rates might not work, depending on the rate. It is relevant to point out that there are caps on interest in the United States of America. I am advised that, in the District of Columbia and Arizona, rates are capped at 24 per cent and 36 per cent respectively. There is evidence that many pay day loan companies in DC and Arizona have shut down. That is surely to be welcomed, but only if the gap can be filled by another means. It is also relevant to point out that, although there appears to be no cap on the interest that can be charged by pay day loan companies, credit unions are capped. Credit unions are restricted by law to lending at a maximum rate of 2 per cent a month, or 26.8 per cent APR, which is modest compared with the APRs of more than 4,000 per cent that Mr Thompson, Mr Gibson and Labour members mentioned. It seems to me that there is a wee hint of double standards in that regard. If there is a cap for credit unions, why is there no cap for other lenders? I do not know the answer to that question, but I am going to find out. There is a chance for the Scottish Parliament to follow up the debate and tackle an issue that has lurked in the shadows for far too long. I am committed to the task, as I think are members from all parties. To that task we shall turn our attention, thanks to Margaret Burgess. Meeting closed at 17:54.

Following the United Kingdom veto decision, the First Minister wrote to the Prime Minister on 11 December to ask for an urgent meeting of the joint ministerial committee to assess the implications for Scotland. The economic implications of the UK veto are unknown while discussions continue to evolve in Europe. However, the North Sea oil and gas industry makes a huge contribution to the Scottish and UK economies—it supports more than 200,000 jobs in Scotland alone—and we continue to work closely with the sector and its supply chain to attract investment, create jobs and grow the economy.

I am a stranger to grandstanding activities myself, as members know. When I attended the energy council with Charles Hendry, we were in agreement that the proposed EU directive on health and safety in the North Sea is unwanted by the sector and by Aberdeen, and unnecessary, because we have extremely high standards of health and safety. We have learned lessons from difficult events over the years, and there is a rigorous and effective regime in Scotland and the UK. I am pleased to say that we are at one with our colleagues in the UK Government on the matter and that we will fight the cause together.

The Scottish Government is committed to supporting sustainable economic growth and job creation throughout Scotland. We are prioritising spend on capital and investing in a supportive business environment to maximise the impact on jobs. On Monday, the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment launched our regeneration strategy, which includes details of the £50 million Scottish partnership for regeneration in urban centres fund. He also announced that the Riverside Inverclyde urban regeneration company will benefit from an additional £1.5 million in 2013-14, on top of the £2.5 million that will be provided in 2012-13. I am delighted that the contract that has been signed between Caledonian Maritime Assets Ltd and Ferguson Shipbuilders to build the world’s first sea-going hybrid ferries will secure around 75 existing jobs in the Port Glasgow and Inverclyde area and create around 100 more. In addition, Ferguson Shipbuilders is expected to create 20 new apprenticeships as a direct result of the contract.

Duncan McNeil makes extremely fair points. We are all concerned about the levels of unemployment. The statistics that I have suggest that the employment rate for people between the ages of 16 and 64 in Inverclyde was 70.4 per cent in the year that ended in March 2011, which was in line with the rate for Scotland as a whole. However, we are aware that the problem is a serious one indeed. Mr McNeil’s suggestion about the possibility of encouraging regeneration through the creation of sustainable jobs in the renewables sector is reasonable, and I am happy to work with him towards that end. As far as enterprise zones are concerned, we are looking carefully at the matter. Many candidates from all over the country have applied for enterprise zone status, as the member would expect. The decision will be made fairly soon.

I was not aware of that matter, so it is probably correct that I decline to comment, other than to say that, plainly, all of us across all political parties welcome the taking of every practical and effective step to generate jobs and to create apprenticeships and youth employment in the area. It would not be appropriate for me to comment on a situation the details of which I am unaware of.

The latest official statistics, published on 27 October 2011, show that 85,000 premises in Scotland, or two out of every five commercial premises, are currently in receipt of the Scottish small business bonus scheme.

I am pleased to reassure Scotland that, for the next five years, the small business bonus scheme will remain firmly in place. From what I understand of the Labour Party’s proposed reforms, given the limited amount of detail available, they would place administrative burdens on councils, which would need to monitor the number of employees in each property. Entrepreneurship would be stifled, and many sole traders would simply not qualify. Perverse incentives, such as an incentive to replace full-time staff with part-time staff, would also be created. In any event, the amount that would be saved by the proposals for the small business bonus scheme would, in many cases, be insufficient to employ anyone. I think that we would be better sticking with the Scottish National Party Government and our secure, robust, guaranteed offer of the small business bonus scheme for the next five years.

Scotland’s small businesses are key to sustainable economic growth and we are committed to ensuring that we have a supportive business environment. Official statistics published on 27 October 2011 show that 85,000 properties, or two in every five commercial premises, were in receipt of a tax break through the small business bonus. In addition, support from the business gateway is helping record numbers of start-ups and existing businesses.

Plainly, the events that the member described amount to a change for the worse in the trading expectations and patterns of the businesses concerned. Members will appreciate that I used to be a bit of an anorak in respect of business rates—used to be—so I can advise members that valuation joint boards are independent of Scottish ministers and that all businesses have a right of appeal for rateable value assessments where there has been a material change in circumstances. I would therefore recommend that the member pursue that point with the businesses concerned and perhaps ensure that they are aware of the potential right of appeal.

I have seen for myself the success of solar photovoltaic businesses in Scotland and I met representatives of the sector last Thursday to discuss how we continue to support its growth beyond the current difficulties caused by the United Kingdom Government’s review of the feed-in tariff. The Scottish Government already funds the Energy Saving Trust to provide a range of support for microgeneration, including solar PV, from home visits to interest-free loans. We are working with industry to look at additional actions to support the sector and will set those out in more detail in the microgeneration strategy to be published in the new year.

I agree with Mr Stewart about the three benefits. However, the feed-in tariff scheme is reserved to Westminster. I am always happy to look into a suggestion, but I suspect that we do not have the legislative powers that are required in this case, although I hope that Mr Stewart will support our moves to acquire them. Further to my meeting last week, I shall urge the Department of Energy and Climate Change to ensure three things: first, that customers who placed orders before the consultation paper was put out have their orders honoured under the pre-existing system; secondly, that the FIT budget be looked at so that social housing can be allowed the benefit of solar panels and lower-rental properties are not cut out of the scheme, which has been advantageous to many people who live in fairly substantial properties, as the member will know; and thirdly, that we bring forward measures for the long-term stability of the solar PV sector. We understand the difficulties that the UK Government faces and do not belittle them, but we are concerned about the way in which the FIT reduction was introduced, as is the industry in Scotland.

I wrote to Chris Huhne on 24 October and 3 November to express my concern and met, at my behest, a number of solar energy companies last Thursday, which members will recall was not a particularly sunny day. There was huge concern around the table about the number of job losses in Scotland, which could reach the high hundreds, or more. I do not want to make political capital out of this; I want to work with DECC to ensure a fairer solution as a result of the consultation paper. Mark McDonald referred to the level of concern. I very much hope that our colleagues in DECC will consider carefully what can be done. I believe that the three measures that I have proposed today are modest and achievable. We are not asking for too much or trying to score political points on the issue; rather, we want a solution for the people and businesses involved.

Paragraphs 187 to 191 of the “Scottish Planning Policy” document set out the strategic approach to dealing with wind farms, including siting. The document is available on the Scottish Government’s website.

Guidance was put in place in 2002, 2006 and 2009, and—as I said in the debate a couple of weeks ago at which Alex Johnstone was present—further guidance on cumulative impact will be issued shortly by Scottish Natural Heritage. These are serious matters, so it does not help to conduct the debate in such stentorian and hyperbolic tones. We need a little more light and a little less heat.

I am aware of the debate the other week, which Neil Findlay led. I thought that members from all parties made useful contributions, which we are studying. I expect that we will debate matters further in the Parliament as time goes on. However, the first step should be to consider the guidance to which I referred, following its publication, and recent announcements of other measures, such as Scottish and Southern Energy’s announcement that it will increase the amount of community benefit that it pays to £5,000 per megawatt. This is a dynamic area of policy. I assure the member that we will keep Parliament fully informed and involved at all times. I welcome his question on the matter.

The provisions of the Energy Act 2004 that apply to the fossil fuel levy funds state that they must be used “for the purpose of promoting the use of energy from renewable sources.” That means that the funds could have a role to play in helping to moderate demand or at least make it more sustainable, for example by helping to fund district heating schemes that incorporate renewable fuels.

We will be happy to consider whether it will be possible to use fossil fuel levy funds for such purposes. Yesterday, I was pleased to meet Community Energy Scotland, which does much work to support communities that want to promote community renewables schemes. There are a number of hugely successful schemes in Scotland, which are helping to power homes and revitalise communities. That is a positive story, which I am sure all members welcome.

I am pleased to say that I understand that the Nigg development, which we all welcome and which will bring around 2,000 jobs to the Highlands, is already being assisted by public funding, through Highlands and Islands Enterprise. Whether there is a need for further public funds is a matter that we would look to, and we would do so sympathetically. Scotland is on the verge of some of the most exciting opportunities that the country has faced and I am pleased that Mary Scanlon has greeted the Nigg development with such enthusiasm. I hope that that enthusiasm is emulated across the Parliament.

We are committed to offering a range of support, through Skills Development Scotland, to make it easier for smaller local businesses throughout Scotland to hire staff and take on one of the 25,000 apprenticeship opportunities that are available this year. The support includes access to £1,000, to support 16 to 19-year-olds who have completed pre-employment training into a job or an apprenticeship, and access to £5 million to help employers to recruit people aged over 18 who are struggling to find work. For businesses that have fewer than 50 employees, £2.5 million is also available, in the form of £1,000 rebates for the additional recruitment costs that small businesses incur.

Jean Urquhart makes a good point. By sheer coincidence, I met business organisations this morning and discussed those and other matters with them. As Jean Urquhart said, in the Highlands and Islands there is a high rate of membership of organisations such as the Federation of Small Businesses, which provides comprehensive services to small businesses, as I well know. We will continue to do everything we can to ensure that businesses are aware of the support, assistance, advice and mentoring services that they can get from business bodies such as the FSB, the SCDI, the Scottish Chambers of Commerce and the Institute of Directors.

We have no plans to introduce a bed tax and there are no existing legal powers for local authorities to levy a local bed tax or tourism tax.

I read about the bed tax proposal in the newspapers. Obviously, we are always ready to engage with local government, but there is a high risk that a visitor levy could damage the industry’s competitiveness, especially in the current economic circumstances. Price is a key threat to the United Kingdom’s competitiveness. Unfortunately, the UK ranks 135th out of 139 for price competitiveness. All but three members of the European Union have lowered VAT rates for hotel accommodation and some have done so for other tourism services. The UK VAT rate on hotel accommodation is high, at 20 per cent. Some people would say that we already have a quasi bed tax and that it is called VAT.

I thank Stuart McMillan for bringing an important subject to the chamber, and I welcome the terms of the motion. I also welcome the action that the Greenock Telegraph has taken to highlight the variations in fuel prices across Inverclyde, and its provision of a daily snapshot of prices. In preparing for the debate, I asked to see some of the relevant articles from the Greenock Telegraph because, like Mr Fraser, I confess that it is not the first journal that I choose in my daily perusal of the newspapers. I commend the active and persistent journalism on the part of all of those who have taken part in the campaign. Their provision of information to their readers is a salutary example, which other local newspapers could well emulate. Some, of course, do. Paul Coulter, Susan Lochrie and David Goodwin—I apologise if I omitted anyone—are to be praised. I do not wake up in the morning expecting to praise many journalists in the course of the day, but I recognise the persistence with which they have pursued the matter. An article that appeared in the paper on 22 July 2010 states: “Every day from today we will publish an updated list of the fuel prices at every petrol station across Inverclyde. That way our readers can decide where to fill their tanks—and at what price. The reason behind our new Petrol Watch feature is we receive countless letters and emails from local drivers who say they are fed up at having to pay higher prices than areas nearby.” Setting aside the politics of the issue, we can all recognise that such journalism, which involves the simple, straightforward reporting of facts and the provision to readers in the area of readily understandable information, is extremely helpful and informs them about where they can get the best deal. More than that, it constitutes a form of pressure on the companies involved—which, according to the motion, charge up to 7p more than others—to reduce the excess charges that lead to the disparity, through fear of public exposure and being named and shamed. Inverclyde is not the only area of the country where that happens. The Strathspey and Badenoch Herald—if I may be permitted to mention that august organ—has exposed the disparity in the prices that are charged in petrol stations in Aviemore, Grantown and elsewhere, some of which are in my constituency while others are in that of Dave Thompson. I put on record my appreciation to the Greenock Telegraph for the work that it does, and I acknowledge Mr McNeil’s comments, even if they ranged freely and widely—that is what we would expect from an old hand—in recognising the newspaper’s campaigning efforts in other areas. I have met Mr Muir on several occasions. I have debated with him and I respect him, as Duncan McNeil knows. These are serious matters and it is right that a local newspaper should take up the cudgel on behalf of its readers. That is perhaps the main thrust of the debate. Mr McMillan’s motion refers to the “challenging economic situation for households and business operations in Inverclyde”, which I think permits me to claim that relevant to the debate is the work that the Scottish Government is doing through the council tax freeze, the abolition of prescription charges and the small business bonus scheme, which have helped to alleviate the burden that many individuals and businesses face in their daily lives. I think that Mr Thompson alluded to the matter.

I could probably hear Mr McNeil if he was in Our Dynamic Earth. I am sorry that I did not have the opportunity to take his intervention; I would have been happy to respond. Taxation accounts for around 60 per cent of the price that we pay at the pumps—the highest rate in any EU country. The taxes are set by the UK Government and it is clear that the UK Government possesses the levers to address the issue. It is also clear that 80p is collected through fuel duty and VAT on each litre of petrol that is sold—that is 14p more per litre than was being collected just three years ago. Of course, under current plans, fuel duty is due to rise by a further 3p per litre next August. It is evident that the overall tax burden on petrol and diesel is still increasing. That is unfair on Scotland, given that we are incredibly oil rich—I think that this year we contributed in the region of £13 billion to the London Exchequer from our overall oil and gas taxation. I acknowledge the comments that members have made and I will try to be reasonably consensual. The cost of fuel is a burden on ordinary families and individuals, especially households on lower pay and households that have no access to public transport, some of which need two cars so that the husband and wife can travel to and from home.

Do I have the pleasure of hearing from Duncan McNeil now?

I never say never, but I am not aware of a provision in planning law that would allow that to be done. If Mr McNeil can suggest an approach that we can take, we will be happy to consider it. Taxation on fuel remains the main component of the cost, and the power rests with Westminster in that regard. I wish that the Scottish Parliament had the power to handle matters. If it did, I think that members of all parties would strive with every effort that we could muster to provide a better deal, especially for people on lower incomes and people who live in rural and island communities, who have suffered injustice for far too long. Meeting closed at 17:34.

Ronald Reagan famously said: “The nine most terrifying words in the English language are, “I’m from the Government and I’m here to help.” As someone who for 15 years of my working life owned and managed a small business, I must say that that view struck a chord: governments—local or national—took our taxes and ignored our wishes. Of course, the world has changed since Mr Reagan was in the White House, and Governments everywhere are working harder to change that perception, because businesses are the engines for delivery of both economic recovery and growth. Successful businesses create wealth and jobs and improve communities and lives. They increase Government tax take through higher income and corporation taxes, through VAT, through national insurance contributions, and through landfill tax, excise duty and many other rates and levies. The Scottish Government is already supporting business, jobs and growth where we can. We do so through investments in capital infrastructure—along the lines of the major announcement that Mr Neil made recently—through provision of business advice and through the small business bonus scheme. I welcome the opportunity today to consider better regulation and what more the Government can do in that context to take care of business. We must recognise, of course, that most of the regulations that impact on businesses in Scotland, including in respect of employment law, tax, company law, competition and health and safety, are reserved to the United Kingdom Government or are transposed from European Union law. The UK Government has been focused since 2010 on hardline deregulation. Its one in, one out policy means that over the lifetime of the Parliament, new UK legislation should be offset by identifying existing regulations that can be removed. Its red tape challenge website drives a rolling review of 21,000 UK regulations, with the presumption that regulations will go unless they are deemed to be essential and it is, as we know, progressing reviews of pensions regulation, company law, health and safety regulation, environment legislation and employment law. I welcome and share the desire to get rid of regulation that is no longer relevant or necessary, but I am not convinced that deregulation is the answer to every question, nor that the arbitrary one in, one out approach is either logical or correct. The role of Government is to support business and to address obstacles to growth, but not through a desperate drive to deregulate. After all, without regulation, children would still be working up chimneys and workers would still be handling asbestos. We can see by those two simple examples that regulation is required.

No. We have never supported an arbitrary process that involves the mathematical approach of one in, one out. The Government has not espoused that approach.

No, I will not. I will carry on for the reason that I have just described. Without regulation, property rights would not exist and international trade would not be possible, so regulation is required in those contexts, too. The question is not whether we regulate but how we regulate. In Scotland, our focus has been, and will continue to be, on better regulation. I see little merit in one in, one out protocols or other complicated targets that are disproportionate and ineffective and also create their own bureaucracy.

No. I will move on and perhaps take an intervention from Gavin Brown later, if I feel like it. As I said, such targets create their own new bureaucracy that allows Governments to deliver on cosmetic targets while making no real difference to the problems that are faced by business. Our approach is predicated on careful and collaborative consideration of whether regulation is necessary, effective or proportionate. A good example of how that works in practice is the process that I led when I was Minister for Community Safety to review fire safety regulations in the bed-and-breakfast sector of our tourism industry. The sector was unhappy with what it saw as being over the top fire safety measures that were based on complex guidance. I chaired a working party and together we simplified the requirements and reduced the average cost of compliance to business by over 90 per cent, from an average of around £20,000 to an amount in the region of £1,000, while maintaining the necessary high safety standards. I remain committed to that type of collaborative work to tackle the stop-flow culture of regulation. Since 2007, we have enhanced the role of the independent business-led regulatory review group and, with its encouragement, we have made it easier to change any regulation that is inconsistent with the five principles of better regulation; we have introduced business and regulatory impact assessments, with the core objective of ensuring that new legislation is developed with direct input from businesses that are likely to be affected; and we have aligned all Scottish regulators with our overarching purpose of increased and sustainable growth, so that they are beginning to change the way in which they interact with business at large. We remain committed to five key principles in requiring that regulation be transparent, accountable, proportionate, consistent and targeted only where action is needed and not with an exclusive focus on economic factors. Protection of our built heritage and protection of our natural environment are good for all of us, and regulation of potentially harmful acts sets appropriate standards and supports enforcement, but it must be done in the right way. Progress has been made in the context of planning, where the adversarial system that we inherited was letting Scotland down. Since 2009, our reforms have delivered a system that debates major issues about future development of areas, and which involves people and communities at the earliest possible stage. We have a national planning framework, a front-loaded development management system and less reliance on planning by appeal: processes do not become unnecessarily protracted. The Scottish Environment Protection Agency now responds to more than 95 per cent of all planning consultations within agreed deadlines. Decisions are made at appropriate levels of authority and locality. In addition, our investment in e-planning has made it easier for communities, small businesses and major developers to engage effectively with the planning system wherever they are. All that helps appropriate business developments to happen faster. In looking forward, we are exploring options for better joint working between public sector bodies that have roles in planning. To that end, I have had positive meetings with Scottish Natural Heritage and SEPA, which has published proposals for a new, simpler and stronger model for environmental regulation. Much of our environmental legislation is European-Union driven, but we do have some scope to decide how it is enacted. SEPA wants a system that reduces bureaucracy and duplication, which protects and improves environments and communities, which drives economic and environmental improvements and which rewards good performance while ensuring that tougher action is taken against those who fail to meet acceptable standards. I share that ambition. I am pleased, too, that Historic Scotland has demonstrated a firm commitment to simplification and to de-layering of process and decision making. Its work with local authorities to clarify roles and responsibilities and to reduce double handling is already bearing fruit. A culture of early engagement and proportionality in all that it does is now firmly embedded in that agency. I know that Historic Scotland is committed to working with all its partners to find more opportunities for better and simpler regulation, while respecting the core need to nurture and protect all that is most significant about Scotland’s heritage. On procurement, there are now almost 60,000 suppliers registered on the public contracts portal, and small businesses secure three quarters of the contracts that are advertised. We recently published the online supplier journey, which provides simple one-stop help and guidance for business. In the coming year, we will introduce a standard pre-qualification questionnaire to further simplify the process, which I know will be welcomed by many contractors. We are determined to connect quality public services and positive impacts on the Scottish economy. Improvements have been achieved and, increasingly, officials in local authorities, SEPA, SNH, Historic Scotland and other bodies are minded to act as economic enablers whenever they can.

I am in a good mood this morning, so I will.

Generally speaking, a BRIA should be carried out, but we must have regard to whether it would be disproportionate for that to be done. For example, if only 0.1 per cent of premises might be affected—as was the case with the public health levy—it would not be proportionate to carry out such an assessment. However, in the vast majority of cases, we already carry out BRIAs. The message that I hear from businesses across Scotland, hundreds of which I have visited in the six months since I was appointed Minister for Energy, Enterprise and Tourism, is very clear: we need to go further and faster. First, I want to acknowledge the work of the regulatory review group, whose annual report was published yesterday. It confirms that we are making progress. The RRG’s review of Scotland’s environmental and rural services initiative, which is a step towards streamlining those services, confirms that 8,012 fewer inspections of farms were carried out in the past three years, there was an 11 per cent reduction in land managers’ paperwork and the sheep-farming industry paid around £400,000 less in fees. Those are solid and significant achievements for a great many small businesses in the rural economy. In addition, the RRG’s chair, Professor Russel Griggs, is working with the Government on a project to ensure that industry planners and regulators are fully prepared to process carbon capture and storage projects in Scotland; indeed, just yesterday I pushed through regulations on that issue at the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee. We have published and tested the necessary regulatory framework, and we continue to monitor progress on the matter.

I am sure that we wish to engage fully with COSLA on all such matters. Professor Griggs has drawn that to our attention and it will be pursued. I thank Mary Scanlon for raising the point. We wish to have even better regulation, because it is one of the main ways in which we can help business. The RRG listens to business, and I have been doing the same—my door has been open and there has been heavy traffic through it over the past six months. It is right that that is the case, because I am the servant of business and the public. I want every business organisation to listen to business, too. All the enterprise agencies, regulators and Government officials are playing significant roles in that regard, and they are doing so willingly—they are happy to and enthusiastic about performing in a team Scotland capacity to secure the objective of better regulation. I wish to focus on outcomes. I want all of us, whenever possible, to work together across the chamber to make a real difference on better regulation. I invite all MSPs to be part of the team Scotland approach that I have outlined. If any member hears of business problems with specific regulations, I ask them to communicate their concerns to me. Together, we can change regulation for the better. I move, That the Parliament agrees that better regulation is an important driver of sustainable economic growth and endorses the Scottish Government’s commitment to better regulation rather than deregulation; welcomes the Scottish Government’s commitment to delivering regulation that is proportionate, consistent, transparent, accountable and targeted only where needed, and supports a regulatory framework in which government, regulators and business work together to identify regulatory barriers to growth and deliver an outcomes-based approach, thereby providing a favourable environment for business to grow and flourish, creating jobs and improving lives.

For just over two hours, we have heard the wind rattle and roar—outside the chamber, things have been quite lively, too. The tone in the debate has been largely positive and moderate. I echo the comments that were made in the two speeches that we have just heard. The majority of the speeches that have been made have been useful, positive and informative, and a number of arguments have been made that we should certainly pursue together. That approach was begun by Rhoda Grant. I have had the opportunity to listen for protracted periods to Rhoda Grant’s contributions in various for a over the years. She is always worth listening to, and today was no exception. She was right to point out that we need to address the challenges, procedures and processes of marine energy—Rob Gibson talked about that as well. I am pleased to inform Rhoda Grant and the chamber that, at my instigation some weeks ago, a short-life working group was set up to look at precisely those matters. I hope that it will reach its conclusions fairly early in the new year, thanks in part to the good offices of Russel Griggs who, with me, chairs the group. It will work on an issue that could hardly be of more importance to Scotland, given that potentially tens of thousands of jobs will be created in Scotland, not least in the Highlands, as Mary Scanlon well knows, and in Caithness, as Rob Gibson remarked yesterday. Such things are important. As far as the opportunities off our shores are concerned, we want Scotland to be the best place in Europe to do business. I think that we all share that objective. Rhoda Grant went on to raise a theme of the debate: procurement. She did so in a positive way, and I intend to address the remarks of the members who made largely positive contributions. Her remarks about procurement raise serious issues. As Mark McDonald indicated, we instinctively support many of the aims that she wishes to take forward. It seems to me that the approach that we should take is to work together to pursue the issue in detail—of course, the detail is where the devil exists. Rather than simply demand that a bill be brought forward, it is more important that we work out what the bill should do. I think that that is the correct procedure. I look forward to working with Rhoda Grant. I undertake that I will pass the Official Report of this debate to Mr Neil—as I speak, officials will rapidly be taking a note to do so—because many members made useful comments that should be followed up and not overlooked. Gavin Brown pointed out some of the good work that the Westminster Government has done. He gave the example of removing the bar on credit unions using e-mail and electronic communications. That is a good example of the sort of measure that we would all support across the party barriers. It is not really for me to praise the Westminster Government—even though, as members all know, I am a very fair-minded person. To be serious, I am more concerned about doing right in Scotland than spending time on criticising what others may be doing wrong elsewhere. That is the approach that I take. I wanted to stress that point in coming to a pledge that I make to members. This is an important pledge to indicate how together we can address all the topics in this debate. When I receive from any member of this Parliament, no matter in which party, a detailed critique of a particular regulation or piece of guidance with which the member perceives there is a problem, and when I receive a detailed analysis of the problem, regardless of whether it is the member’s point of view or a matter that has been taken up on behalf of the constituent—which form perhaps the greater number of such representations—I will take it very seriously indeed. That is the sort of thing that members would expect me to do, and it is the sort of thing that I should do. I am sure that my predecessors in different parties have taken the same approach. The point is that looking at specifics is far more useful than railing against thunder in a general sense. Having a rant about red tape in general does not take us further; in fact, I think that it takes us backwards because, instead of having a focused debate, we have an inchoate debate that is of little, if any, use. I will respond to some of the specific points. Angus MacDonald made a solid contribution about small business. We are acutely aware of the importance of serving the needs of small businesses. The small business bonus helps 85,000 businesses. It is an excellent policy, and we will maintain it for five years. One of the first meetings that I had was with Colin Borland of the Federation of Small Businesses, and since then I have met him many times. I will meet the small business consultative group next week or the week after and we will discuss many of the matters that have been raised. I will ask officials to study the Official Report of the debate, because many members mentioned small businesses. Constituency members, in particular, hear stories from small businesses—perhaps hearing one side of the case. One does not have to be a lawyer to know that there are always two sides to a case; every MSP knows that. However, I want to pursue all the general points with the consultative group. Dave Thompson made informed comments, as we would expect, on consumer protection and the proposed changes. The UK Government has published plans to restructure the consumer landscape, and we are keen to negotiate a transfer of powers and funding—the two are inextricably linked. I think that time is pressing for a concrete exchange of information about the funding; I say that not as a criticism of the London Government but to relay views that I have heard from local authorities, which need to know where they stand if they are to take over responsibilities, so that they can make practical arrangements in that regard. The UK Government has indicated that it is willing to discuss the issues and we will work with all stakeholders to examine all the options and devise a system that delivers the best for Scotland as a whole. I do not think that Gavin Brown mentioned empty property relief—I apologise if he did—although the issue is mentioned in his amendment. No ministerial decision has been taken on whether a BRIA will be conducted for reform of empty property relief. Of course, in relation to that issue and the public health levy, consultation is going on, as part of the draft budget statement. I do not propose to go into all the arguments about the public health levy, which is not the focus of this debate. I note the points that were made and I could respond and bring in extraneous matters. We are consulting and we are listening carefully, but we think that the proposals that we have put forward are right for Scotland. I welcome much of what John Park said. In particular, he made the point that workforce representatives must be involved in what is not and never should be a business-only activity. It behoves us to consult workforce representatives. I took that approach when I was Minister for Community Safety, when I had the privilege of addressing the UK Fire Brigades Union conference—my speech seemed to be quite well received. I enjoyed working with the FBU and I miss the relationship that I think I built up with its representatives. It is important that, for example, Stephen Boyd continues to do his good work as part of Russel Griggs’s group, which will inform the process that I am in charge of. Where there is a relevant interest for a workforce representative to be heard and to be involved in looking at a matter, a workforce representative will be so engaged. That is the correct approach and I was pleased that John Park raised the important issue. Helen Eadie talked about supported employment. She and I have met to discuss the matter, which is extremely important. We are doing more work on what is a difficult area, as we all know, and Westminster is looking at the issue in the context of a review. Much consideration must be given to the matter, which I am sure that the Scottish Parliament will debate at some point—it is correct that we do. I was pleased that Helen Eadie raised the matter. In general, there was a consensus in the Parliament that the culture of regulatory bodies and the staff who work in them is what is important. I am talking about not just the chief executives, chairmen and top management but the people who are involved in day-to-day engagement with businesses, whether they work in SEPA, SNH, the Food Standards Agency, Historic Scotland or planning departments. Of course, culture is difficult to influence, but perhaps one of the most positive things to emerge from the debate is that there seems to be a consensus on its importance. I think that Dr Elaine Murray mentioned the issue. Of course, she had ministerial responsibility in respect of SEPA for a considerable time—I hope that that is correct. She made the point, as did Dave Thompson, that we want regulatory bodies to be enablers, not just enforcers. We want a collaborative approach; if a serious problem is identified that might impair or impede economic development, we would like to know about it. We as a Government would like to be involved in the discussion at an early stage, which is logical, rather than hear six months down the road after a decision has been made that a development is not going ahead because a solution has not been brokered, options have not been considered and opportunities for compromises have not been taken.

I am very pleased with this debate, which has been largely positive. I am very grateful to members of all parties for the largely constructive and positive tone of speeches this morning.

I wish to inform Parliament of an important decision that I have made in connection with the upgrade of the Beauly to Denny overhead transmission line at Stirling. The Beauly to Denny upgrade is Scotland’s key to connecting renewables and to the new jobs that that will bring. The upgrade is essential to our reaching our renewables targets and to ensuring energy security. Consent for the line therefore had widespread support across the Parliament. My predecessor, Jim Mather, announced consent for the Beauly to Denny line in Parliament on 6 January 2010. The consent attached a number of conditions to protect the public, the environment and our cultural heritage, and to take into account the views of communities along the length of the line. Those conditions are being met, existing pylons are coming down and work is progressing apace. When consent was granted, the importance of mitigating the impacts of the line at Stirling was recognised and a condition was imposed accordingly. In short, condition 19 requires that proposals for mitigating the visual and landscape impacts of the line near Stirling must be approved by Scottish ministers before the towers and transmission line can be erected. Following a lengthy process of engagement and consultation, SP Transmission Ltd—Scottish Power’s transmission company—submitted proposals for the Stirling visual impact mitigation scheme on 26 August 2011. I inform Parliament that I am approving those proposals for the 400kV line, but I am doing so with some important additional proposals to mitigate the impact. In coming to my decision, I have taken into account all the relevant material considerations and have had regard to the views that Stirling Council presented in representing the communities involved. I have also considered the views of my consultant, Ironside Farrar, Scottish Natural Heritage, and Scottish Government officials as well as the findings of the reporter to the public inquiry in 2009. I have toured the length of the consented line that is covered by condition 19 with my consultant and officials, and I have carefully considered the proposals in the scheme. The proposals that SP Transmission has made employ mitigation methods including landscape reinforcement, the undergrounding of existing low-voltage overhead lines and other compensatory measures in seven locations. The proposals offer an important level of mitigation regarding the visual impact of the line on the landscape. Let us be clear: the Beauly to Denny overhead line upgrade is the most important grid infrastructure upgrade in several generations and there is a pressing need to get on with this development. The transmission network was built in the 1950s and 1960s, and it was designed to transport electricity generated by large plants that were located close to their sources of fuel—the coalfields in England and the central belt of Scotland. The renewables ambitions of modern Scotland have very different requirements. Energy that is generated at the periphery must now be transported to the centres of population. The clean, green energy revolution is transforming Scotland, building on our distinct competitive advantage in renewable energy, and delivering thousands of jobs and hundreds of millions of pounds of investment. Condition 19 required the Scottish ministers to consult Stirling Council before they approved proposals, and that requirement has been met. I undertook a formal consultation with the council, beginning on 30 August, which I extended from 30 to 45 days. My officials met Stirling Council’s Beauly to Denny power line steering group on several occasions and I recently did so myself to hear its views at first hand. In making my decision, I was mindful of the view of many in Stirling that the new line should be undergrounded. The idea of undergrounding the Beauly to Denny upgrade in the Stirling area was comprehensively examined during the public inquiry and, subsequently, in reports that were produced for Stirling Council, SP Transmission and our consultant, Ironside Farrar. I have considered all the recent relevant reports on the undergrounding of high-voltage transmission lines. Objective consideration leads me to conclude that the net reduction in impacts that would be realised from undergrounding the route would be relatively modest in most locations, especially once the potential impacts of sealing end compounds are taken into account. The evidence that has been presented is that undergrounding the 400kV line would require sealing end compounds where the line was undergrounded and where it resurfaced. Those compounds would have a significant impact in their own right. Such compounds for a 400kV transmission line would be of a size upwards of 30m by 80m, which is almost as big as a football pitch. They would have to be accommodated in the landscape instead of the pylons. Estimates for the cost of undergrounding vary depending on the option, from £28.7 million for a section of only 1.6km to £263 million for undergrounding the whole route that is covered by the condition. I do not find it appropriate to seek approval from the Office of the Gas and Electricity Markets for spending up to £263 million of electricity consumers’ money, especially at a time of such economic difficulty. Given the issues and the limited environmental benefits that undergrounding would bring, it simply cannot be justified. Undergrounding is normally considered as a mitigation intervention only to address extraordinary circumstances—when major adverse impacts are predicted, when undergrounding would be effective, and when other mitigation options have been ruled out as ineffective. I have listened carefully to views from all sides, but I agree with the findings of the reporter as well as Ironside Farrar and I have concluded that those exceptional circumstances do not apply to Stirling. The conclusion of the public inquiry and of my consultant was that the consented line at Stirling will, in the main, have minor to moderate adverse impacts. The prospect of programme delays is important. A timely Beauly to Denny upgrade is critical to the future deployment of renewables and to the wider programme of grid reinforcement that is required for Scotland to realise its enormous renewables potential. Best estimates suggest that undergrounding the main Beauly to Denny line would delay the development by approximately two to three years. It is therefore clear that there would be a financial impact through the restraint on renewables, but the wider implications of such delays for grid improvements and renewables investment would carry even greater economic importance. Overall, I conclude that the position of the reporter to the public inquiry remains appropriate. It was that, having regard to the cost of the alternatives, the technical problems that are associated with undergrounding and the limited environmental benefits that it would offer, the case for it has not been justified. If it is not appropriate to underground the main 400kV line, the question remains how best we can further protect and support the communities that are affected. First, I have requested that the existing overhead 132kV line from Fallin to Glenbervie should be undergrounded. That will carry a cost of £12.9 million for removing 7km of steel pylons, which represents a much more efficient use of money than the £28.7 million for a section of only 1.6km or the £263 million for a section of 15km, and it will not delay the main Beauly to Denny development. The costs of that option are justified. The reporter to the public inquiry recognised the benefits that it would bring to the wider area, as it will provide landscape and visual benefits by reducing the wirescape. My consultant recognised the proposal’s value and surmised that it would produce direct landscape and visual benefits for south and east Plean by offsetting the proposed line’s impact as well as providing landscape and visual benefits to the wider area by reducing the wirescape. I am satisfied that such undergrounding is justified. Undergrounding an existing 132kV line is a different proposition from undergrounding a 400kV line. It will be achieved at much lower cost, will not delay the project, and will not require further sealing end compounds. It will deliver significant benefits at manageable costs. Secondly, I have asked for wider landscape enhancement to be pursued, which will develop the central Scotland green network initiative in the area. My consultant has recommended a wider landscape enhancement scheme to deliver a range of benefits. The costs of that will not be known until the relevant parties have worked together to develop a scheme. However, I ask members to consider for a moment what even a fraction of the money that some have proposed should be spent on undergrounding could do for civic and landscape amenity in the Stirling area and how it could deliver long-lasting benefits to communities. Such an enhanced scheme will also help the Scottish Government to make progress against a number of national performance indicators by increasing people’s use of Scotland’s outdoors through the provision of foot and cycle paths, supporting biodiversity through the creation of woodland habitat, and reducing Scotland’s carbon footprint by creating new woodland. Clearly, that will require co-operative working in order to be successful. SP Transmission must now work alongside Stirling Council, Scottish Natural Heritage, the Forestry Commission and other relevant parties to develop a broad suite of proposals for widespread improvements to amenity in the area. Most important, I encourage the communities involved to actively engage with the process to facilitate environmental improvement in their areas. This is an affordable option with the potential to provide substantial, long-lasting landscape, biodiversity and civic amenity benefits. Particular mention has been made of the increase in wirescape where the consented line meets the existing Longannet to Denny twin overhead power line to the south-east of Plean. That area was highlighted by the public inquiry and Ironside Farrar as facing among the greatest impacts on amenity. It will benefit significantly from the proposal to underground the 132kV line, but it will remain greatly affected by existing and new power lines. I have therefore asked that particular attention be given to that area. Furthermore, I take on board the views that have been expressed on the impact on the Ochils area of great landscape value. Although the reporter and my consultant agree that the impact there will not be so significant as to affect the integrity of the AGLV, I have asked that particular attention be paid to improving amenity in that area. The issue is extremely important, and I have been acutely conscious of the feelings of the communities in the area of the consented overhead line, which have played an active role in the process and made a substantial contribution. My decision represents a way forward that maximises the potential benefits to the people of Stirling from the costs that will be incurred by the public and avoids delay to such a crucial development. My decision letter and submission of the advice from officials is being made available in the Scottish Parliament information centre. I commend my decision to the Parliament.

We consider that the process has been handled correctly. It was correct to consult the communities in the Stirling area on the issues. Plainly, there are strong feelings in the area and it was right to have regard to them by requiring a process of engagement to be carried out. That involved nine meetings between the relevant parties—SP Transmission, Stirling Council and Scottish Government officials were represented—and 23 options were considered as part of the process. SP Transmission then made its proposals and a period of consultation followed. Stirling Council asked me to extend the proposed period of 30 days in which consultation was to be permitted. I felt that that was a reasonable request; indeed, members from other parties urged me to accede to it. On the timescale, I point out that, because we looked so closely at the issue, we came up with significant mitigation that would not otherwise have emerged. The undergrounding of the Fallin to Glenbervie line would not have occurred if the course that Rhoda Grant urged on me had been pursued, and the mitigation in the green network proposal would not have been developed. Those two further examples of mitigation arose from the process that we carried out. It is essential that we proceed and avoid any delay. That is why I have issued the consent and taken the decision that I have taken.

I am afraid that I reject the various theses that Murdo Fraser has put forward. Obviously, there are very strong feelings; I was made aware of that when I met representatives of Stirling Council, led by Councillor Campbell and colleagues. However, they accepted that undergrounding carries a considerably higher price tag. Everybody recognised that fact. The estimate that we have received from our independent professional landscape consultant, Ironside Farrar, is that a multiplier of between five and 15 applies. That means that the cost of undergrounding the extra-high voltage line would have been up to £263 million more. Consumers would have been required to pay that money in their electricity bills. I am surprised that the Conservatives take the view that we should add to electricity bills in that way at this time and I am astonished that any member should describe a figure of the order of £263 million as “minimal”. That is certainly not minimal. We will take responsible decisions with regard to both the deployment of taxpayers’ money and the impact on consumers’ electricity bills, which, as we all know, are fairly high. On Mr Fraser’s other comments, for the reasons that I gave in response to Rhoda Grant’s question, it is clear that the consultation has resulted in substantial additional mitigation measures. I referred to the undergrounding of the Fallin to Glenbervie line and the creation of a green network, which will, I believe, with co-operation and a positive attitude by all participants, leave a lasting legacy that will improve the environment in the affected area. I am proud to be associated with that.

Yes, I agree with Rob Gibson’s point. The fundamental analysis shows that the requirements placed on the grid by society have changed. The grid used to convey electricity from the centre to the periphery, but that is changing and it will now need to convey electricity from the periphery, where Scotland’s great renewables potential is located, to the centre. That will require major investment which, in the case of Scottish Hydro Electric Transmission Ltd—which is part of Scottish and Southern Energy and is the transmission system operator in the north of Scotland—is of the order of £4 billion. For SP Transmission, it will be of the order of £2.5 billion. If, as the Conservatives have urged, we did not take this decision today but delayed by a further two years, those investments would not take place, the achievement of our renewables targets would be impossible and the thousands of jobs that will be created as a result, in part, of this decision would not exist to be taken up.

I have no wish to spoil anyone’s Christmas; I enjoyed my daughter’s Christmas public singing debut recently. Nonetheless, I hope that I am not casting myself in the role of either Santa or Scrooge today. We have come up with a significant and sensible package that cannot be described as modest. I certainly do not think that it will be described as such by the communities in Mr Crawford’s constituency, who will see the Fallin to Glenbervie line undergrounded, or by those who live in the Stirling area, who will be able to take advantage of the increased opportunities to take part in outdoor educational and physical activity. We will see a significant improvement in the green network around Stirling, and all parties will work towards that. It is unfair of Mr Macdonald to characterise the scheme as modest; I think that it will provide a significant and substantial legacy, and one that I hope, in time, he and his colleagues will come to welcome.

Yes, I am happy to assure the member that I will take an extremely close interest in this matter and will pursue it in a positive fashion with all the relevant parties, including the Forestry Commission, Scottish Natural Heritage and, of course, Stirling Council, as well as with the local communities and local politicians. I will be monitoring the progress of this important matter. We cannot put a cost on developing the green network initiative at this time, but we want it to be ambitious, so it will involve a fairly substantial expenditure and commitment.

I do not want to trespass into political terrain—I want to look forward and not back—but I think that it is always correct that we consult communities. We consulted seriously, positively and at length. As I have outlined, we did so in a structured way, holding nine meetings and considering 23 options. The process has resulted in substantial additional mitigation measures that would not otherwise have arisen. They arose because of the consultation process—because we decided that we would consult people. I appreciate that, as we all know, there are strong feelings, but I believe that the decision that we have taken is without a shadow of doubt the right one for Scotland. I am pleased that Mr McArthur shares that view.

I was happy to preside over the first pylon-dismantling ceremony, which took place in Boat of Garten, just south of my home, in my constituency. John Finnie rightly points to the fact that one of the less appreciated consequences of the erection of the Beauly to Denny line is that there will be substantially fewer pylons and that a large number of pylons on existing lines will be removed, including from the line that runs from Boat of Garten to Tarland in Aberdeenshire. There will therefore be a benefit in that respect. That is balanced by the fact that the 400kV pylons are larger—that is true, as has been pointed out—but there will be significant environmental benefits in the Highlands. Of course, communities along the whole length of the Beauly to Denny line have been affected by the decision. We are debating Stirling today, but many communities along the length of the line have engaged with the companies and the Government, have secured rationalisation and mitigation schemes and have welcomed the process. I am pleased that John Finnie has raised the issue this afternoon.

I will leave the Christmas metaphor before it becomes hackneyed, but the question on new pylon designs is perfectly fair and one that many members of the public have raised, because some of the candidate designs have been publicised in the past few months. I point out that, striking as the new designs may be, consideration of the engineering impact of any new pylon design is a time-consuming process that must be undertaken before there can be any question of it being used. The structural integrity of pylons is key for them to fulfil their purpose, so consideration of changing from the existing traditional pylon design to new pylons would incur significant delays. It may be that some of the more eye-catching designs would inevitably be even more visually obtrusive, by virtue of being eye catching, than the existing design, to which we have perhaps all become accustomed. I hope that that answers the question about new pylon designs. The other part of Dr Simpson’s question related to costs. Let me be clear: Mr Mather pursued the course of publishing all relevant documents; he put them on the website. I will follow that precedent. The information will be put on the website, along with the Ironside Farrar report, which I commissioned because I wanted the benefit of independent advice. Julian Farrar, who is watching the proceedings today, provided us with an excellent report. In that report, he was asked to do two things: consider the SP Transmission package of measures and report on the costs of undergrounding. He considered that the approach that I have taken today is the correct one. He advised us that the costs of undergrounding extra high-voltage cable of 400kV is extremely expensive. Dr Simpson might agree that the only argument is whether it is five times or 15 times more expensive. It is more expensive, not by a factor of two but by a factor of between five and 15. Obtaining that independent report from an expert in this area has served to allow rational consideration of the evidence in the debate and it has been extremely helpful to me in reaching the decision that I have announced today.

The Beauly to Denny line is essential to enable our renewables targets to be achieved and our ambitions for Scotland to be realised. Mr McMillan asks a fairly open-ended question. Members might not be aware that a consortium of three companies recently announced that it intends to proceed with an offshore wind development in the Moray Firth, which would involve investment of £4.5 billion—creating potentially the biggest offshore wind farm in the world. Members might not be aware of the significant investment that has been taking place in Scotland over the past 18 months, to the tune of more than £750 million, nor of the work that is taking place in the Pentland Firth in relation to the development of tidal and wave energy projects. Scotland is taking a lead on these matters, working with our colleagues in the Department of Energy and Climate Change and the European Union, including making representations there. The potential of that investment to increase the number of jobs for young people, to assist the new minister for youth employment in her task of providing jobs for young people in Scotland, is immense. The decision today is a sine qua non of achieving that success. Were we to proceed down the line that the Conservatives have advised, we would not achieve that success; it would be denied to us. The announcement today is about one in a sequential line of grid improvements that need to take place for the energy to get to the grid. It is as important as that. I hope that that answers Mr McMillan’s question.

There is no evidence to conclude that exposure to low-level electromagnetic fields is harmful to human health. On matters relating to health, we take advice from the Health Protection Agency, whose view accords with that of the World Health Organization that no such evidence exists. I have a lot more detail; I suspect that Liz Smith will be aware of the arguments, which I know have been considered in Parliament at some length. I did not refer to the matter in my statement simply because we have already looked carefully at it and have reached the conclusions that I have described. That is why it did not appear to me that it was a matter that should take up additional time in my statement.

The reporter in the public inquiry pointed to the impacts between Fallin and Glenbervie of the concatenation of the existing Fallin to Glenbervie line and—at a couple of points along its length—the new line, as well as the line that connects Longannet. The reporter considered the issue and found that there was a case for the undergrounding of the existing Fallin to Glenbervie line. The issue arose because it was raised by the reporter in the public inquiry. Secondly, the issue was raised in the Ironside Farrar report, which concluded that the undergrounding of that section would be justified. Therefore, in taking the decision that I have announced, I acted on the advice that we received from the expert planner and the consultant Julian Farrar, and I believe that my decision will be welcomed. I have received substantial representations from the local constituency MSP, Mr Crawford, who argued the case on behalf of his constituents, as is his right so to do. I think that it is the correct decision and I commend it to the Parliament.

The new pylons will replace an existing line of pylons, although they will, of course, be larger. I point out to the member and the chamber that the environmental impact assessment for the Beauly to Denny line considered the use of the steel lattice L12 towers, which is what has been consented to. A change to the design of the pylons for the line would require that the consent that has been granted be removed and that the application process be completely reopened. The financial costs of delay, for example in constraining wind generation, would be significant—SP Transmission has estimated that they would amount to £1 million per month. As matters progress, we will certainly monitor closely the progress that is made and any options that may be available in future in respect of new design but, for the reasons that I have outlined, it appears to us that the decision that I have announced today is the decision that will stand.

Accurate figures are currently not available to show what contribution golf and golf tourism make to Fife’s economy, but we expect that the impact will be significant as, overall, it is estimated that golf tourism is worth around £220 million per annum to Scotland’s economy and supports more than 4,000 jobs. Partners are working hard to help businesses to capitalise on golf tourism. Scotland’s tourism agency VisitScotland has a dedicated golf marketing programme that targets golfers throughout the UK and in key international markets, for example through the highly successful drive it home campaign.

It comes as no surprise to any of us that awards are literally being heaped on Fife on the golfing front, as I discovered when I visited St Andrews in the summer. I look forward to visiting the Fairmont hotel and entertaining a visiting party of Germans next spring. Golf has been played in Scotland for more than 600 years—although, in the case of some of us, with three-figure scores. There are 241,000 members of golf clubs in Scotland, which is perhaps rather more than the combined membership of all political parties in this country.

I wrote to Chris Huhne, the Secretary of State for Energy and Climate Change, on 24 October and 3 November to express my dismay at the proposals and to ask what action the UK Government is planning to take to address the impact on businesses, householders and social housing projects. I received responses from energy minister Greg Barker on 7 November and from Chris Huhne on 21 November, which restated their position that “failing to act now would result in the entire FITs budget for the four-year spending review period being committed in the next few months”. I have not yet had a response to my questions on the action that the UK Government will take to help those badly affected by the proposals. UK ministers cannot be unaware of the consequences that the proposals are having right now, but their only answer is to refer people to the consultation—which closes after the deadline of 12 December.

I agree that the UK Government’s proposals are disappointing. Particular difficulty has been caused by the imposition of the 12 December deadline. I know that from representations that I have received from businesses throughout the country, which indicate that the substantial investment that they have made may prove to be wasted because it is simply not possible to deal with the installations by 12 December. I hope that the UK Government will listen to this interchange and seriously consider taking action to deal with that unfairness.

Elaine Smith properly indicates an area where the Government is already active and where there is certainly scope for improvement. Plainly, we would wish bodies in the public arena to avail themselves of every opportunity to fit, and retrofit where necessary, green energy equipment. All of us, across the chamber, are united on that front, and I look forward to working with Elaine Smith and other colleagues to achieve that objective.

Jamie McGrigor makes a reasonable point. The capital cost of the equipment has been reducing, and all the parties have recognised that that requires some adjustment to the FIT. However, I say to him and his colleagues in the governing parties in the London Parliament that the imposition of the deadline of 12 December came as a bolt from the blue. To judge from my postbag, it has caused real concern, possible redundancies and wasted investment. That is why, in the very near future, I will meet and bring together a large number of the businesses that have been affected to learn directly of their experiences and to determine what more we can do to urge our colleagues in Westminster to think again.

The refurbished portrait gallery has opened today. Seventeen new galleries showcase the best of Scotland’s cultural treasures. Some original features have been restored and there is a new education suite and enhanced visitor facilities. I take this opportunity to congratulate the National Museums of Scotland, which last week achieved 1 million visitors to its new museum since it opened at the end of July.

I am pleased to inform Mr Walker that the galleries receive many visits from schools in Fife and they will continue to provide that excellent educational function. The opening exhibitions will cover a huge range of attractions that, I am sure, will be of interest to children in Fife, including pioneers of science; women of 19th century Scotland; the age of improvement; Sir Henry Raeburn; citizens of the world; David Hume; Allan Ramsay; and others too numerous to mention. A veritable embarras de richesse, one might say.

The winning years is not a new VisitScotland corporate campaign but a way of describing the unique opportunities that the period 2012 to 2014 presents to Scotland. The aim is to create a joint drive around the year of creative Scotland 2012, the year of natural Scotland 2013, homecoming 2014, the Commonwealth games and the Ryder cup. Only yesterday, in Canada, Fiona Hyslop was promoting the year of creative Scotland. Building momentum during the winning years will boost Scotland’s tourism, events industries and the wider economy.

The Commonwealth games, along with the infrastructure and buildings that are being put in place for that purpose, will provide other opportunities for business tourism, which has already achieved marked success in Glasgow, contributing—from memory—more than £150 million a year. In particular, the new sports arena will be available for such activities as pop concerts, which I am assured are extremely popular.

I have had several discussions with Fiona Hyslop and other ministers on many aspects of tourism. Scotland’s winter festivals bring together three of our most important cultural celebrations—St Andrew’s day, hogmanay and Burns night. This year’s programme celebrates our culture, heritage and creativity and aims to bring together people from all over the world to experience the best that Scotland has to offer in music, arts, food and entertainment, not forgetting drink.

Over the winter festival period, including Christmas, we wish to see as many as possible of our major attractions open to visitors, consistent with the needs of the staff to enjoy some time off to celebrate these occasions. I am happy to offer an assurance that we will do everything possible. Fiona Hyslop will look specifically at the local museum that the member mentioned to see what is being done there. I thank the member very much for a positive contribution.

The Scottish Government encourages such community involvement. That makes good business sense in an industry that earns more than £4 billion every year for the Scottish economy and supports around 200,000 jobs in Scotland.

Yes. I am advised that Braemar castle is operated by local people who volunteer as guides, work in the shop and tend the garden and that they believe passionately that the castle is worth saving. We are delighted that Historic Scotland agreed in July this year to provide a grant of up to £144,600 to Braemar Community Ltd for repairs to Braemar castle and I understand that a comprehensive, sustainable business plan is being developed. I look forward to working with Dennis Robertson, the local member, to build on that success.

I start by thanking Mr Findlay for bringing the debate to the chamber. There is undoubtedly huge interest in it across Scotland, as he mentioned and as is evidenced by the fact that the debate is well attended by members of the Parliament and citizens of this country. I entirely accept the point that has been made by a great many members that the issues under debate are of concern to many people. It is reasonable to argue that some people in this country are opposed to wind turbines in principle. Equally, others are in favour of wind turbines. Many people—possibly the majority—are somewhere in the middle, and think that there should be a policy that locates wind turbines in suitable areas and that due regard should be had to all the factors that have been mentioned by many members across the chamber today.

I have only seven minutes. Bear with me, as I want to try to make some progress. The Scottish planning system is committed to delivery of increased renewable energy capacity. It also seeks to safeguard communities and the environment. The system is a framework that we inherited and that largely has proceeded on the same basis since before this Government came to office. I do not make that point for any party-political reasons and I will not be making any party-political points this evening. It is a fair criticism to say that whereas the planning system and the guidance that allows it to operate were framed by our predecessors, the circumstances have changed. It can therefore be reasonably argued that because the circumstances have changed, with far more wind turbines being approved than was perhaps initially contemplated, it is sensible and correct to look again at that planning system. That is why, when Mr Findlay raised his concerns with me, I agreed to meet him. I think we met on 25 September. I also met Angela Constance, the constituency MSP, to discuss the matter. The Scottish Government is active on this front across the ministerial portfolios and has instructed a considerable volume of work to look at the current situation and the issues that have been raised in the debate. The main issue has perhaps been cumulative impact, which is already a key consideration in decision making. In determinations, planning authorities and the Scottish Government will continue to draw on planning policy and advice from SNH. In assessing cumulative effects, consideration can be given only to schemes in the vicinity that have been built, have had permission to be built or are currently the subject of undetermined applications. I am pleased to announce that fairly soon SNH will be publishing further guidance on cumulative impact and a range of additional guidance on siting and landscape matters. I hope that members recognise that that shows that we have been considering the issue in some detail, about which people feel very strongly.

The risk in debates of this sort is that members may overstate their points slightly. I am afraid that Mr Findlay’s comments are not factually correct. I will arrange to share the facts with members, and the details of which local authorities do have spatial strategies. I can tell members, having seen the list—I have it here—that there are a great number. It would be wholly wrong for me, in Edinburgh, to make such plans. I would be surprised if any member disagreed that it is entirely correct for local authorities to produce plans for their areas, with the benefit of input.

No—I will not take another intervention, because I have only one and a half minutes left. I will talk about benefits, to which many members referred. We entirely support community renewables, on which we have undertaken a great deal of work. The community and renewable energy scheme—CARES—exists, and Community Energy Scotland provides excellent advice to a great many communities on that. We also have a target of achieving 500MW of local and community-owned renewable energy by 2020. I am pleased that—as has been said—Scottish and Southern Energy announced this week that it will increase the community benefit rate in its new wind schemes to £5,000 per megawatt. I hope that other developers will follow that example. We are now examining in detail the consultation responses on securing community benefits and we will come back to members on that work in due course.

I am in the last 30 seconds of my speech.

By instinct, I always want to take part in a debate, which means taking interventions. I just thought that I did not have time for an intervention. I always find it difficult to refuse Jackie Baillie. We will of course consider matters fairly. I have almost run out of time and I am sorry that I have not had time to do justice in full to all the many points that were raised. I assure members and members of the public that the debate is extremely serious and is one of the most important in Scotland. We have huge renewables potential and we are achieving great success, not just in onshore wind but in offshore wind, tidal and wave power. Jobs are being created throughout Scotland and opportunities are being created for young people. I know that members of all parties support that, as does the United Kingdom Government, which has almost exactly the same policy as us on supporting onshore wind developments through ROCs. I hope that the debate will be moderate, informed and useful. A great deal of work is being done. I am happy to share that with members of all parties and to work with them so that we continue to have a successful renewable energy policy for the country. Meeting closed at 18:18.

The Scottish Government has a policy to support the deployment of biomass in heat-only or combined heat and power plants, particularly off-gas grid, to a scale that maximises heat use and local supply.

I would be happy to meet the member to discuss those matters. District heating projects are extremely important to the Scottish Government, which is why we have invested £1.9 million towards them. We acknowledge that they play a very important part—as, indeed, does biomass—in heat-only or CHP schemes off grid. In 2010, more than 90 per cent of renewable heat in Scotland came from biomass. I am therefore very happy to work with the member on all of these matters.

As Malcolm Chisholm knows, our policy position on biomass is clear, and is covered in the draft electricity generation policy statement, in the national planning framework 2 and in planning guidance. We believe that large-scale biomass plants that produce only electricity are not the best use of biomass, which is a valuable product. We acknowledge that biomass has a place, especially in local community projects that use a local supply. Such projects often provide additional income to tree-growers when no other use of the material would be possible. We support local use, but we do not believe that large-scale use for electricity only is the most effective use of biomass. As Malcolm Chisholm knows, that has been our policy for a considerable time.

The Government is working closely with VisitScotland, the enterprise companies, VisitBritain and the London Organising Committee of the Olympic and Paralympic Games to ensure that we maximise the benefits that Scotland can realise from the significant tourism opportunities presented by the games. In addition to that and its highly successful core campaigns, VisitScotland will undertake targeted promotional activity around the games to highlight Scotland’s world-class tourism credentials. In particular, through our year of creative Scotland, we will showcase our culture and creativity.

You can never have too many Londoners visiting Scotland. We are happy to welcome them if they wish to take refuge from the hustle and bustle of the great metropolis and come and enjoy the manifold attractions that Scottish hospitality has to offer.

John Scott makes a very good point indeed. We are extremely concerned about the impact of APD. I know that many airlines have highlighted the issue; indeed I received a message from easyJet this morning about it. I am delighted to make common cause with Scottish Conservatives and work shoulder to shoulder with them to persuade the Chancellor of the Exchequer of the case for taking effective action, as many other countries are doing, to provide a better tax environment to attract tourists and visitors. I am delighted that the Scottish Conservatives recognise the need for change in the fiscal approach of the London Treasury.

Thank you for accommodating this important debate, Presiding Officer. I welcome the opportunity to acknowledge the success of Scotland’s oil and gas sector, which is a cornerstone of Scotland’s economy. The North Sea oil and gas industry makes a significant contribution to the economies of Scotland and the United Kingdom and acts as a major source of employment by supporting 440,000 jobs across the UK, including more than 196,000 in Scotland alone. The industry is also a major source of investment: BP’s recent announcement of a programme of investment of almost £10 billion in North Sea oil and gas in the next five years is terrific news for Scotland. The industry is also a major source of tax revenue and has provided more than £300 billion in tax revenues to the UK Government over the years. The industry also supplies the majority of the UK’s oil and gas needs. Since large-scale oil and gas production commenced in the North Sea in the 1970s, more than 39 billion barrels of oil equivalent have been extracted from the UK continental shelf. Although production levels might have peaked in 1999, the story does not end there—far from it. Indeed, 40 years after oil and gas pioneers in the North Sea first started to pump Scotland’s oil, the North Sea continues to produce 900 million barrels every year, and the story continues, with significant unharvested reserves remaining in the North Sea. Forecasts from Professor Alex Kemp at the University of Aberdeen and others suggest that oil and gas production will continue at least until the 2040s. Oil & Gas UK—the trade representative body for the sector—estimates that between 15 billion and 24 billion barrels have yet to be recovered. That suggests that between 30 and 40 per cent of total oil and gas reserves by volume have still to be extracted. At current prices, those reserves could have a wholesale value of in excess of £1 trillion—which is a denomination that is not normally used in debates in the Parliament. Given that extraordinary potential, it is imperative that recovery of those reserves be maximised. I have enjoyed cordial relations with members of all parties in the Parliament on the shared pursuit of that objective. In February this year, Oil & Gas UK published the results of its 2011 activity survey. The report makes good reading. The potential for new fields development is promising, with 67 possible new field developments reported. Confidence in the sector is fairly high, and levels of capital investment in the UK continental shelf are strong. There has been a series of recent commitments to the North Sea from leading oil and gas companies. There is more: looking to the longer term, the investment horizon in the UK continental shelf over the next decade and beyond is reported to have the potential to reach £70 billion. Of course, much of the skill and the supply chain expertise in Scotland is now exported overseas. Of the nearly £16 billion-worth of oil and gas supply chain sales in 2009, 45 per cent—just under half—or £7.2 billion, was internationally based. That is a real tribute to the people who have worked in the industry over decades. Over the years, Aberdeen has established itself as one of the world’s largest energy hubs. It has an enviable reputation around the world for engineering, innovation and excellence, especially in the subsea sector. Much of that skill and expertise has the potential to help to develop our emerging offshore wind sector as well, especially in design, installation and marine operations. I was pleased to note that that is recorded in the briefings that members have received for the debate from Oil & Gas UK and other bodies. We have industrial and supply chain ability, research and development capacity and a highly skilled sector workforce that is second to none. It is clear that considerable opportunities remain in the North Sea and that the industry will remain an important part of the Scottish and UK economies for many decades to come. However, Government must play its part in supporting the opportunity by creating stable and effective support and incentive structures to help to make that happen. I turn to some of the challenges. The Scottish Government recognises that we cannot take it for granted that development in the North Sea will happen without appropriate political and policy support. Strategic forums—such as the Scottish energy advisory board, which the First Minister co-chairs, the oil and gas industry advisory group, which I co-chair with Melfort Campbell and which was established by the Scottish Government, and the PILOT group, which it is chaired by Chris Huhne and which I attend on behalf of the Scottish Government—bring together the UK Government, the Scottish Government and the wider oil and gas industry to work together.

Certainly.

I welcome Tavish Scott’s point; he is absolutely right that decommissioning will present considerable opportunities for Scotland. Just yesterday we received information that Bremerhaven, which is doing work of that nature, is nearly full. I understand that that matter is much discussed in the industry, and I have taken part in some of those discussions. I would welcome discussions with Tavish Scott on what must be done in Shetland to ensure that his constituency can avail itself of the opportunities in the years ahead, provided that the various other difficulties relating to decommissioning—particularly the removal of the reliefs that were previously enjoyed—are tackled. The forums that I attend are an example of Government working closely with key industry players to formulate clear visions in order to maximise recovery rates, sustain jobs and develop a Scottish oil and gas supply chain that is strong, healthy and resilient enough to take full advantage of the opportunities that are still to come in that vibrant sector in the several decades ahead. Of course, Scottish Enterprise, Highlands and Islands Enterprise and Scottish Development International continue to support and assist many companies in the sector to grow and develop. The challenges that face the industry have their foundations principally in the supply chain, in skills shortages, in lack of sufficient finance from banks, in investment in the existing infrastructure, in lack of new exploration and appraisal, and in the adoption of innovative new technologies. The joint forums help Government to understand industry needs and they help industry to understand Government expectations. As with most good partnerships, the collective effort becomes more effective than the individual one. The oil and gas sector in Scotland is supported by world-class supply chains, but we must do all that we can to support the growth and development of the Scottish supply chain, domestically and abroad, and ensure that opportunities are captured. The sector has a strong and skilled workforce, but its skills needs are evolving and changing. We must work with all relevant players in the industry to ensure that the right skills are available in the right amount, in the right place and at the right time. The long-term aim must be to ensure that the oil and gas sector is viewed as a long-term attractive sector for young people to join and for diverse and exciting career opportunities. I believe that the industry is completely united on that. Skills is therefore a key issue for the industry advisory group. I must say that I share the sentiments that are expressed in Labour’s amendment—at least in the first part, which relates to the topic at hand, rather than in the very last part. I endorse Labour’s explicit recognition of the importance of skills development and workforce representatives’ participation in all those matters, I entirely accept those points, and I thought that I should depart from the text that is before me just to say so. I am that sort of minister. [Laughter.]

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Access to finance is as much an issue in the oil and gas industry as it is in other industries, and oil companies are finding it increasingly difficult to access capital to explore, appraise and develop hydrocarbons in the UK—

That is one of a number of factors that concern all members across all parties. I cannot speak for Chris Huhne, but I think that the UK Government is apprised of that issue, and the need to tackle those problems is acknowledged in all quarters. The debate and the challenge really lie in how that will be done. The simple fact is that without capital to fund exploration, discoveries will not be made and reserves will not be realised. The PILOT group is consulting the banking industry and others to try to tackle that matter. I am just looking at the large number of remaining pages in my text, which I do not have time to cover.

That is very generous of you, Presiding Officer. You are that sort of Presiding Officer.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Technological excellence, robust supply chains, a skilled workforce and making best use of the existing onshore and offshore oil and gas infrastructure are key in enabling recovery of the remaining reserves, which is a priority for us all. However, we have to ensure that success in the future is not dependent on the infrastructure of the past. We have to be realistic and to recognise that the majority of the pipelines and terminals were constructed decades ago and so identification of long-term and short-term critical infrastructure needs to be pursued. The energy advisory groups are working closely with industry to make progress on those issues. Aberdeen has a strong world-wide reputation for technological innovation in the North Sea and is leading the way in many techniques. Aberdeen’s strengths were recognised in the PricewaterhouseCoopers report “Northern Lights—A strategic vision of Aberdeen as a world-class energy capital”, which was published earlier this month. I have confidence that, with the right support, Scotland’s skills set and experience in the oil and gas industries will step up to the plate, but there are still challenges ahead. The recent and unexpected hike in tax was unhelpful and it is regrettable that there was no consultation of the industry. However, looking backwards will not help; we must look forward. I have sought—and will continue to seek—to work constructively with UK Government counterparts on that. We also recognise the massive potential that the oil and gas industry has to develop the low-carbon agenda and economy. Pursuit of clean energy technologies such as carbon capture and storage have the potential to allow us here in Scotland to make great leaps forward in our ambitions for a low-carbon society. Those ambitions co-exist with, run alongside and do not conflict with the imperative of continued excellence and success in the oil and gas industry. I shall shorten the remainder of my remarks, Presiding Officer. I look forward to a constructive debate this afternoon and I thank you for your indulgence.

I move, That the Parliament recognises the continued importance of Scotland’s oil and gas sector to the Scottish and UK economies, its support for 196,000 jobs across Scotland and its contribution of £300 billion to the UK Exchequer over the past 30 years in real terms; recognises the long-term future of the industry, with up to 40% of the remaining total UK Continental Shelf oil and gas reserves worth £1 trillion; welcomes the strong confidence shown by recent industry investment plans announcing four new oil and gas projects valued at £10 billion over the next five years; supports the Scottish Government and its agencies in working to maintain and develop the long-term future of the oil and gas sector by improving the position of Aberdeen as a global supply chain hub, developing energy skills in the workforce and supporting collaboration between the oil and gas and low-carbon energy sectors; calls for a progressive approach to oil and gas taxation to encourage further deployment and extraction, and supports the findings of the PricewaterhouseCoopers report published on 3 November 2011 arguing that fiscal certainty and targeted incentives in the North Sea are required from the UK Government.

I want to say something in the interests of being helpful. I am sure that Tavish Scott will wish to know that a consultation is under way on our public health levy proposals, which businesses can take part in.

Helen Eadie makes her points well. I reassure her that I have already expressed those views to the UK Government at the recent PILOT meeting, to MEPs whom I met recently and to Oil & Gas UK. I share the sentiment that the existing regulatory regime is the best one for the job.

I have thoroughly enjoyed the debate. It has been largely constructive, which is what the industry wants from the Parliament in debating its future at this important time. I am certain that Tavish Scott meant his advice in the kindest possible way when he suggested that I could confine myself to an underwater chamber for, I think, a prolonged period, before taking myself off to Kazakhstan—

I am happy to say to Tavish Scott that I have already met a delegation from Kazakhstan, at the Offshore Europe event earlier this year, and that, as it happens, I have also met a delegation from Kurdistan. Both meetings were very useful. We will continue to engage with delegations from other countries, many of which are seeking, as Tavish Scott knows, to avail themselves of the expertise that exists in Scotland, especially in subsea technology. More and more countries in the world are starting to embark on subsea oil and gas extraction. Dennis Robertson pointed out the skills that we have acquired in that sector—in the interests of geographical balance, I should say that Westhill is the world centre of subsea technology—and those are the skills that are required in the world, for the reasons that have been mentioned by many members. It has been an important aspect of the debate that many members, including Helen Eadie, have spoken, in some cases quite movingly, about their personal experience of family members and people they have known. Lewis Macdonald talked about a friend who, fortunately, survived, and Mark McDonald spoke of a young man whom he was at school with who, sadly, did not. It is a salutary reminder of the extreme, hazardous nature of deep-sea, west of Shetland exploration and oil and gas extraction. Those dangers have not gone away. Maureen Watt pointed out companies’ vigilance about safety, which is the correct approach. We can never be complacent about safety in the industry. My impression from my exchanges with people in the industry is that that is their view, too. I will seek to meet workforce representatives in the weeks and months ahead to ensure that their perspective is fully understood and appreciated as we pursue the issue. Almost all members rightly focused on the importance of skills investment in the sector. If there is one thing that the sector wants from Parliament, it is to ensure that appropriate priority is given to skills development and funding. Indeed, skills are one of the six strategic priorities that are being addressed by the oil and gas industry advisory group, which I chair. We support OPITO in the partnership approach to meeting the needs of the sector. The recently established college-industry energy partnership will allow us to take that work forward. In February, the Scottish energy advisory board, which is chaired by the First Minister, endorsed a skills investment plan for the energy sector, which was published in March and which set out the potential jobs in the sector until 2020. I am pleased to say to Parliament that an industry-led skills action group is being chaired by Colin Hood, formerly of Scottish and Southern Energy. We have great confidence that the work that Colin and his colleagues are doing will help us with the extremely difficult task of ensuring that the skills are available for the sector. As we are a majority Government, the buck stops with me. I will not seek to evade responsibility or adopt that droopy mantra, “It wisnae me.” It is me. It is my job to do it. What has emerged from the debate is that I can expect cross-party co-operation in that extremely challenging task. All of us share Helen Eadie’s sentiment that too many young people in Scotland do not have employment. Plainly, there are opportunities in the oil and gas sector. Matching one with the other is a difficult challenge, for all sorts of reasons. However, she made a fair point, which we take on board because all of us share those important objectives. We are fortunate that we now have an industry that is focused on maximising recovery, pursuing fiscal certainty, securing Aberdeen’s long-term future as a global energy player, seeking to ensure that the funding is more available, where appropriate, and ensuring that Government is focused on working together with it in the pursuit of our objectives. My perspective, as the minister who has relatively recently assumed responsibility for taking forward the massive opportunities in the oil and gas sector, is that we are looking forward, not back, and that we have an alignment of objectives in the industry, in the Government, in academe and across political parties. That is a serendipitous event of which we should take full advantage. Beneath the political interchange in the chamber is a common objective in relation to the potential of oil and gas. That potential is so large that it is difficult to contemplate it. As I said earlier, the value of the remaining oil and gas could be £1 trillion, which is a denomination that we do not hear frequently in the Scottish Parliament. What is far more important is that, at end of the day, it is about people. We wish to ensure that Scotland’s people, most especially its young people, have an opportunity to take part in this important industry. I know from discussions with Lewis Macdonald, Gavin Brown, Tavish Scott and members of my own party, such as Mark McDonald, that there is a shared view in the industry that graduates are coming forward and many people are coming up to retirement, but there is a gap in the middle. That is a very specific facet, the explanation for which is perhaps that it was thought that the oil and gas industry did not have a future. Well, it does have a future and not just for one, two or three decades but for four certainly and, I suspect, probably for five decades and many more. As John D Rockefeller said in the 1930s, the world has been running out of oil since I was a boy. The likelihood is that we will continue to see more discoveries of oil in the future. I turn to another matter that arose in the debate and on which many members commented. Dennis Robertson led the charge by pointing out that, although Aberdeen is the oil capital of Scotland—and, we would argue, of Europe—Aberdeenshire is important, too. That led to a number of members quite rightly pointing out that the oil and gas industry plays a significant part in all parts of Scotland. Indeed, in that regard, I was pleased to attend the opening of FMC Technologies Inc’s extended office facilities in Bellshill, where it is taking on an additional 240 employees. FMC Technologies is a US company, headquartered in Houston, that decided to invest in Bellshill in Scotland after its board in the USA had considered alternatives in Singapore, South America and elsewhere in Europe. The company decided to invest in Scotland because of Scotland’s expertise in subsea technology and the availability of young people who they felt would be excellent employees, as indeed they are, and because Scotland is a great place in which to invest, with—I hope this is accepted across the board—a fairly sympathetic ministerial team to whom they have ready access, assisted by an excellent Scottish Enterprise service that is fully devoted to pursuing such investment. Whether it is FMC in Bellshill, Shell and Exxon in Cowdenbeath—as we heard from Helen Eadie—INEOS in Grangemouth, whose role is vital for the Scottish economy, British Gas in Aberdeen or, indeed, Roy MacGregor’s Global Energy Group, which is about to create 2,000 jobs in Nigg—a truly marvellous and exciting opportunity for the Highlands—the oil industry is truly a Scottish national industry of which we can all be rightly proud.

The Scottish Government remains completely committed to reducing unemployment and improving economic regeneration throughout Scotland. In Cunninghame South specifically, we have provided £11.2 million between 2006 and 2012 to Irvine Bay Urban Regeneration Company and have offered a further £2.5 million for 2012-13. We have provided almost £1.9 million of European funding to support local employability activity, through the community planning partnership.

Yes, I will join the local member in recognising the good work that the company has carried out and congratulating it on its recent award, which recognises the good, hard work that its team has carried out. As far as future funding is concerned, I understand that, just in the past day or so, my colleague Alex Neil has had fruitful discussions with North Ayrshire Council, which are on-going. I very much hope that the outcome of the discussions will be some good news for the member’s constituents.

We recognise the vital contribution that small business start-ups make to our economy and we are firmly committed to maintaining a supportive business environment and ensuring that appropriate measures are in place to stimulate and grow small businesses. Those measures include the small business bonus scheme, which reduces rates for 85,000 Scottish businesses; the transfer of the business gateway to local authorities; investing in broadband; reducing unnecessary burdens on businesses; and making it easier for small businesses to access public sector contracts.

I agree with the member’s points and welcome the success that has been achieved in Angus. I congratulate Dave Valentine, the head of economic development at Angus Council, on that achievement and on the work that he does as chair of the business gateway Scotland board, in which capacity I met him earlier this week to take that work forward.

I have had a number of discussions with the Prince’s Scottish Youth Business Trust, including on Monday evening this week, when I dined with a member of that organisation and various other members of the Institute of Directors in Glasgow. I take this opportunity to congratulate the trust on the excellent work that it does for young people in Scotland, without which many successful entrepreneurs would not have got the start that they needed.

The Global Energy Group estimates that the Nigg yard could create a minimum of 2,000 jobs by 2015. In addition, there is the potential to create many more employment opportunities, not only in the Cromarty Firth area but throughout Scotland, through a strong supply chain. Highlands and Islands Enterprise’s recent investment of £1.8 million will be critical to developing Nigg’s potential to meet the real and immediate needs of oil and gas, offshore wind and wave and tidal developers.

The member is right to raise that issue. Scottish Government officials met Highland Council officials earlier this year to discuss how the development plan and the council’s development management procedures can best support the objectives of the national renewables infrastructure plan at Nigg. The council has adopted a masterplan to guide the future planning of the site and the proposed Highland-wide local development plan, although that is still subject to examination by reporters. The council supports the objectives of the national plan and the redevelopment of Nigg yard. All those matters will be given every possible consideration because of the immense potential benefit to the Highlands and Islands and Scotland of the exciting developments that will go ahead at Nigg.

Glasgow community planning partnership has received almost £8.2 million of European funding between June 2011 and June 2013 to support local employability activity. Glasgow has also benefited from a range of other smaller funds, such as the £500,000 awarded to Glasgow City Council to deliver activity agreements and improve school-leaver destinations, and from Scotland-wide initiatives such as our guarantee of a training or education place for every young person.

Ministers have discussed the high-speed rail link with their UK Government counterparts on a number of occasions. We want closer co-operation on this issue. It is essential that the UK Government work with the Scottish Government to ensure that the planning for high-speed rail to Scotland is taken forward as a matter of urgency.

The Scottish Government has had proactive discussions with the UK Government in the period up to and since the UK Government decision on the Longannet demonstration project. Ahead of the announcement, the First Minister wrote and spoke to the Secretary of State for Energy and Climate Change, Chris Huhne, to raise our concerns and to ensure every possible option was considered. Following the recent disappointment over Longannet and the previous UK Government’s abandonment of the earlier Peterhead carbon capture and storage project, it is essential that Westminster clearly demonstrate its commitment to supporting the commercial development of CCS, not least when the continued commitment from industry is so clear.

The Longannet decision was a deep disappointment, not least for the Scottish Power team and the consortium that it led. They put in a lot of work, and they have left behind a legacy of invaluable advice on the topic. In Peterhead, Scotland has a candidate for applying the CCS technology. I was in Brussels with a top team from Scotland yesterday evening, following the announcement yesterday morning of the excellent news about the joint arrangement between Shell and Scottish and Southern Energy to proceed with a pre-feed study to allow Peterhead to have a CCS project for Scotland. That is excellent news that offers a tremendous opportunity, which I hope we will all grasp.

For the period of 2010-2011, the Crown Estate Commissioners reported the revenue for Scotland as £11.9 million and gross surplus revenue as £9.9 million. Scottish Crown Estate property was valued at £207 million. Those Scottish public assets are administered by a body that is unaccountable to the Scottish Government and Scottish Parliament. All revenue from the Crown Estate in Scotland flows directly to the London Treasury. Those revenues should be invested in the development of Scotland’s offshore renewables industry and used to benefit communities directly. That is why we have called for the Scotland Bill to devolve the administration and revenues of the Crown Estate in Scotland.

The member makes a number of points. The UK Treasury will be a huge beneficiary from increased investment in offshore renewable energy in Scotland. We believe that the Crown Estate should be accountable to Scotland and its people through the Parliament.

Local authorities are responsible for the retendering of the new business gateway contracts. I know the business gateway Scotland board is giving careful consideration to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee’s recent report on renewal of the business gateway contracts, which it published on 10 October. This is helping to inform progress on developing the new contracts. The board will submit a detailed response to the committee shortly and is continuing to engage with key interests. It is organising an event on 18 November to get views on the service specification.

Yes, they will.

The Scottish Government is committed to increasing the opportunities for disabled people to work in a supportive environment. We want a consistent, person-centred approach to supporting those who want help to enter, sustain and progress in work. There is a variety of employment models for achieving that, of which employment in a supported workplace is only one, and Scottish businesses have a role to play in enabling disabled people to access jobs based on their skills and abilities.

The member will know that Blindcraft was supported for a great many years by various administrations in the City of Edinburgh Council and that all parties in the council, including her own, recognised that the public funding element was not sustainable in the long term. It is fair to recognise, as I thought that the member had done when we met and discussed a matter that is, of course, not party political, that the City of Edinburgh Council and its staff did a huge amount of work and made every possible effort to support each of the workers at Blindcraft in Edinburgh on a one-to-one basis. It was entirely correct to carry out that work. It goes without saying that all of us in the chamber will ensure that whatever can be done to support those individuals will be done but I believe that a terrific power of work has already been done and has helped a great number of the staff into fruitful employment and training and other productive work.

First of all, I met the member’s colleague Helen Eadie to discuss this important matter, which, as all members will expect, has been taken extremely seriously by the Government. Moreover, when she met Maria Miller, the United Kingdom Minister for Disabled People, the Deputy First Minister Nicola Sturgeon highlighted her concerns about the impact of any changes to Remploy on Scottish employees. A letter setting out our concerns will shortly be sent to the Department for Work and Pensions, with which we will continue to discuss any implications for Scotland.

It is right that, in this Parliament, we turn our eyes furth of Scotland. I was therefore not disappointed by Rob Gibson’s comments in that regard, as he is a true internationalist. I thank him for securing the debate, for raising this important issue and for allowing all members to have the opportunity to take part. Decisions about the energy mix and the pressing need to deliver a low-carbon, secure and sustainable energy future are obviously among the most important decisions that we take at this time. As many members have said, Scotland is extremely well placed to make the transition to a low-carbon economy, and that is because we are blessed with a large quantity of extremely bad weather. We have one quarter of Europe’s offshore wind and tidal energy and 10 per cent of its wave power. It is perhaps only recently that we have become aware of the huge potential of natural phenomena that were previously regarded with gloom all round. We have among the best energy resources in Europe. All members would give credit—to varying degrees, I suspect—to the First Minister for galvanising the mood of the nation to do what we can to take advantage of the natural elements with which our country has been blessed.

I am happy to accept that point of information. We are working together with the Labour Party on achieving the objectives and I fully understand Mr Baker’s remarks about the duty of the Opposition to challenge and probe; he is perfectly correct to do so. The leadership that we have provided was recognised at the conference last week that was sponsored by the Scottish Government, Edinburgh Chamber of Commerce and Scottish Enterprise. Al Gore spoke for two hours, without notes. I would happily do that this evening if I could get away with it.

His speech was inspirational. The former US vice president said: “I admire and applaud the First Minister’s leadership in promoting the development of renewable energy, efficiency and sharp reductions in CO2 emissions. His government and private companies based in Scotland are providing inspiration to others in many parts of the world.” We are on a journey—one on which we are travelling together with various degrees of enthusiasm. Rob Gibson highlighted Germany’s decisions to turn away from nuclear power, which it is phasing out by 2022, to massively increase use of renewable energy by doubling it, and to make the 10 per cent energy efficiency cut to which many members have quite rightly alluded. I agree with most of the comments on that that have been made by most members in the debate. It would be correct for me to point out that Scotland might face some problems arising from Germany’s decision to expand drastically its renewable generation. It will now resolutely dedicate itself to that task, and it will continue to seek with great determination to lead—or perhaps even to dominate—the supply chain for turbines, high-voltage direct-current cables and vessel leasings. Germany’s drive must be seen as a challenge to Scotland, which makes it all the more important that Ofgem and the UK Government quickly end regulatory uncertainty and deliver an effective framework of support for renewables. Whether it is oil and gas or renewables, the one thing in which we need investment on a substantial scale is certainty. Uncertainty and the hiatus that has been caused by matters that are under discussion, and which members have rightly highlighted, is the enemy of investment. I therefore make a simple plea to the UK Government. We need to make rapid progress with the difficult decision that we face on electricity market reform, with project transmit, with location of the green investment bank in Edinburgh—the case for that is unanswerable—and with the return of the fossil fuel levy, which has been languishing in an Ofgem account for far too long. I pay tribute to decisions that have been taken elsewhere. It is, as has been pointed out, for other countries to make their own decisions, but is it not interesting that the three countries in the world that are moving in that direction along with Scotland—Germany, Japan and Switzerland—are associated with being the foremost countries in the world in giving a lead to technology? That seems to me to be neither accident nor coincidence. Of course we accept the need for a balance in meeting our energy needs so I am grateful for this opportunity to reiterate that, alongside meeting our renewables targets, we will continue to produce the necessary conventional energy. That is why in the past day or so I was pleased to announce that I have approved the application for Cockenzie power station to move from coal to gas. In that respect, our policy is realistic. We will continue to need conventional thermal generation during the transition to a low-carbon economy for the reasons that Alex Johnstone—and, in a different vein, Alison Johnstone—outlined, and we will consider applications to extend the lives of existing nuclear stations based on their merits and on safety, economic and environmental grounds, in respect of the matters that fall to us for decision making. Although we are proud that our vision of a low-carbon economy for Scotland has made a mark throughout the world, we should in the transition to achieving that objective recognise, value and praise those who work in the world’s conventional power stations. I thank Rob Gibson for securing this interesting debate, and all those who have participated in it. Meeting closed at 17:51.

We are determined to maximise tourism growth throughout Scotland and to attract new visitors. In a visit to Dundee on 11 July, I learned at first hand about the potential of the Victoria and Albert at Dundee project. Our significant financial contribution to that project is helping to ensure that there will be a major new visitor attraction that will deliver significant economic and other benefits for Dundee and the rest of Scotland.

I am delighted that the member welcomes Fiona Hyslop’s decision to make the substantial investment of £15 million in Dundee, which represents a third of the total capital costs of the project. The Dundee Courier has reported that the V&amp;A is expected to be open by 2015. I had the pleasure of being at a presentation by all the parties that are working together on the project, and I understand that the V&amp;A at Dundee could attract 500,000 visitors initially and 300,000 a year thereafter. I also understand that the plans for the V&amp;A are already helping to secure new hotel investment in Dundee. To answer the member’s questions, plans are well afoot, and everyone is working closely together. I am delighted that she welcomes the Scottish Government’s financial contribution to that excellent project.

I think that the project will attract interest throughout Scotland and the world. The architect is a Japanese gentleman by the name of Kengo Kuma, who is internationally renowned, and the project will involve extending into the Tay to create a beautiful new riverscape—if I can describe it in that way—in Dundee. The project is one of several developments in Dundee, which include the thriving computer games sector, which I also visited in July, and the exciting developments in renewables there. Dundee is thriving and the Scottish National Party Government is helping it to do so.

Our economic strategy has specific actions that Glasgow will benefit from, including the south Glasgow hospitals project, which is part of our significant new programme of capital investment, and priority funding of the Clyde Gateway Developments urban regeneration company, to drive the regeneration of the east end of Glasgow. Later this year, we will introduce a cities strategy that will build on the status of Glasgow as a renewables supercity and promote the continued growth of business tourism.

I accept the invitation not to comment on the first part of the member’s question. Plainly, we are determined to stimulate the economy to provide opportunities for young people at local and national levels, with 25,000 apprenticeships and the embedding of our approach in the reform of post-16 education, which has a system-wide focus on meeting the needs of learners and employers.

The matter relates more to question 5, but I will answer Patricia Ferguson’s question directly. We will make announcements on enterprise zones in due course and we will consider the criteria and how we wish to proceed. The objectives are to increase employment and job opportunities for all—for example, in Allied Vehicles in Glasgow, which I visited on Monday; in the “Foundation Glasgow—the story of a city” exhibition, which I visited on Monday; and in all the good developments in Glasgow and the rest of Scotland that I see as Minister for Energy, Enterprise and Tourism. We will build on that success with the enterprise zone initiative.

The Government’s updated economic strategy sets out how we are focusing our efforts on accelerating the recovery. However, it is clear from the recent global economic data—including the International Monetary Fund’s downward revision of the growth forecasts on Tuesday—that the Chancellor of the Exchequer must enact a plan B to protect the recovery. As part of our proposals, the First Minister has advocated a targeted reduction in VAT on home repairs, which would provide a boost to construction activity in Scotland. It is clear, however, that the United Kingdom Government must act to protect the recovery.

I advise Graeme Dey that I met the UK Minister for Tourism and Heritage just last week and urged him to consider the measures that have been taken in Ireland. I further inform the member that 23 countries in the European Union currently have a reduced rate of VAT for their tourism and hospitality sectors. I welcome the approach that Ireland has taken, but it has a Government that has the powers to act.

The Scottish Government is currently working to introduce four enterprise areas in Scotland, which will include sites with a particular focus on low-carbon manufacturing opportunities to maximise their economic impact and attractiveness to investment.

I commend Stuart McMillan for pursuing that matter with persistence, in committee yesterday and in the chamber today. He is right to do so, and I am happy to accept the invitation to meet him to discuss the issue further. We are confident that enterprise zones are a lever that we can use to help to grow the Scottish economy.

Our plans aim to ensure that the lever is used to increase enhanced economic activity. That is one of the reasons why we have clearly indicated that our particular—although not exclusive—focus will be on low-carbon manufacturing opportunities. We are about to debate that area shortly, and I think that members on all sides of the chamber agree that substantial opportunity exists in it for enhanced economic activity—more business and more jobs—rather than displacement. I very much hope that Richard Baker will welcome the Scottish Government’s approach and that an announcement on that will be forthcoming from him.

My experience has been that Renfrewshire Council has rarely needed any encouragement from me to make vigorous representations on just about everything, particularly under Mr Mackay’s vigorous former leadership. George Adam makes the reasonable point that Glasgow airport is once again an engine for growth. I commend the recent announcement of new jobs there and I take a close interest in such matters. We all want every part of Scotland to succeed. Every member for every part of Scotland advocates—rightly—the cause for his or her area. We must make tough decisions but, in doing so, we are happy to receive representations from all parties and all parts of Scotland.

We are prioritising our spend on capital to maximise the impact on jobs, including the construction of the Forth replacement crossing, which will secure more than 3,000 jobs and support more than 1,200 jobs during its construction. Our investment in a supportive business environment also supports job creation in Kirkcaldy and the rest of Fife, such as the 750 permanent jobs created by Amazon at its fulfilment centre in Dunfermline.

It should make a very positive contribution to Kirkcaldy—a town that I was pleased to visit during the summer, when I saw the success of PR2 Engineering, Just Slate, Yellow Jacket Europe, and the business gateway incubator centre. Kirkcaldy is doing well. There is always room for improvement and we are always open to suggestions from the people of Kirkcaldy, as we were when the Cabinet visited the town towards the end of the summer.

Yes, I agree that appropriate investment will be required. I met leaders from the local authority and enterprise agency in Fife during the summer. On 13 September, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth attended a business breakfast with the Fife economy partnership. These are very important matters. In Leuchars, as in Kinloss, a huge amount is being done to help to find alternative employment for those people who have lost their jobs. Marvellous work is being done by excellent individuals, and I am very positive about the results of that work in helping people to find alternative careers after the hammer blow that resulted from the closure of those RAF bases.

The Coal Authority is responsible for public safety relating to land subsidence that has been caused by coal-mining operations. The Coal Mining Subsidence Act 1991 is used to administer any claims for damage to land, buildings and structures resulting from subsidence damage. The Coal Authority has a duty to take remedial action by undertaking repairs or by making compensation or depreciation payments in respect of the damage caused. The Coal Authority also provides an emergency response service to incidents that pose a risk to public safety. That emergency call-out service deals with incidents on a 24-hour basis every day of the year.

I thank the member for giving notice of the details of that important matter. I am aware of the incident, which I believe affects four properties in Crusader Avenue in Knightswood. I can advise the member that the Coal Authority and Glasgow Housing Association have been working closely with the affected residents to make the area safe, to provide appropriate support and advice, and to find suitable alternative accommodation. The Coal Authority has undertaken checks on three identified mineshafts in the immediate area and has reported that there are no signs of any surface deterioration. However, it is working with Glasgow City Council and Glasgow Housing Association to ensure that full inspections of properties are carried out. Where there is damage that has been caused by abandoned coal mine workings and shafts, the Coal Authority is responsible and, under the Coal Mining Subsidence Act 1991, will fully remedy the damage.

Last week, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth launched “The Government Economic Strategy”, which reaffirms the Scottish Government’s prime purpose of pursuing sustainable economic growth. Economic conditions have changed since we launched our first economic strategy in 2007. Although we face many challenges, we are also presented with new opportunities that, we believe, offer considerable potential to Scotland. A key opportunity, which our strategy establishes as a new strategic priority for Scotland, is the transition to a low-carbon economy. By promoting the low-carbon transition, we can reindustrialise Scotland as a renewable energy powerhouse and a centre for low-carbon technologies, while securing a high-quality environment and sustainable legacy for future generations. Through its contribution to building a more dynamic and faster growing economy, we will increase prosperity, be better placed to tackle Scotland’s health and social challenges and better able to establish a fairer and more equal society. Scotland is rich in economic potential. Our natural resources give us an unparalleled competitive advantage. Our people are creative, ambitious and resilient; our entrepreneurs, scientists and engineers are world leaders. The low-carbon sector could maintain 130,000 jobs by 2020—we already have 70,000 people working in that sector, so we can in effect double the number by 2020—and be a focus for new private sector capital investment. That is in addition to the 200,000 jobs in the oil and gas sector and the exciting opportunities that exist in the field, particularly in subsea work and decommissioning.

I will give way to Mr Harvie later on when I have made more progress. We cannot let those opportunities pass us by. One of the greatest opportunities for Scotland is in renewable energy. Offshore wind alone could reach 10GW of generating capacity. It could bring in £30 billion of inward investment and deliver 28,000 jobs. It could also reach £14 billion in electricity sales by 2050. Those are glittering prizes and staggering figures, but they are just one element of the renewables revolution. We have ambitious targets, such as the target to meet 100 per cent of our demand for electricity from renewable energy by 2020; to produce from renewables what we consume. That is achievable. However, it is not easy, so we cannot be complacent. The “2020 Route Map for Renewable Energy in Scotland” reflects the challenges and opportunities of that new target. It goes further than any previous plan for renewable energy in Scotland and sets out a comprehensive path towards achieving our ambition to be the green energy powerhouse of Europe. The national renewables infrastructure plan, which has identified locations throughout Scotland that offer the greatest potential for private developers, outlines how more green jobs could be created through the development of regional manufacturing zones built around key port locations. The £70 million national renewables infrastructure fund will help to lever in private sector investment to develop the necessary infrastructure to support that. A low-carbon economy that promotes the sustainable use of resources will make us more resilient to unpredictable commodity prices and volatile fuel prices and offer greater protection to those who are most at risk from rising costs. Next month we will publish the first annual progress report on our energy efficiency action plan, setting out significant achievements that have been made during the past year. For example, almost 300,000 Scots benefited from our energy saving Scotland local advice network, including 6,800 households that received help to upgrade to new efficient boilers. Almost 30,000 insulation measures were installed under our universal home insulation scheme. I am pleased to announce today that, as further support for Scottish householders, we will launch the solid-wall insulation loan scheme in Orkney and Fife this autumn. That is a £550,000 pilot scheme to offer owner-occupiers interest-free loans of up to £15,000.

We always want such schemes to operate as effectively as possible and are happy to engage with any local businesses or their representatives. I engage regularly with bodies that work in the field and represent various trades and I will be happy to continue to do so. If Mr Macdonald has any particular suggestions to make or individuals he believes that I could usefully meet, I will be more than happy to take up those suggestions and work with him on that. Opportunities exist across the Scottish economy for business and industry. In an independent study, Scottish businesses were estimated to stand to save £1,800 million by reducing waste and making more efficient use of materials. That money saved could grow businesses and help to create jobs. Scotland’s zero waste plan has shifted our focus to the resource potential of the waste that we produce. Food waste, in particular, is a resource that could benefit Scotland. If we were able to use anaerobic digestion to process the current level of our food waste and produce a gas fuel, I am told that we could produce enough electricity to power Dundee. Greater resource productivity is a driver of competitive advantage, just like greater labour productivity, and the Government’s economic strategy reflects the importance of resource efficiency as a key driver of growth in the transition to a low-carbon economy. I turn to skills. To take the opportunities that I have described, we must have the right people with the right skills and expertise. Skills Development Scotland has published the national plan for the energy sector that sets out actions to shape future work programmes and prioritise how we invest resources. The Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council has also provided financial support for the recently established energy skills partnership, providing a collaborative approach across Scottish colleges. An additional £1 million has been made available for Skills Development Scotland to create up to 500 modern apprenticeships in 2011-12, specifically to support Scotland’s energy and low-carbon industries. The low carbon skills fund provides financial support to employers who upskill and reskill their employees in low-carbon technologies, already benefiting more than 800 Scottish workers. Those actions are helping to create a solid skills foundation and supporting inward investment. There can be no doubt that Scotland is committed to making the transition to a low-carbon economy. Our target in the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 to reduce emissions by 80 per cent by 2050 sets out actions that will far exceed our own time in the Parliament. Earlier this month, my colleague Stewart Stevenson announced a batch of annual targets for the period 2023 to 2027. That underlines Scotland’s long-term commitment to the low-carbon agenda and sends a clear signal to investors. Many international speakers, panellists and delegates will respond to that signal when they arrive in Edinburgh next week to take part in Scotland’s second international low-carbon investment conference, which the Scottish Government is proud to support. It will build on last year’s success, which drew in investors, financiers and key business figures from the renewables sector. This year’s event will also focus on investment in smart cities, clean technologies and energy and resource efficiency. Scotland’s demonstration of its position as the destination for low-carbon investment makes clear what we mean about the transition to a low-carbon economy. It is about making ourselves more competitive now and protecting our environment for future generations, combating fuel poverty now and making the economy more resilient to future energy price shocks, and about Scotland leading the world now and showing the way towards a sustainable future. I move, That the Parliament recognises the Scottish Government’s determination to achieve and deliver sustainable economic growth by promoting the transition to a low-carbon and resource-efficient economy across all sectors; acknowledges the potential for up to 10 GW of electricity from offshore wind in Scotland and that the potential for still more large-scale development of offshore wind, wave and tidal energy over the coming decades represents the biggest opportunity for sustainable economic growth in Scotland for a generation; notes the vision and purpose underlying the 2020 Routemap for Renewable Energy in Scotland, the enterprise agencies’ National Renewables Infrastructure Plan and associated National Renewables Infrastructure Fund and the Energy Skills Investment Plan; supports the Scottish Government in setting the right policy and funding framework to reinforce Scotland’s position as a destination for global low-carbon investment; agrees that its ambitious approach to climate change is critical in providing long-term certainty for business and investors, and recognises the Scottish Government’s commitment to resource efficiency through the Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Scotland and the Zero Waste Plan, which is already expanding waste reprocessing capacity and cutting carbon emissions.?

Is Jackson Carlaw aware that the UK Government has endorsed our target of meeting 100 per cent of our own energy needs by 2020? Does he accept that the serious challenge in meeting those ambitions is to get the right answers on electricity market reform, on project transmit and on providing a robust grid connection? Without those answers, it is unlikely that we will be able to meet our targets—and the answers rest entirely with the UK Government.

I understand Mr Harvie’s views. What I do not understand is whether he believes that the nearly 200,000 people who are employed in the oil and gas sector in Scotland should continue to work in that sector, or is he saying that, because of the imperatives that he has described, they should all now forfeit their jobs and all oil and gas production and exploration should simply cease?

As I spoke at the conference at the Eden Court theatre, met Alstom Hydro and Marine Scotland and saw the presentation on that excellent work, I wish to give general reassurance that all these matters are under consideration. If Mr McGrigor has concerns, he should write to me about them to ensure that they are fully considered. If he does, I will ensure that that happens.

I welcome this opportunity to debate a key policy lever that should be at the heart of our strategy for sustainable economic growth in Scotland: corporation tax. Our approach to the economy is well established and clearly the people of Scotland have given strong backing to it. Our commitment to enhancing sustainable economic growth was affirmed by the publication on Monday of our new economic strategy, an important part of which is our commitment to creating an environment in which businesses have an opportunity to flourish, underpinned by a fair and efficient tax system. In our last term and in the first 100 days of this Administration, we took—and have taken—forward a range of initiatives to make Scotland the most competitive location in the United Kingdom in which to do business. For example, we have delivered the UK’s most competitive business rates package, including the small business bonus scheme, which has either eliminated or reduced the business rates burden for tens of thousands of properties across the nation. However, under the current constitutional arrangements, many of the key job-creating powers, particularly in relation to taxation, are held back from Scotland. Indeed, more than 90 per cent of Scotland’s tax revenues are controlled by Westminster. Under the current Scotland Bill, that figure would fall to around 85 per cent. As a result, key decisions over vital economic levers, such as corporation tax, fuel duties, national insurance and oil and gas revenues, are taken without consideration of the unique circumstances or opportunities in Scotland. I firmly believe that Scotland’s best interests are served by taking full responsibility for the key policy decisions that affect the Scottish economy. That is why we are committed to holding a referendum on independence. However, our immediate constitutional priority is to improve the Scotland Bill. While we have offered detailed proposals for truly enhancing our decision-making powers, the UK Government continues to engage in a negative campaign of scaremongering over any attempt to improve the Scotland Bill—scaremongering for which, I noticed with some approval, Lord McConnell recently criticised the former Prime Minister. Are we really to believe the claims from the UK Government that reducing corporation tax to 12.5 per cent in Scotland would reduce our budget by £2.6 billion? Does it not realise that that figure is actually the total amount of corporation tax raised in Scotland? I hope that today we can have a proper debate on the potential opportunities to add economic powers to the Scotland Bill. The financial framework for the Scottish Parliament needs reform, with a greater focus on accountability and fiscal responsibility. It surely cannot be the summit of our collective ambitions—for any member in this chamber, from any party—simply to rely on a handout from the London Treasury.

We do not agree with that proposition. We believe that we have published proper detail on the principle of our proposals, and I will come on to address some of the matters that I suspect may be in Mr Brown’s mind. Any reform must be more than simply an accounting exercise. It must offer a genuine advance and real economic teeth that can boost Scotland’s growth, create jobs and deliver a better nation. The Scotland Bill fails to deliver that. The income tax proposals are flawed and need to be revised. Indeed, the Secretary of State for Scotland admitted at last week’s Scotland Bill Committee that he does not even know the impact of his own bill on Scotland’s budget. That is surely not good enough; the Scottish people must deserve better.

I am coming on to that. We believe that the impact will be positive for Scotland, which is why we propose it, as opposed to the impact of the Westminster Government’s income tax proposals. The Scottish Government estimates that those proposals would have cut nearly £8 billion from the budget from 1999 to 2011, while the Scotland Office figures suggest a reduction of £691 million. What on earth is the position?

Not just at the moment; I want to cover the matters that I know will be of interest to all members. It is the lack of economic levers that is important to our debate today. Yes, Her Majesty’s Treasury will give us some borrowing powers, but it will determine how much we can borrow, when we can borrow, the interest rate at which we repay the borrowing, when we repay, and from whom we can borrow. How does that represent a significant transfer of powers to this place? Aside from borrowing, that is it: no corporation tax, no capital gains tax, no fuel duty, no oil revenues and no welfare. I am convinced that we could do much more if we had greater access to the key levers of economic growth. The debate will focus on corporation tax, which is one of the six areas on which we are currently pressing the UK Government for additional powers. As we outlined in our discussion paper, corporation tax is one of the main levers open to Government to promote growth, investment and jobs. It is broadly accepted that there are three principal channels through which corporation tax can influence economic growth. First, it can boost incentives to invest in physical and human capital and in research and development; secondly, it can increase firms’ profitability and their ability to compete in both domestic and overseas markets; and, thirdly, it can make Scotland an even more attractive location for enterprise and investment. I believe that the weight of evidence highlights strong links between corporation tax and economic growth, and the UK Government is of the same view. The UK Government has placed reducing the headline corporation tax at the heart of its growth strategy; however, a unified UK rate of corporation tax is neither desirable nor economically efficient.

I will move on. There are other matters that Mr Brown would expect me to cover, and I wish to do so within the time that I have available. Clearly, parts of the UK such as London and the south-east already have an in-built competitive advantage. A more tailored, more competitive and better designed corporation tax system could address many of the economic challenges that Scotland faces. I do not seem to be alone in recognising the benefits that such an approach could deliver. The UK Government itself has recognised the important role that different rates of corporation tax can have in boosting the performance of different parts of the UK economy.

Not just yet. I am in the middle of this point, but I will give way to Mr Harvie later on. HM Treasury has stated that, in Northern Ireland, “A lower corporation tax rate would, on its own, be likely to have a positive effect on local private sector investment and foreign direct investment”. Why does the London Government think that that would be good for Northern Ireland but not good for Scotland?

No, we would not. I accept that there is a serious problem with the avoidance of corporation tax as it is administered by the London Treasury. The problem has persisted for Administration after Administration. It has been reported on, it has been documented, it has been considered by accountants and it has been the subject of innumerable comments by the well-informed members of the accountancy profession, but no effective action has been taken. That is entirely the responsibility of successive Administrations in the Westminster Parliament. Last week, we had the publication for the first time of analysis to quantify the potential impacts on Scotland’s economy. The initial modelling work that the Scottish Government undertook examined the implications of an equivalent fall in the headline corporation tax from 23 to 20 per cent. Even that modest reduction in the corporation tax rate would have potentially huge benefits for the Scottish economy, including boosting employment in Scotland by some 27,000 jobs, raising investment levels and supporting a rebalancing of the economy through higher levels of exports.

I must make progress to cover the important matters that Mr Brown and others are interested in. I am confident that there would be far greater benefits to Scotland from our having control over this key lever. In my short period of tenure as a minister, I have seen how Scots around the world, across all sectors—especially oil and gas, renewables, the life sciences and financial services—play a key role in global investment decisions. Our globalscot network helps to broker deals, leverage finance and attract new business to Scotland. With the ability to control the corporation tax rate, we can set a competitive rate to ensure that Scotland becomes one of the most attractive places in the world to do business. That message will be communicated in boardrooms around the world by our network of leading Scottish businessmen and women. Who on earth, in this chamber, can object to that proposition? We would be able to create a system that provides certainty for businesses to invest, not like the UK Government, whose last-minute raid on the North Sea oil and gas sector increased the tax rate on some fields to 81 per cent and led to the cancellation of investment in the North Sea. Our proposition is clear: the Scotland Bill should be amended to provide us with the powers and leverage we need. I regret that I have insufficient time to canvass some of the material that I have prepared because I have been reasonably generous with interventions. As the global economy continues to recover, as we hope it will, and we look to capitalise on the new opportunities that emerge, it is vital that Scotland has the levers of a normal nation to grow our economy and see future generations of Scots benefit hugely as a consequence. I move, That the Parliament recognises the important role that corporation tax can play in an economy’s growth strategy; notes the importance and implications for Scotland of devolution of corporation tax to Northern Ireland; supports the devolution of corporation tax to Scotland, and agrees that this economic lever, if used wisely, could support thousands of new jobs in the Scottish economy.

In that case, can Mr McLetchie explain why the UK Government recognises why it would be advantageous for Northern Ireland to have the power to reduce its corporation tax rate? Why is it right to do so in Northern Ireland but not in Scotland?

The corporation tax yield in Scotland is £2.6 billion. If we in Scotland decided to cut that tax rate to 20 per cent or even 12.5 per cent, will Mr Rennie explain how on earth that would cost £2.6 billion, which is the whole—100 per cent—of the yield? That is arithmetically illiterate.

It is quite challenging to say that this has been an entirely positive debate; it has been entertaining from time to time and it has been engaging in some respects. Members from across all parties have—at least in some parts of their speeches—made positive and thoughtful contributions. It is somewhat disappointing that the level of consensus that had been reached in the Scotland Bill Committee in the previous session of Parliament has, seemingly, not been maintained. However, perhaps I can try to find a few rays of sunshine amidst quite a lot of heavy cloud in the debate’s contributions. I refer to the committee’s conclusion in its report in the previous session of Parliament that “if a scheme to vary corporation tax were to be available in some of the devolved countries of the UK as a tool of the UK Government’s regional economic policy, it should be available as an option for a Scottish Government to use also”. That was the conclusion in the last session of Parliament. It is a mature conclusion that was reached after a lot of careful deliberation of the sort that Mr Brown has asked for. He is right: it is important that we look at the detail and I submit that we have done so. The conclusion suggested that we had reached a degree of consensus, which was bolstered by some quotations from members of various parties. They were along the lines that if it is good enough for Northern Ireland, it is good enough for us. Also, if Northern Ireland possesses the powers and uses them, and other parts of the UK—such as Wales—are denied them, politicians in Wales will say that it is outrageous that they are denied the powers when Northern Ireland is granted them. To be fair to Mr McLetchie, as I always try to be—I do not quite know why, because I am not sure that he always deserves it—I acknowledge his comment that the UK Government has not decided that Northern Ireland should have the powers, but has produced a consultation paper, which sets out the proposal for consideration. In that case, where is the UK consultation paper on whether Scotland should have such powers? If, as Mr Brown argues—in a somewhat narrow argument, perhaps on a restricted zone—

I will develop my argument, but I will certainly give way to Mr McLetchie later. If Mr Brown is arguing that we need the detail and that without it we cannot have a debate about the principle—which, I suggest, is a somewhat specious argument—why did not the UK put the detail in a consultation paper? Why did it produce a consultation paper only on Northern Ireland? Moreover, in its paper on Northern Ireland, the UK Treasury estimated the cost to the Exchequer of profit shifting to be £70 million per year. However, for Scotland the figure becomes £1 billion a year. Can Mr Brown tell us what Treasury modelling leads it to say that Northern Ireland’s possible loss might be £70 million whereas Scotland’s would zoom up to a massive £1,000 million? I find that to be inconsistent, at best.

Unfortunately for Mr McLetchie, the Treasury argued in its paper that if Northern Ireland gets the power to reduce corporation tax, the dynamic effects would be such that “additional revenue from other taxes could recover 15-21 per cent of the foregone corporation tax receipts in each year”. There is, at best, an inconsistency in relation to the “race to the bottom” that Mr Baker, Mr Bibby and other members talked about. I mention an issue that has not been raised in the debate—I am surprised that Mr Gibson did not mention this, because he mentioned everything else. [Interruption.] Incidentally, we are not proposing a separate tax regime for Northern Ireland, but there we are. In the United States of America, each state has different corporation tax arrangements. The pattern is clear from the figures. There is no “race to the bottom”. States that have an inbuilt competitive advantage—New York, New Jersey and California—and the District of Columbia have the highest rates—

I am sorry, I do not have time. I wish I did. Because of their location, their benefits and their positions as financial centres, such states do not have to compete on corporation tax. They already have important advantages. The important point is that we do not regard the approach as a “race to the bottom”. We regard the powers of a normal country to set our own levels of taxation on business—not simply through the small business bonus scheme, which has been such a massive advantage for Scotland, but through taxation on profits—as powers that we would use wisely. We have possessed limited powers on varying income tax since the Parliament was reconvened. We have not used the powers, because we did not think it wise to do so. The most positive speeches in the debate came from the SNP benches, although Margaret McCulloch made a thoughtful speech and I found that I could agree with parts of Mr Bibby’s speech. Members of my party have argued that there would be many options for the Scottish Parliament if we had such powers. We could concentrate on stimulating investment in sectors such as renewable energy and life sciences. We could reduce the headline rate, to send a message to the world that not only does Scotland have a workforce that is made up of highly-skilled, committed and enthusiastic people, and not only do we have marvellous academic institutions and—I hope—a sympathetic Government and an approachable enterprise minister, but we have a target headline rate that marks us out as a place to do business in the world. The most important things about business taxation are certainty and confidence. Given what we saw in the North Sea, with the raid on profits and the UK Government setting tax without warning at rates of up to 81 per cent—rates that Mr McLetchie might say would be associated with former totalitarian regimes—is it any wonder that boardrooms across the world are questioning decisions on investment in Scotland, with the consequence that much-needed investment in our oil and gas sector might have been withheld? Business needs long-term confidence if it is to invest. I have always believed fervently and passionately that an independent Scotland, with the power to set a corporation tax rate that adds to our competitive advantage, would see all the investment in the world and it would immeasurably—[Laughter.] It would see all the potential investment in the world come to this country, and it would immeasurably improve the prospects of generations to come. That is an exceedingly positive prospect, and one that I hope all members can support.

It is a real privilege to be here as the Minister for Energy, Enterprise and Tourism and to have the opportunity to wind up the debate. I am honoured to join colleagues in recognising the 40th anniversary of the UCS work-in. I thank Hugh Henry for lodging the motion for debate and for his opening speech. It has been more than a debate; it has been a tribute to the individuals involved and a reminiscence. Most of the reminiscence was from people who were at school at the time, but we also heard from Margo MacDonald, who was part of those events and, if I may be so bold as to say, galvanized Scotland at that time and since. On behalf of the Scottish Government Cabinet, I acknowledge the veterans and guests in the public gallery. The Deputy First Minister is in the chamber and the First Minister was here for much of the debate, until he had to attend to urgent business. I know that he, Nicola Sturgeon and others will join all our guests in the garden lobby directly after the debate, to offer their commendations—I had better hurry up, or you might not get that glass of something as we continue the evening’s celebrations.

I hope that there is a time and a place. On that point, my mother Winnie and Jimmy Reid were great friends throughout their campaigning lives, even if they were campaigning from different perspectives. My mother said that Jimmy was always a great gentleman to her. They enjoyed a dram or two from time to time, and great fun was had by all in their company. It is important that significant moments in Scotland’s history are remembered, recounted and discussed by members of the Scottish Parliament and I am pleased that people who could not be here tonight will be able to listen to the fine speeches that we heard from all members who took part in the debate. Even more important—Margo MacDonald put her finger on this, as she so often does—Jimmy Reid’s speeches will be available to schoolchildren throughout the land. That is surely the best way of ensuring that his memory and memories of his colleagues—many of whom are here, but many of whom are sadly not with us—live on. We know that every man and woman who has worked in the yards since 1971 owes their job to the activism that was so vividly and passionately described by all speakers. The BAE Systems Surface Ships apprentices who are in the public gallery are the newest recruits to one of the largest apprenticeship programmes in any sector. BAE has recruited more than 800 apprentices since 2003. All members, irrespective of our political differences, want to ensure that there continue to be opportunities for the young people who are here today and others that follow them to pursue apprenticeships. The Scottish Parliament is here now and we do things differently. Many speakers talked about the importance of respecting the legacy of UCS and ensuring that in our actions and decisions we give reality and life to that legacy. I think that it was Gil Paterson who talked about the rights of workers to win compensation when they have contracted dreadful diseases related to asbestos. Members of all parties did work on that—when this Parliament is at its best it is a united Parliament. Bill Butler, with whom I became fairly friendly in the previous session of the Parliament, was at the forefront of that work. Stuart McMillan has done work in the same field, as have many MSPs from all parties. The legacy sees members across the Parliament committed to a policy of no compulsory redundancies, despite the difficult financial times. Above all, the legacy sees us committed to ensuring that we promote opportunity for all. I can still hear Jimmy Reid express that very sentiment. I am delighted to echo members’ remarks about the exhibition in the Mitchell library and the gala concert on Saturday 1 October. I hope that this debate is part of the tribute. Gil Paterson talked about giants. Those giants’ footsteps echo in this chamber this evening. I ask that members close the debate by applauding the people who have joined us in the gallery—our visitors, the veterans and the new apprentices. Thank you. [Applause.]

It is always a pleasure to follow Malcolm Chisholm, who made a typically thoughtful speech. He mentioned his visit to the violence reduction unit in Glasgow. I agree that Karyn McCluskey and John Carnochan are two of the most inspiring individuals in Scotland. It is relevant to point out that, while our main aim in taking forward our programme is economic growth, the human misery that drug addiction and alcohol abuse cause not only is a human tragedy but contributes massively to economic difficulties, at a cost of an estimated £5 billion a year. That is not the main reason why our minimum alcohol pricing bill is important, but it is a contributory reason. It was pleasing to hear that the Liberals will now support that bill, which is a positive move. We look forward to building on that consensus with the various strands of opinion that are emerging in the Conservative Party—whether people are abolitionists or non-abolitionists, I hope that they can unite behind some of the promising SNP measures in our legislative programme. The First Minister made it clear that among our most important priorities are creating and protecting jobs; growing the economy; securing capital expenditure in so far as we can, given the predation from London; and helping young people into jobs through building on our excellent record, with 25,000 apprenticeships created last year. However, I want to talk about work that is being done not by the Scottish Government—although it is supported by it—but by Scottish companies and people whom I have had the pleasure of meeting in the past few months. One of those people is Ian Couper of Energy North, who has brought together 60 or 70 companies in the north of Scotland to build on the opportunities in the oil fabrication and renewables sectors in places such as Nigg. We hope that, through Global Energy, the excellent work at Nigg, which has been supported by members from across the Parliament, will continue. Another example is the work carried out by Scott Taylor, the chief executive of the Glasgow City Marketing Bureau. Tourism makes a huge contribution to the economy. The new Scottish Hydro arena, to which Scottish Enterprise contributed, will enable Glasgow massively to increase visitor numbers to that great city, as people come to listen to bands such as Take That—not one that I am familiar with—and many others. [Interruption.] I am told that another is Robbie Williams, who is another individual with whom I am unfamiliar. That will make a massive contribution that will be worth about £150 million a year, or something of that ilk. I also visited the Moray economic partnership and met Jim Royan and George McIntyre and others who are working to help the people who are losing their jobs at RAF Kinloss. Through individual effort and with appropriate assistance from Highlands and Islands Enterprise and the Moray economic partnership, those people are trying to get back on their feet and, in many cases, find a way of staying in the Highlands. Among them are people from England whom we would like to stay and continue to make a huge positive contribution to our economy. Another example is the company Ceridian.

I am slightly surprised that the other parties’ priorities seem to have shifted slightly. While we are determined to promote Scotland’s economy, jobs in Scotland and opportunities for young people, there seems to be a new Conservative-Labour alliance on high hedges. “High hedges!” is the cry—that is what we need to sort out in Scotland. Of course we will see brought forward measures to deal with a high hedges bill. I have every confidence that that will happen. I know that Roseanna Cunningham has the issue at the forefront of her agenda and that appropriate measures will be taken forward. I am happy to assure David McLetchie and Michael McMahon on that important topic. I turn to matters that, arguably, are at least of equal importance, such as the oil and gas sector. Lewis Macdonald mentioned that he was in the audience when I spoke at a business breakfast in Aberdeen yesterday morning. As we all know, the oil and gas sector makes a massive contribution to the Scottish economy, including the 196,000 jobs and £13,000 million to the London Treasury. When we consider the oil and gas that is yet to be extracted from the North Sea and off Shetland, and given that that will happen in higher proportions under enhanced oil extraction—a policy that both Governments support—we find that the value of the remaining reserves in Scotland’s waters is estimated at up to £1.2 trillion. Members who have doubts about whether we are some sort of economic basket case might want to reflect on the fact that the oil and gas sector is doing well. One fact that is of particular importance is that the oil and gas sector in Scotland, working in complement with the renewable energy sector, has about five decades to come of continued activity in the North Sea. I hope that all parties will endorse our view that, for young people who want to pursue a career, that sector offers an extremely important opportunity to have a lively and rewarding career. I therefore have pleasure in commending the programme for government.

Scotland’s renewable energy story can be traced back to the period following the second world war and the vision and determination of Tom Johnston. As a Highlands MSP, I am well aware of the impact of the hydro programme, which began in the 1940s, in transforming the lives of families and the fortunes of the region. In the period since devolution, renewable energy has become linked with the growth of modern Scotland, and the rapid pace of progress has allowed us to be ever more ambitious about the contribution that a wide range of renewable sources can make towards our energy needs. The Government has introduced a target to meet 100 per cent of Scotland’s electricity demand from renewables by 2020. That is not all that we produce; it is equivalent to all that we consume. We will produce up to twice as much as that. The target reflects scale, strength and value: the scale of our natural resources; the strength of our energy capabilities; and the value that we place on that high-growth sector of our economy. The achievement of that target and our ambitions for renewable heat and sustainable transport will mean that we can meet at least 30 per cent of our overall energy demand from renewables by 2020. With our emissions reduction targets and our aim to reduce consumption by 12 per cent by 2020, it is clear that, as a nation, we are at the forefront of the global shift towards sustainable, low-carbon development. However, we need to go further and faster to secure our place as a European leader in renewable energy. Therefore, the renewables route map, which is being published today, sets out the key actions that are needed to achieve our new targets and to seize the opportunity for Scotland to research and develop, design, construct and service the technologies that will power the 21st century. The headlines from the route map speak for themselves. We have a challenging electricity target and actions to meet it, but it is not just about electricity. Our route map sets out progress towards the target to meet 11 per cent of heat demand from renewables by 2020 and our commitment to ensure that impacts on existing biomass users are mitigated as demand continues to grow, including through our forthcoming review of support for large-scale electricity-only biomass under the renewables obligation (Scotland). We do not believe that large-scale biomass electricity-only plants, which require the transglobal shipment of wood, are good for the planet or the economy. We have made a commitment to set up an expert commission on the development of district heating, and we have set a new target to meet 30 per cent of overall energy demand from renewables by 2020 and a new target of 500MW community and locally owned renewable energy by 2020. That is a transformational opportunity for the local ownership of energy that is set within our wider aspiration to support community asset ownership. To help to meet that challenge, we undertake to work with investors to establish a new green equity fund for community renewables. We will follow up our securing the benefits consultation to provide greater clarity for community benefits from commercial schemes, and we will enhance our commitment to small-scale and rural renewables through the development of a microgeneration strategy and an agri-renewables strategy. We do not underestimate the challenges. In particular, there is a need to ensure that the United Kingdom electricity market continues to provide the right level of incentives. We are working constructively with the UK Government to highlight areas in which we have a legitimate devolved role in setting the support framework for developing low-carbon generation, especially protection of our role in determining financial support for renewables and, in future, for carbon capture and storage. We need to continue to work to secure adequate connection with European Union neighbours to ensure that UK demand is not a limiting factor on the ability of Scottish generators to dispatch and export their electricity. Good progress has been made on renewables employment opportunities. The picture is fast moving, but the latest projections from Skills Development Scotland are for up to 40,000 new jobs in the sector by 2020. I am sure that we all recognise the potential of renewables for the Scottish economy. We must address the range of technology and market failures that may act as a barrier to deployment and tackle the many infrastructure, skills and supply chain barriers to deployment. We need to ensure that Scotland secures adequate economic and social benefit from renewable energy deployment. Lastly, we need to secure the funding required for all those ambitious plans. The route map goes further in scope and ambition than any previous strategy for renewable energy in Scotland. It sets out a comprehensive path towards achieving our ambition to be the green energy powerhouse of Europe. Taken alongside our electricity generation policy statement, which is currently being updated, the route map sets the course for a rapid expansion in renewables capacity, complemented by greater energy efficiency, advances in energy storage and the development of carbon capture and storage technologies. This Government will continue to listen and to make the most of the expertise of all parties in Parliament, including the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, to ensure that we get our energy policies right for Scotland. However, we see no place for new nuclear power, because it is an expensive technology of the last century that offers Scotland no competitive advantage. We welcome the recent announcement by the German Government of a decisive move to phase out nuclear by 2022, alongside a huge expansion of its already significant renewables capacity. That announcement adds to the growing international realisation of the difficulties associated with nuclear power. Renewable energy provides perhaps Scotland’s greatest economic and environmental opportunity this century. Our new route map sets out what we need to do collectively to write the next chapter in Scotland’s renewable energy story. I hope that Parliament will unite behind it to ensure that we grasp the opportunity in front of us.

I thank Richard Baker for his questions and the tone with which he put them. I commend his colleague Sarah Boyack who, when she was a minister, set targets that at the time appeared ambitious but which were all achieved, as we discussed yesterday in a briefing session for members. Equally, although our targets are ambitious, we believe that they are achievable. In the foreword to the route map, I point out that more than a quarter of Scotland’s electricity needs already come from renewables. I also make the important point, which is perhaps not widely appreciated, that renewables projects and operations that are under construction or have consent will provide almost 60 per cent of our electricity needs. So, although there is a mountain still to be climbed, we are a good way up that mountain. Richard Baker asked how frequently we will report back to Parliament. We will report back to Parliament as frequently as is necessary and certainly when there are major changes. Timing in the next six to 12 months will be absolutely crucial. There will be negotiations and discussions with the United Kingdom Government about electricity market reform. Project transmit and the unfair charges from which Scotland currently suffers and the issues surrounding operation and investment will all be considered in the next six months. In fact, we might be seeing the biggest set of changes in the energy sector since the electricity privatisation of 1989. The next six to 12 months will be absolutely critical. We are working with the UK Government to get the best possible deal for Scotland. The member’s final question concerned the industrialisation of Scotland and where the jobs and investment will come from. Plainly, we believe that the investment should come from several sources. We are negotiating for the return of the fossil fuel levy—currently at £200 million—from the Westminster Government, which has already drawn down some of England’s share of the levy. We are working with many companies, including Mitsubishi, Gamesa and Doosan, which are world-leading companies in the manufacture of turbines, and negotiating with them to try to persuade them to invest heavily in our ports. We will use the £70 million fund towards that aim. I hope that those rather long comments answer all of Mr Baker’s questions.

Jackson Carlaw accuses me of being poetic, which is not an accusation that I have hitherto faced. He goes on to say that our targets are ambitious and, yes, they are. I think that I recognise his snatchets from the initial renewable energy debate in this session of Parliament. The targets are ambitious, but they are not quite as ambitious as those of another party in its 2011 manifesto, namely the Welsh Conservatives. That manifesto states that the Welsh Conservatives wish to “Generate More Renewable Energy” and goes on to say that they will “Promote a diverse range of renewable energy sources—including solar, wind, marine, small scale biomass, and microgeneration technologies with an aim to produce 100% of our energy needs from renewable sources by 2025.” I commend the ambition of the Welsh Conservatives; and I commend it in particular to the Scottish Conservatives. I was asked about the extension of the life of nuclear power stations—an issue that we accept must be considered rationally. We are perfectly open to an extension of the life of the existing nuclear power stations, providing that the case is justified on economic and environmental grounds. That case exists, and it exists because of the need for security of supply. We have always acknowledged that, although we are clearly opposed to the building of new nuclear power stations. I hope that my answer has given some assurance to Jackson Carlaw.

As I said in my statement, the prediction of the Office of the Gas and Electricity Markets is for 40,000 more jobs in the renewable energy field. In the low-carbon sector, the target is 130,000. Of course, low carbon covers more than renewable energy; it also covers environmental jobs, and jobs related to waste and the efficient use of energy. That is all to be welcomed. We believe that there is an environmental case for renewable energy—which can also answer the question of the volatility of gas prices. As has been debated in this Parliament, one utility company has made substantial increases. We also believe that renewable energy will transform job opportunities in the Scottish economy. I have already mentioned three of the largest companies in the world in the manufacture of offshore wind turbines, and they are all interested in coming to Scotland. One reason for that is precisely our setting of ambitious targets. That has aroused, stimulated and secured the interest of the leading companies in the world, and that must be a good thing.

We certainly wish to achieve the greatest possible success in transport and we are happy to work with the Labour Party on that. I am well aware of the Labour Party’s ambitious commitments and I would like to continue a dialogue on how, in practice, we can exceed our hopes and aspirations on all those fronts. I hope that we will make progress with the announcements that I have made today. For example, I would like to develop the strategies on microgeneration and agri-renewables and to get them in place before the end of the year, if possible. I am willing to work with all members to secure that objective.

We want to encourage community renewables schemes, which is why we have set the target of 500MW. At the moment, we are in the region of 180MW—so, again, we have set an ambitious target. One of the ways in which we think it would be sensible to stimulate such projects is by having a green equity fund that would focus on the community side. We debated the green investment bank in Marco Biagi’s members’ business debate some weeks ago and focused on large-scale investment. The purpose of the green equity fund is to fill a gap for small-scale community schemes. Members might ask: how much will this fund be? I thought that somebody would have asked me that, but since no one has, I will answer the question anyway. We have not yet set the fund total because we want to see how successful we are in securing the return of the £200 million fossil fuel levy, which, thus far, the Chancellor of the Exchequer and the Chief Secretary to the Treasury have been unwilling to return to us. We hope that that will change, and when it does, we hope that the green equity fund will include a reasonable proportion of the levy to develop community schemes.

There is a consonance of objectives between the Government and the views that Sarah Boyack has expressed, as I have already tried to make clear. Since the introduction of the fuel poverty programme, we have seen, through the energy assistance package, more than 150,000 people on low incomes reduce their energy bills and keep their homes warm now and for years to come. It is plain, however, that the recent increases in electricity and gas prices will hit the most vulnerable hardest. That is an area in which I expect to work with all members to see what can be done practically to help those families.

In response to the member’s first question, I am aware of the issue, which was raised by Sarah Boyack in the renewable energy debate when she alluded to her concern about the Forestry Commission tendering process not availing communities of opportunities in that regard. Given that we have made a commitment this morning to introduce a microgeneration strategy and that we want to develop community initiatives as far as possible by the end of this year, I have decided that it would be reasonable to engage fully and directly with the Forestry Commission to see what lessons we can learn for the future. In response to the second question about low-carbon vehicles, we want to see what progress can be made as quickly as possible. Since Liam McArthur has raised the matter today, I will raise it with the Minister for Housing and Transport, Keith Brown, and the Minister for Environment and Climate Change, Stewart Stevenson, so that we can take it forward. We will get back to Liam McArthur and give him a specific answer on timing if we can.

I am aware that this problem has been reported in various parts of the country. Parliament supported the introduction of permitted development rights for domestic microgeneration equipment in 2009-10 and for non-domestic equipment this March; nevertheless, inconsistencies in local planning decisions have been reported to us. Planning decisions are made locally, but we have produced guidance on these matters and will be looking closely at the situation to see whether we can do anything more, especially on the consistent treatment of noise. The issue has been reported to us and we look forward to working with Rob Gibson and other members who are rightly concerned about it.

We certainly wish to encourage microgeneration and to that end we will introduce and work with all members on the strategy. On energy efficiency, which every member has mentioned, plainly we want to encourage all means by which people might use less energy. At a recent housing expo in my constituency, pioneering design in the efficient heating of housing was demonstrated across a whole range of renewable resources, including solar and geothermal energy. I wish to avoid stating the obvious, but the benefit of renewables is that they are renewable. There will be no volatility in the price of the sun, the waves or the wind. The benefits are clear and we will do all that we can to drive forward measures to reduce energy consumption, with a particular focus on the most vulnerable.

Section 3.1 of the route map, which I looked at earlier this morning, spells out the massive opportunity for Scotland’s needs to be powered by offshore wind many times over. I see Jackson Carlaw almost nodding in agreement. We wish to bring greater clarity to the arrangements for community benefit from onshore wind. Doing so would help to reduce some of the difficulties and tensions that can arise from time to time over applications for onshore wind farms.

I think that the route map that we have produced is broadly welcomed by Patrick Harvie—at least I hope so. We will ensure that all bodies in Scotland, including Scottish Water, are playing their full part towards achieving the objectives that the route map sets out. We have set an ambitious new target for community renewables this morning, and that is good. I get the sense that that is broadly welcomed. We all want more communities to benefit. Many schemes in the Highlands and Islands have benefited many communities greatly. In Shetland, for example, energy costs have been reduced, compared with the cost of fossil fuels, through a district heating scheme. I am sure that Patrick Harvie and I will work shoulder to shoulder in the years ahead on all those matters.

Mr Malik is absolutely right to praise the achievements of Scottish inventors; indeed, some people argue that Scotland invented the modern world. Through the work that they do, our universities, including the University of Strathclyde, are leading the way—Jim McDonald briefed members on these matters yesterday. That is why Gamesa has already committed to research jobs in this country—precisely because of the intellectual know-how, capability and leadership in the field of research into renewable energy. That is very much to be welcomed. We will certainly update Parliament as regularly as appropriate, and my door is always open.

The Scottish Government is determined to maximise the growth of tourism and attract new visitors to Scotland. In doing so, we are committed to supporting the tourism industry and we continue to work with it and our agencies to develop and promote Scotland as an all-year-round tourism destination. Just this week, I brought together key players in business tourism from across Scotland to review what opportunities there are to grow this sector. We are also determined to make the most of our key tourism assets and are committed to further developing and promoting activity, ancestral, cultural and food and drink tourism.

We are of course ambitious for Scotland to achieve even greater success in tourism. The 50 per cent target was set before the onset of the global recession, as Gavin Brown will know. The figure was based on the then estimates of world tourism growth. Despite that, however, Scotland has done pretty well in tourism of late. In spite of the recession, the heavy snowfall and the volcanic ash cloud, which brought our airports to a standstill, overall visitor spend in 2010 was down by less than 1 per cent compared to 2009. We are of course looking towards the winning years in securing a number of world-class events for Scotland, including the Ryder cup, the Commonwealth games and the year of homecoming in 2014. There is much to be positive about.

The “2020 Route Map for Renewable Energy in Scotland”, which I published today, states that we will commission a study to examine the potential of deep geothermal in Scotland.

I was aware that the research is now five years old. That is why we are commissioning further work to provide certainty for the industry to exploit this potential. We fully recognise that, in particular, ex-mining areas offer great opportunities for geothermal energy. We are therefore determined to take that form of renewable energy forward.

I welcome a second debate on this important subject. In March, my predecessor, Jim Mather, responded to a debate that was led by Elaine Smith. She is certainly persistent in her campaign, and I admire her for that. If I may be so bold, I say that she has demonstrated tonight that even Presiding Officers can still be passionate about their politics. There is nothing wrong with that. Over the years, all of us as elected representatives have campaigned on many issues where we have felt that a reduction in public expenditure has been leading to hardship for people in this country. I am sure that all of us have done that in many different ways. That is the essence of the sentiments that are expressed in the motion. In its campaign, the STUC focuses on jobs, services, tax and a living wage. I will try to cover each of those points in turn. The Scottish Government is committed to securing jobs, investment and economic growth. Last week, we saw the seventh consecutive reported fall in unemployment in Scotland—a decline of 10,000 during the three months to April 2011. More good news is in my notes, but I will not read it out, because it is nothing to be complacent about. What I said is true and is to be welcomed: for someone who is one of the 10,000, the situation is welcome. It is an improvement for 10,000 living human beings. However, none of us in any party is complacent about the challenges that we face or the misery of anyone who faces a P45, redundancy and the impact of expenditure reductions. Our aim is to protect public jobs and services. We have therefore acted to constrain pay, by producing the one-year policy of no compulsory redundancies for staff who are under our control. That is the right policy, although we have been criticised for it, as the First Minister pointed out at this morning’s national economic forum meeting, which I compèred—if that is the right word. We have been criticised for not going far enough—it has been said that we should make compulsory redundancies and that we should put people through the fear and worry of thinking, “Will we be next for the cut?” Instead, we have said that a policy of no compulsory redundancies should apply. Such a policy has many economic benefits, as well as the human benefit for those who are involved. The economic benefit is that, because people do not worry as much about whether they will be in a job, they do not constrain their spending. We all know that, when people worry about whether they—or even their friends—will have a job, that makes them think twice about spending, particularly on large purchases. That damages the whole economy.

I bow to Helen Eadie’s local knowledge of Fife and I am happy to consider such matters with her further. Announcements have been made recently about successes in bringing jobs to Fife, which I am sure she welcomes, as do we. We have given a lead with our policy of no compulsory redundancies. I hope that that lead will be followed throughout the public sector. In 2011-12, for staff groups that are under our control, we have targeted resources to protect family incomes for the lowest paid by introducing a living wage of £7.15 an hour and a minimum increase of £250 for people who are paid less than £21,000 a year, to which Elaine Smith referred. That policy is right and I hope that other members will agree—including Mr Brown, who has fought his corner doggedly tonight, particularly given that he is alone on his benches, as his Westminster colleague is all the time.

I say with respect that I do not need to take the policy of a living wage to the Cabinet, because the Cabinet produced the policy of a living wage for employees who are under the Government’s control—I was at the Cabinet session at which the decision on that policy was taken. I urge Mr Findlay to make his views known to the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, as I am sure he will. We have given a lead in respect of public sector workers for whom we are directly responsible. We have gone further than that. In the context of jobs, services, tax and a living wage, it is reasonable to make the point that we have said that a pay freeze should apply—[Interruption.] I hope that that noise is not from my phone; I do not think that it is. A pay freeze is justified. In hard times, surely many people—perhaps most people—accept that it is better for all of us to remain in employment than to live in fear of redundancy. That must be a principle. Certainly, from speaking to constituents, I know that, although it is tough and nobody likes it, it is by and large accepted for the greater good of us all. Elaine Smith rose— I will go on to make the second point. In exchange for that restraint, we have undertaken that we will do various things. One of those is to extend the council tax freeze that we carried out in our first term of government into our second term. That is in the form of a social contract. We are asking people—rightly including members of the Scottish Parliament and ministers—to accept restraint in their own wages but, in exchange for that, we say that there is one bill that will not go up substantially. We heard about electricity and gas bills going up last week, but there is one bill—the council tax bill, which we are responsible for—that we will freeze. Neil Findlay rose— I am sorry. Was there another intervention? I am happy to take one if I have time, Presiding Officer.

That was a double-barrelled intervention. We did not impose the council tax freeze. We indicated that there would be a council tax freeze provided that local authorities were willing to act in partnership with us, and they were. It is only reasonable to point out that, as far as I understand, the party that Mr Findlay represented at the election fought the election on a policy of a council tax freeze. I do not really like to make partisan comments, but the debate has had an element of partisanship here and there. It seems reasonable that the Labour Party should either stick to its council tax freeze policy or jettison it and should not be for and against it at the same time, which is what we have seen in debates over the past few weeks. The Scottish Government will do its very best, despite the budget reductions that we have received from the Westminster Parliament, to use taxpayers’ money as best we can to avoid wasting it. Every pound that we waste and, indeed, every £1 million that is wasted by the Government, means that there is less to use for the real priorities in this country. That is why it is so important that we work together to protect, as far as we can, those who elected us to this place, through the provision of services in health, education and all other areas. That is what the Scottish Government will do. Meeting closed at 17:48.

Price increases such as those that Scottish Power announced last week could undermine the Scottish Government’s commitment to eradicating fuel poverty by 2016 as far as is practicable. In Scotland, 770,000 households are in fuel poverty. Despite the successes to date in helping more than 200,000 people to improve the energy efficiency of their homes through the Scottish Government’s energy assistance package and home insulation schemes, it is estimated that as many as 46,000 more households—2 per cent of households—will be pushed into fuel poverty every time energy prices rise by 5 per cent.

Bob Doris is right to make his point. Many people in Scotland are struck by the contrast between an energy-rich Scotland and the price hikes that severely affect many of the vulnerable in Scotland. The energy assistance package is aimed at a much broader range of people who are in fuel poverty than the previous central heating programme was. The EAP provides support to pensioners and families who live in the most energy-inefficient housing. Recently, eligibility has been extended to support the most vulnerable disabled people, and we will shortly extend it further to include the most vulnerable carers.

In common with localities throughout Scotland, Cumbernauld and Kilsyth benefits from VisitScotland’s significant national investment in marketing, information provision and quality assurance. In addition, VisitScotland works hard to boost tourism at a local level by actively providing advice and support to partnership bodies such as VisitLanarkshire and the Lanarkshire area tourism partnership.

I am aware of the excellent work by Charlie Allan to develop Duncarron fort, and I wish the Clanranald Trust every success with that exciting and innovative project. I am happy to take on many roles in life, but I have not and do not expect to be asked to take on the role of a “Braveheart” extra, no matter how well suited I may be to it.

The easier it is for Scotland’s small businesses to bid for public sector contracts, the greater the economic impact across the land. We continue to work with the supplier group chaired by Liz Cameron of the Scottish Chambers of Commerce to ensure that all Scottish businesses have fair access to public contracts. That will build on the success of public contracts Scotland—the single online portal for finding contract opportunities from the Borders to the northern isles. Of the 53,000 suppliers that have registered for free on public contracts Scotland, 84 per cent are small and medium-sized enterprises and more than 90 per cent say that it is now easier to bid for contracts.

I am grateful for the member’s good wishes, although it feels as if I have already been in post for quite a long time. Back in the early days, I met the representative of the FSB. I will most certainly continue to work with Colin Borland and his colleagues, who so well represent small businesses in Scotland. He knows that three quarters of the contracts that are advertised on public contracts Scotland go to small and medium-sized enterprises. In the United Kingdom, only 25 per cent of contracts go to SMEs. We intend to remain well ahead of the UK in that regard.

Our ambition is for more householders, public sector organisations and businesses to generate their own energy from microrenewables, and we will publish a microgeneration strategy by the end of the year. It will set out our plans to build on the range of support that is already available, such as the energy saving Scotland home renewables advice service, action on skills and accreditation, and maximising investment in Scotland from the feed-in tariff and the renewable heat incentive.

There is already much progress in that regard. Permitted development rights apply to domestic microgeneration equipment, and were introduced in 2009 and 2010. Permitted development rights for non-domestic microgeneration equipment were introduced in March this year. Permitted development rights remove the requirement for planning permission for specified equipment that falls within set thresholds, which speeds up matters considerably. However, we are also considering what more might be done to support the renewable energy industry and planners to facilitate technology that requires planning permission through the planning application process.

We retain a lot of statistics in our brains, but that is not one of the statistics that I have in my frontal lobes. I can share with Mr Brown the very good news that 1,300 microgeneration installations in Scotland benefited in the first year of the feed-in tariff, delivering 7.5MW of capacity. In 2011-12, we expect 2,600 householders to take up energy saving Scotland’s free service. A great deal of progress is therefore being made. If the requested information is held centrally, I will endeavour to get it to Mr Brown.

I should declare that I hold various investment trusts but no holdings in oil companies. All my shareholdings will be disclosed in the register of members’ interests when it is published. I warmly congratulate Mark McDonald on initiating the debate. It is a matter of considerable importance to have such a debate at this time. I thank all the members who have spoken, including Alison McInnes and Alex Johnstone, for the tone of the debate. It has been entirely constructive and free from unduly partisan point-scoring. Members across the parties in Parliament all recognise the huge contribution that the oil and gas industry has made, is making and, we all hope, will continue to make to this country of ours. Members from the north-east have particular expertise in and experience of the issues because they represent the part of the country that is associated with oil and gas. Aberdeen’s reputation goes before it throughout the world, and the skills that oil and gas companies have gained during the past four or five decades have seen them become vital players throughout the world through the exportation of their skills. Companies such as the Wood Group lead the way in the support sector throughout the world. As members have done tonight, it is important that we all record our admiration, respect and appreciation for all those companies, from the managing directors down to the ordinary workers who work in this great Scottish success story. Alison McInnes referred to international sales. Scotland’s oil and gas companies’ international sales now exceed £7,000 million and account for almost half their total sales. Although North Sea production might have peaked, the industry is still producing 900 million barrels of oil and gas equivalent per year, and significant reserves remain. Between 30 and 40 per cent of the total North Sea reserves have still to be extracted, and as production techniques improve, more and higher percentages of total oil reserves can be extracted, thereby further increasing reserves. It was John D Rockefeller who said in the 1920s that the world had been running out of oil since he was a boy. However, with the correct incentive structure, there remain considerable opportunities in the North Sea and elsewhere off this country, and I am sure that the industry will remain an important part of our economy for decades to come. However, as members of all parties have rightly argued, the industry’s sustainability is threatened by the increase in the supplementary charge, which we believe is a blunt uniform tax rise. As it raises the tax burden on all existing and future fields, regardless of their potential profitability, it is inevitable that many new developments and incremental projects will have become non-viable overnight; I think that Maureen Watt gave some examples. The situation for gas companies, which account for almost half of all North Sea production, is of particular concern. The chancellor justified the tax increase on the grounds that oil prices have risen sharply over the past two years, but wholesale gas prices are at the same level that they were at in January 2009, so gas producers have not benefited from the windfall profits that some oil producers have received. As such, there is real concern that many previously profitable gas projects will no longer be viable, which will accelerate the rate of decline in production. A number of companies have re-evaluated their investment plans. Statoil has put on hold its planned investments to the west of Shetland, and a recent survey of North Sea producers by Oil and Gas UK suggests that a further 60 projects are being re-evaluated as a result of the tax rise. Given the nature of offshore production, those developments are not likely to be scaled back or delayed—they will simply be cancelled. As a result, valuable assets will be lost, which is neither efficient nor in the interests of the Scottish economy, the UK economy, jobs or taxpayers. The long-term impact of the tax increase on the industry could be even more significant. As other members have highlighted, the research by Alex Kemp suggests that 79 fewer fields may be developed over the next 30 years as a result of the tax rise, which he estimates would reduce investment by £29,000 million and cut production by 10 per cent. The figure that Kevin Stewart cited for the number of jobs that would be lost in the industry as a result was 15,000, which is a massive number. I am pleased that there has been broad recognition across the chamber that that represents a fair summation of the reasonably expressed concerns about the effects that the tax change may have. Looking forward and being positive, we hope that we can—perhaps through tonight’s debate, the First Minister’s efforts and representations from the oil and gas sector—persuade the chancellor and his team to change tack. The First Minister raised our concerns when he met the chancellor and the UK Secretary of State for Energy and Climate Change last month. On Tuesday, we provided the UK Government with a detailed submission that set out how the North Sea fiscal regime could be amended to mitigate some of the damage caused by the chancellor’s reforms. Our proposals have been implemented successfully in other countries, and the underlying principles are already embodied in the North Sea tax regime. Although they would not completely offset the impact of the tax rise, they would go some way towards ensuring that marginal and incremental projects remain viable, while also ensuring that the country would still capture a substantial share of the windfall that some oil companies are receiving as a result of recent rises in wholesale oil prices. I am very grateful for the way in which Alex Johnstone pitched his remarks, and I hope that he, in turn, believes that the way in which I have sought to respond to the debate is consonant with his tone and that of others. The proposals that we have put forward have been endorsed by many in the industry and by the Labour Party here in the Scottish Parliament, and we are extremely grateful for that. It is important that the UK Government responds to that broad consensus and amends the Finance Bill to ensure that it does not do lasting damage to one of our country’s most successful industries. Meeting closed at 17:44.

I warmly congratulate Marco Biagi on the motion, which is on what must be one of the most important matters that we have debated in the Parliament. I welcome the support from all the parties on the green investment bank. As Sarah Boyack rightly pointed out, all parties in Scotland have joined together to support the campaign for the GIB to come to Edinburgh, for all the reasons that Marco Biagi set out so eloquently in his opening remarks. We do not often hear the word “trillion” in the Scottish Parliament, but the potential to benefit Scotland in the future is absolutely massive. The bank has the potential to deliver substantial benefit to the green economy in Scotland, especially when it gains full borrowing powers, which might not be for some time yet. The bank needs to operate flexibly and to leverage investment from the private sector. Scotland has key credentials. In particular, Edinburgh has twin criteria that render it the best place for the GIB: a distinguished history in banking and a growing reputation as an innovative and high-quality hub for financial services, as well as a leading place in the low-carbon economy development. In relation to banking and renewable energy, Edinburgh is the best and right place for the green investment bank. Malcolm Chisholm was right to point out the significant achievements by academe, if I can put it that way. Last night, I attended a dinner at the Heriot-Watt University campus, where the principal and colleagues are seeking to establish a campus furth of Scotland, in Malaysia. Heriot-Watt has considerable expertise in renewable energy and it has a presence in Orkney, where the European Marine Energy Centre is taking a lead, and which I hope to visit next month. In all those respects, and in other respects that members have mentioned, Edinburgh has outstanding credentials to be the location for the green investment bank. I believe that a case exists on merit and not on special geographical or national pleading. In a speech that Vince Cable made—I believe, in April—he described Edinburgh as a front-runner. The task for the Scottish Government now is to see Edinburgh become the front-runner and the choice. The GIB would help to provide the capital that we need to realise the renewable energy revolution in this country. That will not be easy in many respects, but a public sector banking finance element is plainly necessary, without a shadow of doubt. The scale of the capital that is needed to develop offshore, carbon capture and marine technologies is substantial indeed, but there must—and will—be a role for the public sector to play. That is accepted by everyone, which is good. The public sector would play a role in first-loss debts, the construction phase, equity co-investment, pari passu senior debt, up-front refinancing commitments and subordinated debt during the operational phase. Those technical terms all describe different ways in which public sector finance will be necessary in order for projects to become a reality. That is why the GIB’s role will be crucial, and why—as Gavin Brown pointed out—utility companies such as SSE have supported Edinburgh Chamber of Commerce’s campaign, which, as many members have said, has been very well presented. ECC is to be congratulated on its efforts, and on holding its Scottish low-carbon investment conference once again this year, on 27 and 28 September, following the inaugural event last year—to which Gavin Brown referred—which was attended by 550 international delegates. SSE has pointed out other arguments that may not have been made tonight, and I will run through them now. First, any new financial services organisation seeking to establish itself in London would struggle to make an impact because of the sheer size of the sector there. SSE makes a very good point: there is a real risk that GIB would get lost in London because there are so many massive institutions there. Its presence would not be felt so strongly and it would not be seen as being so significant. In Edinburgh, that will most certainly not be the case: the GIB will be seen as a key institution serving a determined key national objective. Secondly, the selection of Edinburgh is entirely consistent with UK policy on the principles of establishing new institutions, in that such institutions should create business opportunities that are spread more evenly across the UK and between industries. Lastly, if the green investment bank is located in Edinburgh, its activities will—because of the interest from all parties in the chamber, which we have seen tonight—be more visible, and there will be greater scrutiny of those activities. I think Alison Johnstone would agree that we need to keep an eye on the role of the GIB to see that it performs its purpose, and not other purposes to which she alluded. I think that we all agree on this matter tonight, and I am delighted to bring such consensus to the chamber, which as minister I always seek to do. I congratulate Marco Biagi again, and I thank all the members who have made such excellent contributions to the debate this evening. It is truly an example of all parties coming together as team Scotland—of all of us pulling on the blue Scotland jersey to support the green investment bank. Meeting closed at 17:48.

In 1865, in Cleveland, Ohio, Maurice Clark met his business partner at an auction at which one partner would buy the business from the other. The bidding stopped at $72,500, at which point Mr Clark announced to his partner that he could afford no more and sold him his half-share in the business. A cheque was offered but they settled on a handshake. The partner’s name was John D Rockefeller and the business became the Standard Oil Company. Little did either of them know that the business would go on to become the biggest in the world and would subsequently be split to form Exxon Mobil, Chevron, Amoco, Conoco and other companies that dominate the oil industry today. There was no way that either man could have known in 1865 that petroleum would become the biggest business in the world. Today, however, we all know that fossil fuels are finite resources. We cannot say exactly when they will run out but we know with absolute certainty that we must find replacements. We also know that Scotland has a unique natural endowment, with a quarter of Europe’s offshore wind and tidal resource and a tenth of its wave energy potential, and that as a result it has an opportunity to be among the pioneers of the 21st century energy revolution. Our opportunity is to be at the forefront of the global low-carbon economy. In 1865 John Rockefeller could have predicted neither the success nor the size of the oil industry. However, today, we can foresee and predict with near certainty that renewables will become massive businesses employing millions of people all over the globe. The Scottish Government has therefore pledged to move further and faster to secure Scotland’s place as the green energy powerhouse of Europe. We must aim high or be left behind. Our commitment to generating 100 per cent of Scotland’s electricity demand from renewable sources by 2020 sends a clear signal that Scotland has the political will as well as the natural resources, the technical expertise and the industrial capacity. Indeed, there are already 60,000 low-carbon jobs in Scotland. We estimate that by 2020 there will be 130,000 such jobs in Scotland—an additional 70,000 in just a few short years. In the next few weeks, we will publish our Scottish renewables road map, which will set out a clear route to achieving our renewables targets for electricity, heat and transport. Let me be clear: by 2020, Scotland will be sourcing at least 11 per cent of its heat demand from renewable sources, including biomass, heat pumps and solar thermal; will be generating 100 per cent of electricity consumption from renewables; and will double its electricity generation equivalent to 200 per cent of our consumption. In other words, by 2020, Scotland will be producing all the electricity that it needs, just over half from renewable sources and just under half from other sources. Plainly we will then be in a position to be an energy exporter. The additional electricity will be generated by thermal plants that are progressively fitted with carbon capture and storage facilities to achieve full decarbonisation by 2030. Substantial grid upgrades and investment in electricity storage and demand management will result in a responsive and flexible grid that effectively balances renewables generation. Scotland will continue to export substantial amounts of electricity throughout the year, which will become lower and lower carbon. That will help the United Kingdom and the European Union to meet their renewables and climate change targets.

Combined heat and power has many advantages in using biomass to provide electricity, and it will certainly have a role to play. Our energy efficiency action plan, which was published last year, heralds energy efficiency as “the simplest and most cost-effective way to reduce emissions whilst seeking to maximise the productivity of our renewable resources” and provide a positive effect on energy bills. That will, in turn, reduce fuel poverty and allow householders and businesses to spend in other parts of the economy the money that they save. We want affordable housing with affordable warmth. Our target to reduce total final energy consumption in Scotland over the period to 2020 stands at 12 per cent. Meeting that target and reducing our energy requirements will not only help us to meet our 2020 emissions reduction target but make our renewables targets more easily achievable. That is simply common sense. Patrick Harvie, who is, I see, about to make an intervention—perhaps I provoked that—has argued that for many years.

I am, of course, glad that I caught Patrick Harvie’s eye. We have set a number of clear-cut targets. I understand that there is considerable controversy about the role of energy from shale and the complexities that are involved. It is important that appropriate environmental safeguards are put in place if such an approach is to be used anywhere in the world. Mr Harvie would argue that such safeguards are not possible, but others argue that they are. We need to study those matters carefully or else we will come to premature conclusions, but I am happy to work with Mr Harvie on that and all other issues as time progresses. Renewable energy in Scotland has come a long way. Our hydro legacy together with the growth of onshore wind since devolution mean that renewables now deliver almost a third of our annual electricity demand. In the past four years, there has been a significant increase in the rate of deployment, with ministers consenting to 42 renewables projects. That is more than double the number for the previous four years. Hydro will continue to provide electricity in Scotland long into the future. There are opportunities for new hydro schemes, and we will need more pumped storage to help to balance electricity supply and demand. I would like to set a challenge to developers to come up with more hydro schemes that are in harmony with the local environment. The hydro revolution is not just a memory from the 1940s and 1950s and the days of Tom Johnston; it can be relevant now as well. Scottish Water is a public sector success story, but it also uses around 1 per cent of the electricity that is consumed in Scotland each year. It already generates around 5 per cent of its own energy needs, but under a new plan, it could generate enough from renewables to cover all its own needs and make a significant contribution towards our targets. Onshore wind will continue to play a role in meeting our targets and in attracting investment in grid upgrades and helping to finance the development of emerging technologies. We will continue to address deployment issues in areas such as aviation, where work to develop solutions is beginning to pay off, and we will drive best environmental practice in community engagement so that good, responsible applications with a strong chance of being realised come through. It is of course in onshore wind and hydro that the greatest short to medium-term opportunities lie for communities to generate revenue from renewables. Marine renewables have a huge part to play in our sustainable low-carbon and industrial future. In the European Marine Energy Centre in Orkney, we have a world leader in the field. No doubt Liam McArthur will talk about that in more detail later. Through our grant funding, which has seen more than £25 million awarded since 2007, we have supported domestic pioneers such as Pelamis Wave Power, Wavegen and Aquamarine Power. We have introduced the £10 million saltire prize and enhanced levels of return for wave and tidal generation under the renewables obligation. We have also created a one-stop shop for all marine licence applications in Scottish seas to help address the challenges of developing offshore renewables. We are determined to respect all the marine interests, most notably those of our fishermen and fishing communities. The award of commercial leases to 11 projects in the Pentland Firth and Orkney waters—a world first—remains a powerful signal of both the capability of the technology developers involved and the will and intent of their utility and industrial partners. The offshore wind industry could support almost 50,000 direct and indirect jobs in Scotland in 2020, generating more than £7,000 million for our economy. I became more personally aware of the opportunities last week, when I visited Babcock at Rosyth and learned that it has engineered down the cost of offshore weather stations from £7 million to £3 million. Those who question the commercial viability and affordability of such techniques should be aware that massive progress is being made by Scottish companies finding engineering solutions. The potential from existing leasing rounds alone amounts to almost 10GW of capacity in Scottish waters. Our plan for offshore wind in Scottish territorial waters has identified a further 25 sites for exploration in the medium term. The industry is attracting major investment to Scotland. Companies such as Doosan, Gamesa and Mitsubishi have already announced plans to locate in Scotland and develop their offshore wind interests here. This is not in my script, but a headline in the Glasgow Herald today states “Glasgow named as first Scots ‘super city’ of green energy”. The article points out that HSBC has said that one reason to come to Glasgow is that we are taking a lead in the green energy revolution. Our national renewables infrastructure plan and the related £70 million fund will ensure that our port and harbour facilities are ready to meet the sector’s needs and exploit the huge economic benefits that it offers. Renewable energy can provide a tremendous source of income for local communities. Scotland leads the way in supporting local ownership, with at least 800 community-owned renewables schemes operating throughout Scotland, thanks to Government support over a number of years. Sarah Boyack has done a lot of work in the area and we support the same broad objectives in that regard. I commend the work of the Forestry Commission Scotland in negotiating a £5,000 per megawatt rate for the new commercial wind and hydro schemes on the national forestry estate, which has given a lead to private sector developments on the appropriate benchmark. We are determined that Scotland will play a significant role in the renewable heat sector. We are working with the UK Government to ensure that Scottish interests are reflected in the design of the renewable heat incentive. As my time is nearly up, I will dispense with various sheets of prepared text and draw my remarks to a close. We are on the verge of perhaps the most tremendous economic and environmental opportunity that Scotland has had in our history. The Government’s aim is to ensure that we take full advantage of that revolution, working with everybody in the Parliament. I believe that that is exactly what we will do. I move, That the Parliament supports the Scottish Government’s pledge to move faster and further to secure Scotland’s place as the green energy powerhouse of Europe; agrees that the investment and job opportunities presented by the low-carbon economy represent Scotland’s greatest economic opportunity; welcomes the target to generate the equivalent of 100% of Scotland’s electricity demand from renewable sources by 2020; supports the Scottish Government’s aim to maximise the benefits for communities from renewable energy and to transform the level of opportunity for local ownership; supports demands for the release of Scotland’s Fossil Fuel Levy surplus for investment in renewable energy in Scotland; supports the campaign to locate the Green Investment Bank in Edinburgh; supports the Scottish Government’s plans for Scottish Water to become a renewable energy generator; calls on the UK Government to accept the case for the Scottish Ministers to have a greater say in the design of the Electricity Market Reform mechanisms and to subsequently outline greater powers over energy policy in the UK Energy Bill for the Scottish Ministers and the Scottish Parliament, and supports the devolution of the Crown Estate to the Scottish Parliament to ensure that Scotland’s natural assets are managed in Scotland for the benefit of all of Scotland’s people.

In the construction of the northern section of the Beauly to Denny line, consent for which my predecessor granted, much of the work will in fact benefit Scottish companies and employees.

I think that we would all agree that my immediate predecessor, Jim Mather, was an unusual character in politics. He was entirely without side and without the desire to make personal remarks and was an inspirational character whom I believe created an atmosphere of great trust, particularly in the business community, and was also widely respected across all parties in this chamber. Helping to recruit Jim Mather to the SNP was one of my greatest achievements—although he is somewhat older than me, as members will appreciate—and it is an especially hard task to follow his example, given his boundless and unlimited appetite for hard work and his willingness to meet every member of the chamber. With regard to that latter aspect, I want to state that if any elected member of this Parliament has a serious matter to bring to me, a serious analysis of an issue or a serious problem that is facing his or her constituency, my door will always be open, just as Jim’s was. I pay particular tribute to those new members who have made their first speeches in this debate. We have had many spirited—and from time to time passionate—speeches and I congratulate every one of those members. A number of themes ran through the debate, especially in the speeches from first-time speakers, and I hope to cover them in principle. First, though, I should say that I believe that we all share a number of fairly straightforward and common objectives, which were outlined by the cabinet secretary, John Swinney. The Administration’s fundamental aim is for the Scottish economy to grow sustainably. Gavin Brown was right to point out that our predecessors probably shared the same aim, but it is also right that I should start by saying that, as we all share that objective, we should all be prepared to work together to achieve it. In his speech, the cabinet secretary set out what we should be focusing on to maximise opportunities for achieving further economic growth and creating more jobs in the by-going. In addition to the Government working with MSPs, MSPs all work together as partners with business representative bodies and the Scottish Trades Union Congress, which was the first representative body that I had the pleasure of meeting yesterday. I then met the Federation of Small Businesses, the Scottish Chambers of Commerce and the Scottish Council for Development and Industry. In those meetings, it was accepted that we are working with those bodies to try to achieve our objectives and I very much look forward to doing just that. Although Margaret McCulloch and Jenny Marra also covered the issue, I believe that it was Margaret Burgess who focused most directly on the tragedy of youth unemployment. Gavin Brown was correct to say that I and the cabinet secretary could just stand here and read out our list of successes. We welcome the announcements from State Street and Amazon; the fact that the Scottish Investment Bank has given loans to BigDNA, Aquamarine Power and the Amor Group; the successful inward investment that Scottish Development International has attracted; and the new jobs that many companies all over Scotland have created over recent weeks and months. However, we cannot—and should not—ignore the downside, the difficulties and the problems, especially the problems of young people who have not worked and, most of all, those who have never worked. As I said, Margaret Burgess focused on that issue in a straightforward and direct way, as did other members, notably those in the Labour Party—and rightly so. I say to all members that we are all in this together; we are all working together to try to tackle these difficult and very wide-ranging problems, which affect not only the economy portfolio but the health portfolio. When I was Minister for Community Safety, I was horrified to learn that the costs of drug addiction to this country were £2,000 million to £3,000 million. The same was true with regard to alcohol addiction. This is not an entirely economic matter and I hope that this time we can build a consensus around our minimum pricing policy. After all, I believe that by addressing that problem in our society, we can substantially help many people to move into the labour market and live successful and fruitful lives. With regard to helping young people into employment, I am proud that, in the last year of the SNP Government’s first term, John Swinney set a target of 20,000 apprenticeships and delivered 21,000. Our target is now 25,000, which is ambitious. I acknowledge that it is dangerous to set ambitious targets, because we might not succeed in meeting them. However, we are determined to succeed and if any member in the chamber has any specific ideas or proposals about how to succeed in that respect, about things that we are not doing that we should be doing, or about things that we should not be doing at all, my door will always be open to them. As I say, we share that objective. I also hope to do what we can within the portfolio, using our powers and persuasion with other Parliaments, to lift barriers that prevent business from succeeding. I will run through some of those barriers and give members examples rather than dry jargon from a speech that somebody else wrote for me—members may have noticed that I am not reading it. When I was in the community safety sector, I found out that bed and breakfast fire regulations were going to cost some B and Bs £20,000. Many B and Bs may not earn £20,000 a year, never mind being able to pay that amount. With co-operation from all parties, we therefore set up a working group and changed the rules and guidance. The new guidance may include a cost of perhaps several hundred pounds or even £1,000, and it can be implemented over a number of years. The process took around 18 months, but that is an example of our working together to deliver better regulation. Again, I ask for help from all members over the next five years. That is important. Our railing against red tape in general terms is no use at all. Red tape, rules and regulations are not wrong per se. Does anyone think that the regulations that prevent children from going up chimneys should be reconsidered or that workers who worked with asbestos should be able to do so again? Regulation solved those problems. Red tape is not wrong, but over the next five years we can together address the disproportionate impact of regulations that have not been thought through and which have unintended consequences. Perhaps that can be done in the licensing sector—that is one example that concerns many of us. If we do that and lift barriers, we will see jobs being created and businesses succeeding. It has been mentioned that taxation is another barrier to success. I do not want to start the session on a discordant note, so I will not do so. Many members have talked about the benefits of the small business bonus scheme. Undoubtedly, many other businesses that do not qualify for that scheme still pay substantial business rates. We are all aware of that. Business rates are a necessary evil in society and undoubtedly a large burden for many businesses, and I would be astonished if we did not consider that matter in detail in this session, but, as many members have indicated, the benefit of the small business bonus scheme has been massive. I am talking about the benefit for more than 70,000 businesses in Scotland and an average of £1,400 a year. I hope that members will visit the Victorian market when they are in Inverness, which is in my constituency. Many businesses in the Victorian market have said that they would not have survived if it were not for the small business bonus scheme, and many others have said that they were able to take on somebody else because they no longer had to pay business rates under that scheme. Around two months before the small business bonus scheme was introduced, I told a lady who runs a business in Kingussie that she was about to benefit from it. She did not know what it meant and she showed me her bill, which was quite large. I explained that she would receive a reduction of £2,000 or £3,000. Her reaction was a long pause followed by the remark, “Mr Ewing, I love you.” We do not expect that reaction from every constituent.

I am happy to draw my remarks to a close, and thank every member for their contribution to the debate.

There is much in what Professor Alexander says.

The drugs strategy “The Road to Recovery: A New Approach to Tackling Scotland’s Drug Problem” already takes account of the economic links between drug addiction and poverty. As for the member’s suggestion that we abolish GDP, I have to say that that decision is slightly above my pay grade—at least at the current time. However, just yesterday on my last ministerial engagement—at least for the time being—I had the pleasure of visiting Cothrom Eile, which is funded by the Mungo Foundation and provides just the kind of facility that we need. I pay tribute to Bill Wilson for the passionate, articulate and informed way in which he has championed the cause of tackling poverty in this Parliament.

I acknowledge Margo MacDonald’s lifetime interest in these matters and pay tribute to the work that she has done. This Parliament does not have power over the classification of illegal drugs—would that it did—but we certainly work constructively with the Westminster Government on all these matters. I thank all parties in the Parliament and all members for the approach that they have taken to “The Road to Recovery”, which has seen us all work together to try to deal with the scourge of drug addiction in Scotland.

The Scottish Government is committed to making our communities safer and stronger. With record numbers of police on our streets and a renewed focus on prevention and education, that commitment has resulted in the lowest levels of recorded crime since 1978. Our priorities for tackling antisocial behaviour are set out in “Promoting Positive Outcomes”, which was published in spring 2009. That approach continues to have the full support of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland, the Society of Local Authority Chief Executives and Senior Managers, academia, the third sector and other partners. The first annual progress report to Parliament on implementing the antisocial behaviour framework was published on 30 November 2010 and endorsed by the Parliament on 16 December.

We have always acknowledged that legislative measures are one tool in the box that local authorities may use as appropriate. I hope that all members also acknowledge that, during the parliamentary session, with the funding and supply of more than 1,000 additional police officers on our streets, crime has fallen to its lowest level for 32 years. We are never complacent, but that is a proud record that we will be pleased to commend to the electorate in due course.

I express my gratitude for the way in which Rhoda Grant has approached the necessary amendments to the bill from stage 2. We appreciate that, and our officials and Rhoda Grant’s advisers have worked together closely to bring about the results that I imagine we will see later today. The Government supports amendment 1, which will make some technical changes to the bill as a consequence of the Damages (Scotland) Bill, which passed stage 3 on 3 March. Amendment 1 agreed to. Section 3—Breach of interdict with power of arrest

These are important amendments. Following stage 2, two main issues were outstanding: the labelling of interdicts and interdicts protecting a girlfriend or boyfriend. Amendments 2 to 4 deal with both of those issues. Amendment 2 amends the current section 3(1)(za), so that it refers to the determination by the courts being introduced by amendment 4. Amendment 4 then provides that someone who is obtaining an interdict or who has obtained an interdict may apply to the court for a determination that the interdict is a domestic abuse interdict. The court may make such a determination if the interdict protects the applicant against a person who is or was the applicant’s spouse, civil partner or cohabitant or who is or was in “an intimate personal relationship” with the applicant. The latter category is designed to protect girlfriends and boyfriends of the interdicted person. As Rhoda Grant has said—and as we will all remember from stage 2, when she alluded to this—table 10 of the “Statistical Bulletin: Crime and Justice Series: Domestic Abuse Recorded by the Police in Scotland, 2009-10” shows that 11,379 incidents related to violence between partners. Some of those incidents may have occurred between civil partners, but it is likely that the majority of the people involved were not in a formal relationship. Therefore, after considering the matter carefully, the Government concluded that we agreed with Rhoda Grant that interdicts covering boyfriends and girlfriends should be covered by the bill. Scottish Women’s Aid overwhelmingly supports that position and has stated that it is vital that all those who are at risk of domestic abuse from their partner or former partner should be protected. Amendment 4 attempts to deal with at least one of the issues that were identified by Bill Aitken and Robert Brown. We consider that “intimate” means that there is a close relationship, but it does not necessarily have to be of a sexual nature—it could be a close emotional relationship in much the same way that a relationship between spouses, civil partners or cohabitants does not have to be sexual.

That is not our intention in respect of amendment 4. We have framed the wording carefully to cover boyfriends and girlfriends.

As I said, that is not our intention. As members will appreciate, the drafting has been framed carefully by the Scottish Government legal department, with advice from officials. It is intended to—and we believe it will—capture appropriate relationships between boyfriends and girlfriends but not brothers and sisters.

We believe that it covers boyfriend and girlfriend situations. We accept that the wording that we have come up with covers a wide variety of relationships. Ultimately, we have accepted the advice of the Scottish Government legal department to use the wording in this way, because we believe that that best covers the need to protect those who are in a relationship that is not a husband-and-wife relationship or a civil-partnership relationship—in other words, one that is a boyfriend-and-girlfriend relationship. Sadly, that non-formalised relationship is a type of relationship in which there are not just hundreds or a few thousand but, perhaps, more than 10,000 instances a year in which there is a need for interdict and protection. I hope that that is clear. I can confirm that, as I have already said, family members are not covered by the amendment. I hope that that clarification is welcomed by members of the committee, who, I appreciate, put a great deal of time and effort into carefully considering these matters. When interpreting the provision on boyfriends and girlfriends, I expect that the courts will follow the principle of interpretation, whereby words that have a wide meaning but which are associated in the text with words that have a more limited meaning are taken to be restricted, by implication, to matters of the same character. That formal principle of interpretation will, I believe, help matters when it comes to the task that judges will have with regard to interpreting these provisions. The reference in amendment 4 to “personal” is designed to exclude business partners, workmates and other relationships that are professional and social, as opposed to personal. Any abuse between, for example, business partners and workmates may well be shocking and disgraceful, but it would not be regarded as domestic abuse. For the breach of an interdict to be a criminal offence, a number of factors must be in place. The interdict must be granted on or after the point at which section 3 comes into force; there must be a determination that the interdict is a domestic abuse interdict; there must be an extant power of arrest; and the power of arrest and the determination must have been served on the interdicted person. On boyfriends and girlfriends, we consider that the amendment achieves the objective of protecting boyfriends and girlfriends without casting the net too widely. We have had the opportunity in this debate to pin down that matter and, I hope, answer the concerns that were expressed by Mr Brown and Mr Aitken. Therefore, the Government supports the amendments.

I am grateful for the opportunity to outline the Government’s approach to the bill. In one unfortunate respect, the bill is timely, in that the incidence of domestic abuse has been highlighted recently following old firm games. Domestic abuse is a stain on Scottish society generally. We need to ensure that our action to tackle domestic abuse is effective in a wide range of areas, including those that the bill covers, such as civil protection orders. Indeed, that is why the Government has been supportive of most aspects of the bill, albeit that we had some concerns that were shared by others. Rhoda Grant mentioned section 2, on legal aid. We were concerned about potential costs and about how the section would work in practice. I am thinking of multicrave actions in which protection orders and other outcomes such as divorce or contact and residence are sought. The Justice Committee also raised concerns in its stage 1 report. It concluded: “the Committee does not support section 2 which in effect would make legal aid free to all for applications to a civil court for an interdict with a power of arrest, or a non-harassment order, where domestic abuse was involved. In the view of the Committee, this provision would create an inequality of arms between the pursuer and the defender. Additionally, the Committee is not persuaded that domestic abuse cases should be prioritised above other cases for the purposes of legal aid.” Although the Government opposed section 2 and it has been removed from the bill, I recognise the point that Rhoda Grant made. She alluded to the Scottish Legal Aid Board’s comprehensive statement on how it deals with legal aid applications that relate to domestic abuse. In addition, through the Legal Services (Scotland) Act 2010, the board has been given a duty to monitor the availability and accessibility of legal services and to advise ministers accordingly. Indeed, the measure was incorporated in the 2010 act at my instigation. To help it to implement its new role, the board is setting up an access to legal services reference group. Scottish Women’s Aid is being invited to join the group as a core member. In her opening remarks, Rhoda Grant stated that in certain cases people still face barriers to access to justice. I give her an undertaking that if any such cases are drawn to our attention we will study the circumstances most carefully and explore with the Scottish Legal Aid Board whether more needs to be done. I must point out, however, that the Government has extended the availability of civil legal aid on financial grounds to around 50 per cent of the population—and we are proud of having done so, given that our priority in that regard has been to extend access to justice. Another area of concern related to the definition of domestic abuse in section 4, which came in for some criticism. We shared concerns that it was too wide and agreed with its removal at stage 2. However, that move raised questions about how best to describe interdicts covered by the bill, particularly in relation to interdicts protecting boyfriends and girlfriends. As I said a moment ago, the bill now refers to people in intimate personal relationships, and we do not consider that such relationships need be sexual. We welcome the bill. The Government will monitor the bill’s impact; improve its information on civil protection orders to tackle domestic abuse; and continue to examine all aspects of our work on tackling domestic abuse in our efforts to remove this stain from Scottish society.

Maureen Macmillan was referred to earlier in proceedings, and I am delighted to see that she is in the public gallery witnessing the debate. I recall from stage 1 that Rhoda Grant mentioned that it was Maureen Macmillan’s idea that the bill should be proposed in the first place. That has proven to be a deft and effective piece of delegation. I warmly congratulate Rhoda Grant on the work that she has done—it cannot have been easy, as the bill was complicated—and on the pragmatic and constructive approach that characterised her dealings with me and my officials throughout. I also thank the officials for their Trojan efforts throughout the bill’s passage through the Parliament. No one pretends that the bill itself will remove the stain of domestic abuse from Scottish society. Tackling domestic abuse effectively involves a huge range of measures, and many members have highlighted the gravity of the problem that we face. Bill Aitken only a moment ago highlighted the appalling assaults on pregnant women, and Stewart Maxwell reminded us that the record shows that, of the incidents of domestic abuse that take place in Scotland each year, fewer than 6,000 are reported on a Tuesday night but more than 10,000 are reported on a Saturday or Sunday. It is perhaps because of those shocking statistics that the police throughout Scotland are taking proactive measures and chapping on the doors of those with a record of domestic abuse to warn them that, if they misdemean again, perhaps on particular occasions such as old firm matches, the boys in blue will be watching what they are up to. I think that all members support that sort of proactive effort. Nigel Don, as he often does, raised points that others did not, but it was fair of him to do so. He said that there was a lack of good information. I am determined that the Government will produce better information on civil protection orders to protect against domestic abuse. We will work closely, as we have already done, with Scottish Women’s Aid. We will amend the Scottish Government’s website to ensure that it reflects the changes. We will consider whether a hard-copy leaflet on civil protection orders would be helpful. We will involve fully Scottish Women’s Aid in all the work that we do in that respect. Nigel Don echoed earlier concerns about whether the boyfriend/girlfriend amendment would inadvertently capture family members, which the committee did not intend should happen. By way of providing further ballast to the assurances that I have already provided, I state clearly to the chamber that when drafting the amendments we considered whether a specific exclusion was needed for family members. We decided that it was not needed, given that the new category will be read as including relationships that are like the relationship between spouses, civil partners and cohabitants. Therefore, it was not necessary to incorporate in an amendment the exclusion for family members, because the new category will be read as—I have been waiting 12 years for the chance to use this phrase—ejusdem generis with other relationships such as spouses and civil partners. I hope that that clarity will assist those who have the job of interpreting the legislation that we will produce today. We as a Government have sought to tackle the issues surrounding domestic abuse with the co-operation of all parties in a very serious way. More than £44 million has been allocated over the period 2008 to 2011 to tackle violence against women. Seventy-three projects have been funded through the violence against women funding stream. There has been three-year funding for specialist children’s services through the children’s services Women’s Aid fund. All local rape crisis centres have been funded for a further three years. The children experiencing domestic abuse recovery programme has been launched. There has been funding for the Scottish domestic abuse helpline and national rape crisis centre, and almost £2 million has gone to fund the advice, support, safety and information services together project—the support service for victims going through the domestic abuse court. Rhoda Grant mentioned some of those wider issues. I am happy to confirm that more than £44 million has been devoted to those areas over the past three years—a hefty increase in the funding, which I believe has had the support of all members. I thank Rhoda Grant for the constructive approach that she has taken to the bill. I congratulate her and all members who have participated in this debate and provided Scotland with this much-needed legislation.

Will Mr Brown give way?

Robert Brown says that the SNP Government micromanages, but does he recall that it was the Labour-Liberal Administration that said that £6 million must be used by local authorities to procure junior antisocial behaviour orders? Twelve such orders were procured at a cost of £0.5 million each. Was that not micromanagement and does he now regret it?

The Family Law (Scotland) Act 2006 amended the law on damages for wrongful death to provide that relatives by affinity—for instance, in-laws—would no longer be regarded as the victim’s immediate family for the purpose of claiming damages for non-patrimonial loss. That approach was replicated by the Scottish Law Commission in its report and draft bill, and by Mr Butler in the bill that he introduced. The current Administration had no intention of reversing that approach, certainly not without consultation and debate, but a technical flaw in one of the stage 2 amendments appears inadvertently to have had that consequence. Amendment 1 will bring the bill back to the status quo ante in that regard. Amendment 3, on the other hand, will make a limited but deliberate change in the approach of the law. Currently, a stepgrandchild or stepgrandparent counts as a relative and may claim for patrimonial loss but not for non-patrimonial loss. It has been put to us that that is anomalous and that someone who had been accepted by the deceased as his own grandchild should be able to make a claim for non-patrimonial loss. Likewise, a person who had accepted someone as his own grandchild should be able to claim in the event of the child’s death. There appears to us to be merit in that argument and, therefore, amendment 3 addresses it. I move amendment 1.

Amendment 2 will delete the word “annual” from the phrase “net annual income” in section 7(1)(a). Its inclusion there seems unnecessary and potentially confusing, as it is only in certain circumstances that it will be appropriate for the court to have regard to the annual figure. In other circumstances, it may be more appropriate for the court to have regard to the monthly, weekly or even daily figure. In those circumstances, the reference to “annual” would seem inappropriate. Amendment 4 aims to ensure an effective relationship with other statutes, some of which refer to common-law awards of solatium in respect of the loss of a relative that predated the Damages (Scotland) Act 1976. To ensure that they also continue to have effect, it is necessary to provide that those references should in future be read as references to awards under section 4(2)(b) of the bill. Amendment 9 will remove a problematic provision from schedule 1 to the bill. That provision would insert an apparently inappropriate reference to the Social Security (Recovery of Benefits) Act 1997 into the Administration of Justice Act 1982. Whatever the aim, the effect seems to be to invite the suggestion that the benefits to which the 1997 act applies can be taken into account in the assessment of damages. That risks contradicting a clear statement to the contrary in the 1997 act—hence the recommendation that the provision be removed from the bill. Amendment 10 is consequential on amendment 9. I move amendment 2.

I say at the outset that I share Bill Butler’s sentiments about the importance of bringing the legislation into effect as soon as possible, so I make it clear that I want to see and am determined to ensure that it is commenced at the very earliest practical opportunity. I am happy to give that absolute assurance to Mr Butler and I am grateful to him for the way in which he has moved amendment 5 and for the prior discussions that we have had there anent. With that in mind, amendment 5 is a temptation. It would result in the legislation coming fully into effect on the day after royal assent, perhaps in early April. Unfortunately, that is not a course that I can recommend, but I will set out in a little detail the reasons why I have to say that as minister. The key consideration is that, as is normal, we need to ensure that proper provision is made for the legislation to come into force. That includes making transitional and saving provisions to ensure that the move from the old regime to the new is smooth and that nothing and no one falls between the legislative cracks. I am sure that Mr Butler will agree that that is important, particularly when we are dealing with people’s rights and obligations. I do not want to see any bereaved relative losing out or being involved in an unnecessary dispute simply because, in our eagerness to legislate, we missed a trick. We in the chamber have heard before that some defendants will exploit any loophole and that is one reason to ensure that we take no undue risks. If amendment 5 were accepted and the act commenced immediately after royal assent, an order under section 18 would be needed for such transitional arrangements. The order would have to come into force immediately and would have to be made during the election purdah period. If that happened, we would be denying Parliament its scrutiny function and breaching the requirement in section 28 of the Interpretation and Legislative Reform (Scotland) Act 2010 for the Parliament to have 28 days to consider a negative instrument before it comes into force. I should also say that acts do not ordinarily commence earlier than two months after royal assent has been given as it is recognised that the public, lawyers and other interested parties need time to prepare for the new law coming into force. There are reasons why it would be better for the act to come into force by a commencement order two months after royal assent has been given, when Parliament will be in session. Although commencement orders require to be laid before Parliament only as a courtesy, Parliament is normally given 10 to 14 days’ notice. Of course, the Scottish Law Commission’s draft provides for the act to come into force by commencement order and recognises that transitional and supplementary provisions might be required by the inclusion of section 18. Indeed, amendment 8 improves the position for quick commencement by enabling transitional and saving provisions to be made in the commencement order itself. The amendments in my name allow for the implementation of the bill to be as speedy as reasonably possible and should enable the act to come into force as early as two months after royal assent has been given. Amendment 8 will enable the commencement order to contain transitional provisions without the need for a separate order to be made under section 18. Amendment 6 provides that the separate order-making power in section 18 comes into force on royal assent. Both amendments will enable ministers to expedite commencement and they have been lodged at my express behest in order to achieve that objective. I hope that what I have said, which I am sure will have received the closest of attention from all members, will have persuaded colleagues to support amendments 6 to 8. During yesterday’s stage 3 debate on the Wildlife and Natural Environment (Scotland) Bill, I heard Peter Peacock say that, when he was a minister, he was sometimes required to read out technical arguments with which he might not necessarily have fully agreed. This is not one of those occasions, regretfully. Were there any way that I felt would be safe to commence the legislation more speedily than we can, I assure Bill Butler that I would have pursued that avenue. Unfortunately there is no such way. However, we have taken measures to expedite the time of commencement. I conclude by saying that I hope that Bill Butler will have taken some comfort from my assurances about our intention that the law will come into force at the earliest possible and practical date.

I begin by belatedly responding to Robert Brown’s earlier point by advising him that, under section 17, nothing affects proceedings that are commenced before section 16 comes into force. The legislation will apply only to court actions that are raised after its commencement. The Parliament has a proud record on modernising the law on damages, although the need for further reform is well recognised. I had announced plans for a programme that covered three Scottish Law Commission reports—those on psychiatric injury, time bar and wrongful death—but when Bill Butler lodged his final proposal for the bill to address wrongful death issues we adjusted to focus on those first. I hope and believe that Bill Butler agrees that we have maintained a good and constructive dialogue in the past year. We have engaged fully over a long period to good effect. We worked at all times with the members of the Justice Committee as a team who had one objective: to improve the terms of the original bill to meet the matters that arose in evidence. In particular, I thank the former convener of the committee for his excellent convenership. [Applause.] The Scottish Government issued a consultation paper last July so that we could contribute constructively to proceedings. Our objective is legislation that ensures that the victims of wrongful death and their relatives get a fair deal and that they have the right, without unnecessary aggravation or delay, to secure a reasonable level of compensation for their financial, physical and emotional losses. The Law Commission concluded that, for patrimonial loss, the best approach was a fully standardised one that, disregarding relatives’ income, works on the basis that fatally injured individuals would have been spending 25 per cent of their income on themselves and 75 per cent on their family’s requirements. That was a central feature of the recommended regime and, with some qualifications, it remains at the heart of the bill. I should recap the main qualifications that were introduced at stage 2, on which Bill Butler has touched. The first related to the proposed standard 25 per cent/75 per cent assumption. Although that was supported by many stakeholders—including Aviva and the Forum of Scottish Claims Managers from the defenders’ perspective—there were concerns that a one-size-fits-all approach could lead to instances of injustice. The Justice Committee concluded: “If a rebuttable presumption could be drafted in such a way that it provides flexibility only when it is needed, without undermining the benefits of a fixed deduction in the majority of cases, it might still offer the best way forward.” It was agreed that the standard assumption could be set aside in those few cases in which its rigid application would lead to a “manifestly and materially unfair” outcome. That should allow some flexibility, but it requires a very high test to be met. A second qualification related to the disregarding of the surviving spouse’s income. Let me make it crystal clear that we agree that a relative’s income should generally be disregarded. It should be taken into account only in those truly exceptional cases in which ignoring it would lead to a manifestly and materially unfair result—and then only in relation to fixing the appropriate percentage. Otherwise, it should be of no account at all. The bill now directs that, whenever a qualifying partner or dependent child survives the deceased, 75 per cent of the deceased’s net income or, in very exceptional circumstances, such other percentage as the court may fix, must be taken as having been spent in supporting family and relatives. That is the measure of the relatives’ loss; no further account can be taken of the income of a surviving spouse in calculating the level of support. It can no longer be argued that the Brown v Ferguson formula is relevant. The result of all this work is, I believe, a much improved piece of legislation—one that, as Bill Butler has argued, will deliver a better approach to claims for wrongful death. On behalf of the Scottish Government, I am pleased to commend the bill to Parliament.

I believe that in its approach to the bill this Parliament has done itself what Donald Dewar might have described as a modicum of credit. In a cross-party show of purpose, colleagues have been focused on doing what is right for the ultimate victims of wrongdoing—those who lose their lives, or who lose their loved ones. However, the Parliament has not done this in a starry-eyed way. There has been no writing of blank cheques, either on our own bank account or anyone else’s. We have not simply rubber-stamped the recommendations that came from the Scottish Law Commission; still less have we taken those recommendations and loosened them. Instead, we have remembered that there is a balance to be struck and, with input from stakeholders from all quarters, we have taken a compassionate, but also a hard-headed look at the commission’s recommendations, and strengthened them where it appeared appropriate. We have sought to consider the interests of the taxpayer and the insurance policy holder, as well as the interests of the wrongfully killed and their relatives. Of course, the bill is about money. It is about using money, as far as is possible, to put someone back into the financial position that they would have been in had the fatal injury not occurred. The bill’s financial implications were always going to be a source of contention. Some people might think that the bill gives them too little; others might think that the bill takes too much from them. On the latter category, I am disappointed by the tone of the representations from the Forum of Scottish Claims Managers during the past few weeks. I do not have time in the debate to respond to all the forum’s complaints, but I have written to it in some detail. The forum’s estimated price tag for the bill—at least £52 million a year—appears to lack a firm foundation and is wholly out of line with other predictions that I have seen. Also, unlike the estimates that Mr Butler provided to the Finance Committee, the forum’s estimate seems not to be based on detailed assessment of real-world casework from any of its many member companies. I am sure that members are aware that nearly six months ago the Scottish Government responded to the Finance Committee’s request for commentary on the financial data that Bill Butler had provided. The worked assessment, which has been in the public domain since then, suggested tentatively that the data indicated annual costs in the region of £4.7 million to £5.9 million. That is not an insubstantial amount, but it is hugely below the £52 million estimate of the Forum of Scottish Claims Managers. As members of all parties said, the bill’s purpose is to provide fair compensation in an efficient manner, where death has been wrongfully caused. It is, in essence, about putting people back into the financial position that they would have been in if there had been no fatality. It is the cost of doing the right thing. I am not persuaded by suggestions that the cost of doing the right thing is too high and that people who have the misfortune to suffer the ultimate loss should not be properly supported. The Government’s view is that even in these financially challenging times—perhaps especially in these financially challenging times—we should not be kicking people who are already down and desperate through no fault of their own. The bill will provide financial justice for the bereaved. I am pleased to have worked with Bill Butler throughout the passage of the bill and I echo all members’ remarks about the hard work that he undertook, with his advisers, to help to pilot through a bill that was not exactly straightforward. We thank him for that effort. The Government has been pleased to play a part in helping to turn the bill into what I hope and expect will be a good piece of legislation. I thank all members of the Justice Committee, most particularly the former convener, Bill Aitken. I support the bill. It is a good bill and this is a good day for the Scottish Parliament.

Domestic abuse is completely unacceptable. That is why the Government acted swiftly to legislate last year to close a gap in the criminal law so that cases of domestic abuse can continue to be prosecuted under our new offence of threatening or abusive behaviour. The Government will carry on working closely with all key partners, including the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, the police and the key support agencies to ensure that perpetrators are held to account and that victims have access to appropriate support. We will continue to tackle the issue head on, with funding of more than £11 million proposed for 2011-12, which is 40 per cent higher than the budget in 2006-07.

I acknowledge Marlyn Glen’s long-standing interest in and campaigning on the issue. On her first question, the Scottish Government supports Scottish Women’s Aid’s together we can stop it campaign. My colleague the Minister for Housing and Communities signed up to that campaign at its launch. On the domestic abuse court in Glasgow, the member correctly says that we have developed from that a toolkit that we believe should be applied and available throughout Scotland so that the advantages that are gained from that successful experience in Glasgow can be felt throughout the country. We will continue to work with all our colleagues to ensure that that takes place.

I acknowledge Anne McLaughlin’s role in campaigning on that important matter. As many members from all political parties have done, she rightly raises the issues of violence against men. She makes excellent points. We believe strongly that services should be available to meet the needs of anyone who experiences abuse—women or men. We have provided funding for the men’s advice line so that male victims can receive support and information. We are exploring with male victims and organisations that support them what the service need is, so I can give Anne McLaughlin the assurance that she seeks.

As the First Minister said earlier, serious offences receive severe sentences. Any serious offence of, for example, assault will be extremely seriously dealt with by the court. It is for the court to decide the appropriate sentence under the law that the Parliament has passed. Mr Lamont will, I hope, agree that we also need to address Scotland’s problem with alcohol. Although alcohol can never be an excuse for domestic violence, it is sadly an exacerbating factor in many cases of violence against women. I hope that he, too, will therefore recognise that we need to take measures such as minimum pricing that will more effectively address the abuse of alcohol.

Cathy Peattie is quite correct to say that the vast majority of victims of domestic abuse are female: that is the case, although men are also abused. I certainly agree with her, and I acknowledge that she too has campaigned on the issue for many years, as have people from all parties in the chamber. It is essential that we work closely with the police, the Crown Office and the fiscals, as we have been doing. I take this opportunity to praise the proactive work that has been done throughout the country. For example, police officers contact and visit—especially before certain significant football matches—individuals who are known to have committed domestic abuse in the past, and point out that if they do the same thing again, there is only one place that they will end up, and that is in a cell. We acknowledge the work of the police and the justice authorities in that regard, and I am pleased that it has such support among members on all sides of the chamber.

The Scottish Government recognises the important contribution that the third sector makes to supporting Scotland’s economic recovery, creating employment and skills opportunities, improving public services and supporting communities. We are committed to continuing to support the sector in whatever ways we can. We recognise the enormous contribution that our volunteers make to the lives of individuals and communities throughout Scotland. Volunteers often play a major part in building the confidence of those who feel marginalised in our society and in helping them to realise their potential and develop their talents and skills so that they can go on to lead healthy and fulfilled lives and to become economically active. Organisations such as Crimestoppers, the Association of Scottish Neighbourhood Watches and others have all played an important role in achieving the lowest recorded crime level in 32 years.

Yes—I confirm that the Scottish Government will not deliberately favour large organisations at the expense of small ones in funding applications. I am therefore happy to reassure Maureen Watt that charities that have expressed such a concern to her will have every chance of securing funding if their bids are successful enough. I pay tribute to the work that has been done in Aberdeen to tackle successfully the unacceptable waiting times for drug treatment and assessment that prevailed there some years ago. I discussed that with Richard Carey of NHS Grampian just last week.

We have directed the resources from the Scottish taxpayer not to assessing what might go wrong in the future but to funding 1,000 extra police officers, to ensure that Scotland remains the safer place that it is now. We have supported the work of voluntary organisations in tackling crime; in particular, we have supported the work of organisations that contribute to tackling the problem of Scotland’s relationship with alcohol, which underlies a substantial proportion of the crime that is committed in the country. That work and other work of third sector bodies would have been considerably supported had we been able to add to our repertoire of measures minimum pricing for alcohol, which the Labour Party rejected.

The Scottish Government places high importance on preventive work with vulnerable young people who are at risk of becoming involved in criminal or antisocial behaviour. We are committed to addressing the causes as well as the effects of youth crime and antisocial behaviour, with a clear focus on prevention and early intervention. There is broad consensus among key stakeholders that that is the correct approach. Data published in the “Scottish Policing Performance Framework: Annual Report 2009-10” suggest that the approach is starting to show results, with recorded youth crime falling by 12 per cent between 2009 and 2010.

I am aware of that excellent scheme in Hamilton and I congratulate all who are involved. We shall seek to protect the cashback scheme by maximising the amount of money that we recover from drug dealers and organised criminals throughout Scotland, £26 million of which has been used in the cashback scheme by the Government to help give 300,000 young people across Scotland choices and chances in life. We are determined that the scheme will continue for the next four years, as it has been a success for the past four.

We welcome the debate. There is plainly a broad consensus today, which continues the consensus reached on the previous occasions on which we have debated this very important matter. As Nigel Don said, it is right that we take time to debate double jeopardy and that we debate and consider it in great detail and at length. It is essential that we pass an effective bill that achieves the objectives that we all share. That is our predominant duty—as a Government especially, but also as members of the Parliament—in reforming the law of double jeopardy, which I think a vast majority of the public wishes us to do. The law of double jeopardy is a vital safeguard, and it is right that the cabinet secretary and the Justice Committee convener began by setting that out. We are not scrapping the principle that has served Scotland so well for centuries, and which was well described by Robert Brown—drawing, no doubt, on his extensive legal experience. The principle is important for three reasons. First, it allows finality in criminal proceedings. People who have been acquitted in a court will have gone through the fire and the ordeal of a trial—with all the pressure that is put on any individual who finds himself in the dock, especially in a case in which a very serious crime has been libelled against him. That individual and his family will have faced that pressure—it is an experience that, as far as I am aware, none of us here has undergone. It is essential that an individual who has been acquitted—against whom the state has not made the charge—is then able to get on with his life. If that were not the case, individuals who were acquitted might live in constant fear of a retrial. It is the existence of the law of double jeopardy that marks out what we all regard as a civilised legal system for people whom we would otherwise view in a different light entirely. It offers a necessary finality. Secondly, the law of double jeopardy limits the power of the state and the ways in which it can pursue citizens through the criminal courts. Thirdly, it also provides protection from the anxiety and humiliation that repeated trials would undoubtedly cause accused persons. It is agreed across all parties, and it has been acknowledged among all the members who have taken part in the debate, that there should, however, be changes to the current system. Those changes have been considered extremely carefully and thoroughly, first by the Scottish Law Commission and then by the Parliament. I will deal first with the issue of tainted acquittals. On trials that have been tainted, it is essential, as a matter of principle, that people should not benefit from attempts to pervert the course of justice. Many speakers commented on that. There are myriad ways in which trials can be tainted. Jurors and witnesses can be bribed. Witnesses can be threatened—for example, so that they do not identify an accused person as the person alleged to have carried out the crime. A witness can be threatened with violence either against members of his family or against himself. That is a real scenario; it does not exist purely in the pages of John Grisham novels. It is quite easy to recognise that, in some sections of society, witnesses may be and have been placed under such pressure. It has emerged during the debate that all members agree that if the trial is tainted, there should be an opportunity for a retrial, whether the crime of which the accused person was originally acquitted is of the most serious sort or less serious. Where there is taint, there is injustice, and there must be an opportunity to put it right. That principle was expounded by Dave Thompson, and he was absolutely correct in what he said. There has not been a fair first trial in such cases, and it is therefore right that there should be an opportunity for a further trial so that a false acquittal can be set aside. Any offence against justice is a serious matter. In his closing speech, Bill Aitken touched on the possible effect of merging elements of the new-evidence test and of the admissions exception. Both admissions and other types of new evidence can create a compelling case for a new trial. However, it is important to stress that for an admission to justify a new trial the bill as drafted requires that it must be “credible”. That answers Bill Aitken’s point about instances when a number of individuals—and, I think he said, their auntie—come forward, for reasons best known to themselves, to claim that they carried out the crime. Indeed, financial reasons could be involved, as Stewart Stevenson said. The admission must be credible, it must be new and it must be corroborated by other evidence. It must also be in the interests of justice to have a new trial. Those are all substantial requirements—it is important to stress that. We will amend the bill so that an admission will have substantially to strengthen the case against the accused in order for it to justify a retrial, and it must also be highly likely that a reasonable jury would have convicted had the admission been available.

If Robert Brown does not mind, I decline his invitation to respond to his question with a definitive answer—for good reason. I will not respond now with specific and definitive answers on how we will frame amendments. However, I can say, and it is correct for me to do so, that we will reflect carefully on each contribution that members have made in the debate, and we will then lodge our stage 2 amendments. We have already determined, as the cabinet secretary announced, the purpose of the amendments that we seek to make and to which I have alluded. However, although my contribution will probably not turn out to be short, it will not be definitive on how we will seek to amend the bill. We have to get it right, and it would be foolish of me to make commitments or give undertakings on the hoof. I have not done that for four years, and I am certainly not going to start today. The bill is plainly not intended to encourage the reopening of cases involving low-level offences as a result of an admission; rather, it is about the principle of pursuing people who boast of their guilt. I hope that we can all support that position. If I understood him correctly, I think that in his closing speech Bill Aitken proposed that we merge section 3, on admissions, with section 4, on new evidence. I will make a few points about that. There are some points of difference between admissions and new evidence. First, the section on new evidence is limited to a specific range of offences, but as I have just set out, the admissions exception should be capable of covering any offence. That is a difference between two of the reasons that justify the departure from the general principle of double jeopardy. Secondly, the section on new evidence allows a person to be reprosecuted only once for the offence, whereas it should be possible for an application to be made under the admissions exception regardless of whether there has already been a retrial. In other words, if an individual is acquitted after a retrial, but then boasts of having got away with it, that should not be acceptable. Although I suspect that the number of such cases will be very small indeed, the example illustrates the difference between the two categories. The new-evidence provisions cover murder, rape, culpable homicide and serious sexual offences. The difficult issue on which many of the speeches focused is how we tackle which offences should permit a departure from the general principle. Do we list those offences? Do we try to define when the general principle can be disapplied by providing a different test—one that is based on whether the case was originally tried in the High Court or whether the crime would normally be dealt with on indictment rather than by way of summary procedure? These are difficult areas and the questions are finely balanced, so we will consider the matter further. We accept that it is difficult appropriately to define the scope of the exception by using a list alone. However, because most offences can be tried on indictment or in the High Court, an approach based on that test would make the range of offences that could be reprosecuted following new evidence much wider than the list in the bill. One option would be to restrict retrials in such cases to those that were initially prosecuted under solemn procedure or in the High Court, but to retain the list. I say that as a general response to that whole area, which was probably the area that was most widely covered by members in today’s debate.

We will certainly consider that approach before we lodge stage 2 amendments. I am sure that we will wish to involve the committee in discussions prior to the stage 2 proceedings so that we can get such matters settled as well as we can. The bill contains the power, using the affirmative procedure, to add or remove offences from the list, so Parliament will have full scope to consider any such changes. It will be for the Government and Parliament to consider what would be appropriate in each case when change is proposed. There is an important issue around the new-evidence test. Many speakers in the debate referred to DNA evidence as the most likely source of new evidence that leads to a retrial. Indeed, although I do not plan to mention individual cases, members referred to the one case in England in which a retrial led to a conviction on the basis of new evidence. What should our new-evidence test be? It is important to say that the Scottish Law Commission devised our test after a thorough analysis of the law. The test looks at the effect of the evidence on the case as a whole. It is a high-level test, but it is not the English test. The commission looked at the test that is used in England and Wales, which requires new evidence to be compelling in its own right. It concluded that, in practice, the English courts had found that test to be unworkable because it does not permit a retrial when the new evidence is unremarkable by itself but, in combination with the existing evidence, puts the case in a compelling light. It is important to accept that the SLC’s judgment on that is correct. It concluded that in practice the English courts looked at the effect of new evidence in strengthening the original case. That is much more in line with the provisions in our bill. However, a brief perusal of a submission from the Director of Public Prosecutions in England reminded me that, during the five years in which the law has been in force south of the border, there have been only 10 applications to the High Court for retrial; I am advised that four of them led to a conviction. That is an important reminder for us. As Mr Pringle and other members said, relatively few cases will end up in retrials. That is an important point because many people have legitimate concerns about what we are seeking to do. The Green MSPs are opposed to the bill, although they are not here to state their position today, which is a shame. Nonetheless, I mention that for the record.

I was just getting into my stride, Presiding Officer.

Certainly. I thank all those who contributed to the debate. It is essential that we should be able to bring people to justice when new evidence emerges. We are trying to perfect the removal of an injustice that has existed for perhaps too long, and I am grateful that we have the support of the parties that have been represented in the debate.

The domestic abuse court was established in Glasgow because of specific circumstances, primarily the volume and seriousness of cases being reported, and the lessons learned from that court have been used to develop a domestic abuse toolkit that is designed to help local sheriffdoms to decide how best to arrange domestic abuse cases in their area and recognises that approaches may vary depending on the number and pattern of cases being reported at local level. It will be for local justice partners to decide how to apply the toolkit in each sheriffdom.

I recognise the member’s interest in this area; indeed, we are working with her to improve the law for all victims of domestic abuse. As she knows, the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service takes such matters very seriously all around Scotland and, as a case in point, the service provides specialist domestic abuse training for all legal staff. That is extremely important and the combination of victim support and effective court proceedings is helping to reduce repeat victimisation. Through the Minister for Housing and Communities, we have made members aware that the Scottish Government will continue to provide support and assistance during 2011-12, and it is appropriate that all local criminal justice partners not only consider how best to support victims of domestic abuse in their area, but learn the lessons from the work that has been successfully carried out in Glasgow.

I congratulate Rhoda Grant on introducing the bill, and I should perhaps also congratulate Maureen Macmillan on what appears to have been an extremely effective—not to mention ingenious—piece of delegation of all the hard work to Rhoda Grant. I also thank the Justice Committee for its work, which has been extremely useful for the consideration of the bill. Domestic abuse is abhorrent, repellent and a stain on Scotland. There has been a change in attitudes over the years, but we still have a very serious problem. In 2009-10, the police recorded 51,926 incidents of domestic abuse. That is a shocking figure, which shows why we need to consider further legislation. The Government supports section 1, which removes the need to show a course of conduct. I am grateful to the committee for its summation of the evidence in that regard, including that from Scottish Women’s Aid, which argued that the existing law is both ineffective and inaccessible. We have concerns about the costs and other aspects of section 2, as Rhoda Grant said. For that reason, we do not support section 2, nor, indeed, does the Justice Committee. We agree with the reasons that the committee’s convener set out in his exposition. Section 2 seeks to remove the legal aid means test when applicants are seeking a protective order to tackle domestic abuse. SLAB advised us that the potential costs are hard to estimate. We estimated the costs on the basis of rises in the number of orders sought. If demand for orders increased by 10 per cent, the estimated extra cost would be £529,000; if the increase was 20 per cent, it would be £725,000; and if the increase was 50 per cent, it would be £1.3 million—a not inconsiderable sum. Those arbitrary rates of increase were selected at random by SLAB to give an indicative figure for what the extra costs might be. The increase in demand for orders could be much higher than 50 per cent. It is ironic that the more effective the legislation is, the greater the cost will be. It might be that people are currently put off from raising actions because of misunderstanding and unnecessary fears about whether legal aid will be available. I hope that we can address the matter by providing clearer information, and I have written to Rhoda Grant today along those lines. I will share that correspondence with the committee. We are anxious to continue the good working relationship that we have enjoyed with Rhoda Grant during the progress of the bill thus far, and we will seek to provide her with what further information from SLAB we can. I hope that that will address the point that Robert Brown made when he intervened during Rhoda Grant’s speech. Only a proportion of the costs would arise as a result of section 2 but, given the committee’s report and the potentially very large overall costs, I urge Rhoda Grant to delete section 2. We support section 3, on the criminalisation of breaches of domestic abuse interdicts with a power of arrest. We have pointed out some technical matters, which Rhoda Grant is considering, and we are happy to work with her and the committee on those points. On section 4, the definition of domestic abuse is too wide. The committee’s report tends to the conclusion that a definition is required. We also tend towards that view. We continue to work with Rhoda Grant and the Lord Advocate and we very much hope that we can find a solution to those matters.

This has been a useful debate, and we can now focus on the issues for discussion at stage 2. The first of the two contentious issues relates to costs. It is reasonable to assume that all members recognise that any Government must pay regard to the costs of any legislative measure that it considers, especially where it is difficult to estimate with clarity what those costs will be. The Domestic Abuse (Scotland) Bill is one such example: it will have costs, and they are difficult to quantify. Only a proportion of the costs will arise as a result of section 2, but there are, nevertheless, compelling reasons why that section should be deleted, especially in the light of the committee’s report. First, there are technical problems with section 2. As I understand it, the intention is that the means test would be disapplied only in respect of applications for protective orders against domestic abuse. However, in many cases the protective order will be part of a multi-crave action. It will not stand alone, but will be part of a wider action in which the pursuer is asking for a variety of things from the court. Disapplying the means test for protective orders only in multi-crave actions would mean that the means test would, I presume, be applied for those other craves in the action. That would create pretty serious technical problems, as SLAB testified in its evidence to the committee. Secondly, the importance of providing timely advice to victims of domestic abuse is recognised on all sides of the chamber. It is not clear that there are barriers in the system to the provision of such advice. The written submission from SLAB states: “The position in 2008/09 was that, of the 1371 financial assessments completed by the Board in cases containing at least one crave relating to a protective order, 97%” —that is, almost all cases— “were assessed as eligible, 77% with no contribution. Only 3% of applicants (43 cases) were assessed as ineligible. In 2009/10, this percentage had fallen to 1% as a result of the” very wide “extension of financial eligibility”, which this Government, with the support of the Justice Committee and parties in the chamber, put forward. In other words, making legal aid more generous means that the number of people who would be affected by the presence of a means test would be 1 per cent. There are very few cases in which that would be a practical issue. On sections 3 and 4, I understand the concerns about the definition. The definition as drafted is too wide and could mean that the focus on domestic abuse would be lost. Equally, however, we must ensure that the legislation is clear on what constitutes a criminal offence and what does not. That was encapsulated in paragraph 91 of the Justice Committee’s report, which is a model of clarity, and members have repeated the arguments that are contained therein during today’s debate. The Government will continue to work with Rhoda Grant to devise workable solutions. She has received, and I have seen a copy of, a letter from the Rt Hon Elish Angiolini QC, the Lord Advocate, which states: “Without a clear definition of what amounts to domestic abuse, there is the possibility that such interdicts will be challenged on their facts. Although this will be an issue to be addressed by the civil court, it should be highlighted that such challenges may result in motions to adjourn any criminal proceedings until the issue has been resolved.” That letter will, of course, be shared with all members, but the Lord Advocate has already highlighted the technical difficulties that are contingent on the lack of a definition and the need for, or at least the desirability of, the presence of a definition in the bill for the reasons that the committee ably articulated. In conclusion, the Government welcomes the bill, section 2 should be removed and the Government will continue to work very cordially with the member in charge.

I acknowledge the work of Hugh Henry, members of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee and all the staff who assisted them. Every single MSP, across every political party, regards with abhorrence the crime of assault, no matter against whom it is committed. Any assault, on any human being, is wrong. Assault is criminalised. As far as I know, it has always been criminalised, since before the days of Baron Hume. I suspect that the sentences that were imposed in those days were very strong beer indeed.

No. I am going to make progress. We should be taken at face value as being entirely sincere when we say that we all want to do everything that is possible, practical and effective to help shop workers in the job that they do. "Unfortunately, there are a minority of individuals who would wish to jeopardise the provision of these Services"— which we take for granted— "through verbally and physically abusing shop staff. This of course is completely unacceptable in any circumstance". I have just read extracts from my foreword to the "Violence Reduction Handbook". Throughout Scotland, 5,500 copies have been distributed to people who are directly in the front line. One of the committee's recommendations, as Rob Gibson said, was to have a campaign and, to the extent that the handbook has been distributed, we have already had a campaign. More can be done, but it makes a good start. The handbook offers practical advice about encouraging "employees to report all forms of ... violence"—  there may be under-reporting at the moment, as some members said. It also contains advice such as: "Remove the motivation or incentive for violence" and "Create a culture of respect", as well as practical advice, such as to "Install ... physical barriers" to protect staff in a concrete way. Such protections include secure premises, counters and locked areas for staff to provide an actual element of physical protection. The handbook also recommends the use of security video cameras, mirrors or CCTV cameras where appropriate and that workers avoid lone working. I have just read out some extracts from the handbook but, with respect to members, it seems to me that little has been said in the debate about those practical steps that we need to take. As I have said in previous debates, at the end of the day, law is simply words on a page; it does not protect people in any physical sense. It does not protect a shop worker against someone who is out of his mind on drink or drugs and is intent on committing an assault. Such a person certainly does not stop and say, "Oh dear, there is a protection of workers act; I had better stop right now." Every member of the Parliament most certainly regards every citizen in Scotland—shop workers, emergency workers, elderly people, children and people with a disability—as deserving of the protection of the law in so far as it provides protection. However, the bill does no more than simply replicate the law as it stands—no one has contradicted that—and I imagine that that, in part, was the reason why, when the Labour Party was in government, it declined to do what it asks the Parliament to do today.

The debate has been a useful one and interesting contributions have been made by members throughout the chamber. A fairly strong element of consensus has joined us together. I am particularly pleased that all parties have emphasised that it is wrong to suggest that all children are a problem for Scotland and that, in fact, it is only a tiny minority who get into serious trouble and a minority of that minority who present the most serious problems to our society. That starting point is very much to be welcomed and it is right to acknowledge that. As members know, I always seek that—to coin a phrase—where there is discord, I bring harmony. It is good when there is an element of consensus. Lurking beneath occasional rhetorical flourishes from members, whom I will not name, there was the realisation that we must tackle the causes of crime and antisocial behaviour.  The most fundamental point that has emerged from the debate, which has focused largely on the use of, and the place of, the ASBO, is that it is very difficult to see how getting a piece of paper can prevent someone from committing antisocial behaviour and crime when the cause of that behaviour or crime is essentially abuse of alcohol or misuse of drugs. If someone is involved in serious, problematic drug misuse, that person has an addiction to drugs. Getting a letter through the post from the courts will not change that. In fact, I would be surprised if the letter was opened. Before I return to the ASBO, I will correct some incorrect information that Mr Baker—no doubt inadvertently—gave us. He suggested that the number of complaints in Scotland about antisocial behaviour is increasing. The "Scottish Policing Performance Framework", from which members have quoted, records that there has been a decline of 28,500 antisocial behaviour crimes and offences over the last year for which statistics are available. It further tells us that "all forces in Scotland reported a reduction in the number of ASB community crimes and offences being recorded by police in the last year ... resulting in the figure for Scotland showing a reduction of almost 11 per cent." Labour wanted a report and it has got a report: antisocial behaviour and crime are down by 11 per cent.

I have read out the factual position, which is that there has been a reduction in ASB and crime. Incidentally, we also know that crime is now at its lowest level for 32 years. I do not claim credit for that, although we have implemented certain decisions and programmes. However, I strongly praise the 1,000 extra police and their colleagues who have brought about that result. I presume that it is just an extraordinary omission, but I have heard no Labour member say, "Don't you recognise what a great thing it is that Scotland's police force has seen crime at its lowest level for 32 years?" Should we not all welcome that? Moving back, however, to the consensual aspects of this debate, I point out that the Scottish household survey, which was published in August, showed Scottish perceptions of most neighbourhood problems to be at their lowest level for 10 years. In a characteristically thoughtful contribution, most of which I understood, Mr Don pointed out the difference between the perception and the reality of serious crime and antisocial  behaviour. As we will all accept, that has been fuelled by negative stereotyping by some of the wilder fringes of the tabloid world. As for ASBOs—which, although the main issue in this debate, are not, of course, the main part of the approach that I outlined in my opening speech—I think that they can play a role; are a tool in the box; and can, where appropriate, be used by local authorities. On my visit to Stornoway, I found that ASBOs are not actually issued—[ Interruption .]

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I am surprised that members are not listening more closely because, if they do, they will learn that, on my visit to Stornoway, I found that the authorities, cunningly, did not bother to apply to the court for an ASBO. That would require an investigation and take up a lot of time and money that could be more usefully spent on other things. Instead, they sent a letter saying, "If you don't improve your behaviour, we will apply for an ASBO." They believed that, rather like a lawyer's debt letter, that sort of threatening letter had, when used with other measures, some benefit. The revelation in the debate has been that Labour's new flagship policy will never really leave the harbour. Over the summer, it said in the press that its policy was for community councils—and now, it seems, registered residents groups—to be able to force local authorities to get an ASBO. Now we learn that its policy is for community councils to be able to ask local authorities to apply for an ASBO. However, they can do that at the moment. If that is the case, where is Labour's policy? I listened very carefully to Mr Baker's closing speech, because there was something that Labour has not made absolutely clear in the debate. He said that community councils could make a formal request. Well, they can do that at the moment. Anyone can—an MSP can. However, what do local authorities have to do when they receive that formal request? Are they obliged to carry out an investigation, or are they required to do nothing whatever? The bad news for the Labour Party—and Mr Butler tried to develop this argument as best he could—is that local authorities and COSLA do not want to go down this road. In fact, COSLA says: "If community councils and other community groups were to be able to apply for ASBOs it could lead to a potential proliferation of expensive enforcement measures that councils ... would find ... unaffordable to implement." Not one Labour member has said anything about the cost of this measure, but COSLA has already  made it clear that it would be "unaffordable". When will we hear how much this measure will cost Scotland? I will give way to anyone who wishes to answer. We simply do not know, because Labour has not told us. I know that ASBOs have been used for some strange purposes. A 60-year-old man from Northampton was banned from dressing as a schoolgirl; a bid to ban an 18-year-old from wearing low-slung trousers was dropped earlier this year; and, in Peterhead, a slightly deaf man who had a habit of playing Dolly Parton and Johnny Cash throughout the day was given an ASBO for tormenting his neighbours, as well he might. I am not denying that there is some use for ASBOs.

Perhaps Johann Lamont is a Dolly Parton fan—I do not know. I commend the approach that is supported by the police, the fire service, social workers, youth representatives and just about every other group in society in Scotland, except our friends in the Labour Party. I commend the motion.

Bill Aitken will be aware of the use of fixed-penalty notices, the number of which increased from 49,000 in 2008 to 62,000 in 2009. Does he agree that that is a more effective and speedier method of dealing with many types of antisocial behaviour?

They are going down everywhere.

We know that Mike Pringle and Robert Brown are opposed to having a single national police force. Do the Liberal Democrats believe that there should continue to be eight police forces in Scotland?

I do not accept the member's line of argument. How many ASBOs does the Labour Party think should be issued? In 2006-07, 437 ASBOs were issued. If there were more than 200,000 episodes, is Labour suggesting that  100,000 or 200,000 ASBOs should have been issued? What exactly is the member's prescription?

We will do that after May.

The Government has not decided on its position on a national police force. However, even if half the £200 million could be saved and diverted to pay for police on the front line, would not it be sensible to explore the proposal thoroughly?

Will the member take an intervention?

On that last point, is it Labour policy that community councils and properly constituted residents groups should have the power to require a local authority to apply an antisocial behaviour order? How much will that cost?

In March 2009, we published our antisocial behaviour framework, "Promoting Positive Outcomes", which followed a review of national antisocial behaviour policy. The framework recognised that prevention and early and effective intervention and diversion should be at the heart of our approach. In April 2009, Parliament agreed with that; parliamentarians agreed that to tackle successfully the blight of antisocial behaviour in Scotland we must focus more on preventing it from happening in the first place, on intervening early when it does happen and on diverting those who have behaved antisocially. I very much welcome the measure of cross-party support that was given to the approach. Parliament agreed that we need to address the causes of antisocial behaviour, including drink, drugs and deprivation, and to improve life chances for individuals, but Parliament also recognised the need to punish bad behaviour in a proportionate, appropriate and timely fashion because—let us be in no doubt—antisocial behaviour can, in some cases, blight and sour the daily lives of its victims. I wish to update Parliament on the progress that has been made so far on implementing the framework. I was able to update a number of members earlier this month when I invited members to a briefing session in the Parliament, although I know that the weather worked against us and only a few could attend. I also want to highlight and acknowledge a range of initiatives that are contributing to a safer, stronger Scotland. Prevention is better than cure, and long-term positive outcomes will be delivered only if we tackle the causes of antisocial behaviour, rather than focus only on its symptoms. We can promote positive behaviour by creating more choices and chances. However, we recognise, equally, that focusing solely on punishment will not prevent offending. Working together as partners is key to our approach and our success. We must—and, indeed, do—work together with local authorities, the police, fire and rescue services and the third sector. We must—and do—work with and for the communities whom we serve. We are more successful when we share resources, information and outcomes and when we reassure, support and  empower our communities. Much progress has been made but, of course, much more remains to be made.

It was always intended to present this work 12 months from round about last autumn. In fact, this debate would have taken place earlier had the Parliamentary Bureau not agreed to hold a debate on another issue at the request of, among others, the Labour Party. I had hoped to have this debate slightly earlier, but that has not happened. Be that as it may, we are on track to evaluate the progress of our work. We must use evidence to communicate positive messages and measure success. All members in the chamber will recognise that—understandably, perhaps—media reporting all too often portrays a negative picture, which can fuel an entirely false and unfair image of our young people. The vast majority of children in Scotland are a credit to themselves, their parents, their schools and their communities and it is absolutely right that I as minister underscore and emphasise that. At the end of November, we published the first annual report on our progress in implementing the framework. In this, the first year of a two-year implementation, we have concentrated on providing direct practical support to the front line. For example, we have provided funding for the community wellbeing champions initiative, which is a series of projects that provide communities with real decision-making powers over how resources are used locally. We have laid the foundations for sustained future support by developing the safer communities programme to support partners and practitioners working on the ground and we have commenced the development of a knowledge hub, which we are delivering in partnership with the Scottish community safety network. As we move into the second year of implementation, we will continue the good work, endorsed by Parliament, of those who are tackling antisocial behaviour. However, the causes of antisocial behaviour are not only being dealt with through the implementation of promoting positive outcomes. We are also funding programmes to divert young people from antisocial behaviour and are working with others including the police, the fire service and the Army on extending their excellent diversionary work. I have seen many examples of that work, which has been effective in diverting many young people away from a life of crime and antisocial behaviour. Initiatives across Government complement that approach and  support the aim of achieving a safer, stronger Scotland for all. We have also, as members might be aware, delivered more bobbies on the beat and are working across the political spectrum to deliver the road to recovery drugs strategy. I also suggest that the Cabinet Secretary for Justice, who is sitting beside me, could not have given a stronger lead in the efforts to tackle alcohol abuse in our country. We have committed a £20 million investment in our communities through the cashback for communities initiative, which will provide free activities for around 300,000 young people to divert them from becoming involved in antisocial behaviour. This year, we are investing a further £400,000 in our safer streets campaign to ensure that all members of our communities feel safer when they are out and about enjoying themselves We are working towards draft legislation on high hedges, which some people view as a form of antisocial behaviour. Many members will be aware of that; in September I held a briefing for members that many either attended or were represented at. I was very pleased with the evident consensus on my proposals across all the parties that were represented. As we all know, in these financially frugal times there is a temptation for partners to defend budgets and retrench. We recognise that changes will be needed to deliver savings and maintain services. We are confident that the focus on prevention, intervention and diversion is right.

I am on my final paragraph.

I am happy to do so.

I certainly agree that progress has been made in Inverclyde, as it has been throughout Scotland. For example, according to official Strathclyde statistics, knife carrying in Inverclyde reduced by 35 per cent from June 2009 to October 2010, and the handling of offensive weapons in Scotland has been reduced by 30 per cent. I mention that because I am aware of the close interest that Mr McNeil rightly takes in those issues—I think that all members are aware of his close interest in them. As he invited me to respond to his question, I should say that cuts have had to be made because of the package with which the Westminster Government presented us. There are deep cuts and difficult decisions to make, which is why I hope that Duncan McNeil will support our excellent budget proposals, which Mr Swinney has so prudently brought forward. As I said, we are confident that the focus on prevention, intervention and diversion is right, and that working with partners effectively is the right way to address antisocial behaviour successfully. However, we are not now and never shall be complacent about these matters, because we are acutely aware of how some types of antisocial behaviour can ruin and blight the lives of too many people throughout Scotland. I think that all members would agree that that is entirely unacceptable. I very much look forward to the debate, which will, I am sure, be a positive one with constructive contributions from all members. I move, That the Parliament notes the publication of the first annual report of progress made in implementing the antisocial behaviour framework, Promoting Positive Outcomes: Working Together to Prevent Antisocial Behaviour in Scotland, which shifts the emphasis onto prevention and early, effective intervention while recognising that enforcement measures are appropriate in some circumstances; welcomes the support for this approach from the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities (COSLA), the Society of Local Authority Chief Executives (SOLACE), the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland (ACPOS), the Chief Fire Officers Association in Scotland (CFOAS), the Scottish Children's Reporter Administration (SCRA), the Association of Directors of Social Work (ADSW), the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service (COPFS), Youthlink, the Judicial Studies Committee, Victim Support Scotland, Safeguarding Communities Reducing Offending (SACRO), the Scottish Youth Parliament, academia and the third sector; further welcomes the £20 million being invested in Scotland's communities through the Cashback for Communities initiative, which provides free activities for young people, and further notes the progress made across a range of areas in improving community safety.

This debate has been useful. It was led by Bill Butler and included a contribution from Bill Aitken, who ably set out the committee's position. It also included contributions from members on all sides of the chamber that highlighted the two strands of what we are seeking to do. There is the emotional strand, as we are trying to ensure that those who have lost a loved one through the negligence of a third party receive fair compensation. As human beings, we all respond to that pull. There is also the intellectual strand, as we must ensure that we pass legislation that is correct and based as far as possible on  accurate evidence, which we must do our reasonable best to seek out. I am happy to pay tribute to Bill Butler for his work in focusing attention on the issue. We have had an excellent constructive dialogue from the outset, which I am sure will continue. I will cut to the chase and be candid. We need greater confidence that it is right in each and every case to assert that the fatally injured person spent around 25 per cent of his net income on himself. As far as the Government is aware, no firm evidence has been produced to prove that that is the right level in the average case, nor to indicate how much variation from the average there might be. The Scottish Law Commission did no more than "suggest that 25% falls within the range of what might be considered reasonable", in its "Report on Damages for Wrongful Death". It also acknowledged that there is an "absence of accurate figures" to substantiate the 25 per cent figure. Members have referred to the evidence from Thompsons, and we are grateful for the effort that the firm has made. However, none of that evidence appears to demonstrate clearly that 25 per cent of net personal income is what people always or normally spend on themselves. Indeed, it would be a somewhat odd and unduly uniform world if every person spent exactly the same amount of money on themselves. It does not feel right that that would be the case, given the vagaries of human nature and the differences in spending practices that we know there are between people. We also need greater confidence that it is right in each and every case to conclude that the surviving spouse's income should be entirely disregarded. That proposal seemed to elicit the most vehement opposition from defenders, even from those such as Aviva and the Forum of Scottish Claims Managers, which were prepared to make concessions elsewhere. Lest it be thought that only defenders had concerns, I note that, in relation to the risk of overcompensation, the judges of the Court of Session advised that "to ignore completely the income of a surviving spouse or partner, which may be substantial, gives rise to such a risk." However, I accept that the Justice Committee was not persuaded by such concerns and I will certainly reflect on that. Mr Butler may feel that my plea for more evidence may be becoming a little bit repetitive, but I submit that we cannot make legislative bricks without evidential straw. Evidence is essential if  we are to gain the confidence that is necessary for fixing a one-size-fits-all rule in statute for a generation. Where might such evidence come from? It seems not unreasonable to expect that pursuers' agents may have relevant data on file, given that we are told that they have had to be ready to prove personal expenditure levels in all past cases. If that does not prove possible, given that we do not have time for fresh research, it might be helpful to know whether there is evidence that the approach that we are being asked to adopt has been successfully adopted elsewhere in the world. Unless such evidence is available, we might need to consider the merits of introducing rebuttable presumptions instead of rigid rules. Presiding Officer, I note that my time has expired, so I will ignore the final four or five pages of my speech and reiterate my pledge to every member of this Parliament—but most especially to the member in charge of the bill, Mr Butler—that we will, in the way that we have set out today, do our best, working with all parties and all MSPs, to seek to find a solution that achieves fairness.

The bill seeks to replace the Damages (Scotland) Act 1976, as recommended by the SLC in its "Report on Damages for Wrongful Death". The stated aim is to modernise and simplify the law in this area. In more human terms, it is about trying to facilitate fair compensation, and the Government shares that aim. In December 2009, I announced our intention to consult on issues relating to damages for personal injury, including the commission's recommendations on wrongful death, psychiatric injury and time bar. There would have been real merit in such an approach because of the connections between those areas. However, in January this year, Bill Butler lodged a final proposal for the Damages (Scotland) Bill and we changed our plans to accommodate that. We consulted on wrongful death issues alone so that we could engage constructively with work on the bill, and the results of that consultation inform our approach.  There seems to be a consensus that the 1976 act should be replaced. However, like the consultations that were undertaken by Mr Butler before the bill was introduced and by the Justice Committee thereafter, our exercise revealed deep divisions on fundamental issues—not a simple division between pursuers and defenders, but divisions among a whole range of stakeholders. Therefore, like the Justice Committee, we conclude that key issues require further consideration. Some of the bill's provisions run the risk of delivering unfair outcomes. I cite the provisions that would deny some relatives the right to claim for patrimonial loss. Even if a young person had evidence to prove reliance on the financial support of an aunt or uncle, a claim for compensation would be prohibited. We cannot support that. Similarly, it is unlikely that we can agree definitively to exclude damages for a mental disorder that is induced in a relative by a victim's death. That is not because we are sure that the provision is wrong, but because we are not yet convinced that it is right. It might, however, be possible to reach agreement on the issue of the multiplier. The weight of independent expert opinion seems to favour reform so that a multiplier would apply from the date of settlement of a claim rather than the date of death. There appears to a greater challenge in achieving confidence in the bill's central provisions, which would introduce a one-size-fits-all set of fixed rules for dealing with the income and expenditure of pursuers. In essence, those provisions state that for every family—regardless of its composition—it can be assumed that an individual will spend one quarter of his personal net income on himself and the remainder on family and household expenses, and that that will never be affected by how much the other members of the family earn. The SLC acknowledged that such a broad-brush approach would lead to cases of undercompensation and overcompensation, but it also judged that that is a price worth paying for the benefit of speedier settlements with less intrusive inquiries. The difficulty is that we have little hard evidence to quantify how much inappropriate compensation would occur, and how much more quickly and less intrusively settlements might be reached. Testing the validity of the judgment that underpins the bill's central provisions is, therefore, difficult. In the absence of robust evidence—and picking up on an idea initially floated by the Law Society of Scotland—we considered whether the standard rules could be framed as rebuttable presumptions, allowing an opt-out for exceptional cases. We  continue to look at that, although we acknowledge that any such move would need to be carefully circumscribed to avoid compromising the benefits of the provisions. My remarks have focused on the recipients of compensation. I have two further remarks to make before I close. First, payment will usually come not from those who have inflicted a fatal injury but, indirectly, from citizens through their insurance premiums, which might arguably be reflected in increased settlements. Secondly, the financial memorandum says that statement of funding policy might enable the United Kingdom Government to require the Scottish Government to recompense it for any additional costs that it incurs as a result of the bill. David Mundell wrote to me yesterday, to inform me that the Scottish Government's opinion that the statement of funding policy would not apply here is "not necessarily shared" by the Treasury and other UK Government departments. My officials have been invited to pursue the issues with his. There is uncertainty, too, about forum shopping issues. I will truncate my speech and conclude by thanking Mr Butler for his approach to his bill. We will continue to work constructively with him. I appreciate the way in which he has conducted the bill process; it is a credit to him. I also thank the Justice Committee for a useful report. I hope that we have a consensus on which to build and which, with co-operation from all sides, should allow us to find a way through the difficulties that I have set out.

Assessment of the cost of hoax calls to the emergency services is a matter for individual services, and information is not held centrally. It is likely that any costs will vary depending on the circumstance of the call. Hoax calls divert services from dealing with real emergencies, and the Scottish Government continues to support the emergency services in their efforts to reduce the number of hoax calls.

Hoax calls to our emergency services waste vital time. If a fire appliance is misdirected to a bogus call, for example, the appliance could be diverted from vital life-saving action in a real emergency. That is why the issue is so important. Like members throughout the chamber, the member will be aware that hoax callers tend not to give their name and address. It is therefore scarcely a surprise that it is not easy—particularly when the hoax call is made from a public telephone box—to identify someone who hides, in a cowardly way, behind the cloak of anonymity.  However, having looked into this serious matter, I understand that 80 per cent of cases that are reported to the procurator fiscal are prosecuted and there is a high conviction rate. I have confirmed with my colleagues in the Lord Advocate and Solicitor General’s department that it is taken extremely seriously. I am pleased to say that, in the past few years, there has been a significant reduction in the number of hoax calls and malicious calls that are made both to the fire services and to the police, which are treated differently under the law on those two emergency services. The reduction is due not least to fire safety campaigns and campaigns such as Lothian and Borders Fire and Rescue Service’s cool down crew initiative, which make young people aware of the utter folly of hoax calls and the potentially serious risk that they create in our country.

The Scottish Government supports a number of successful initiatives to reduce crime in Fife. The work of Fife police, alongside that of local community safety partners, contributed to a 12 per cent reduction in crime between 2008-09 and 2009-10. In real terms, that equates to 3,000 fewer victims of crime. This is the fifth consecutive year in which Fife Constabulary has recorded a decrease in the number of crimes. Fife police are involved in a number of initiatives to reduce crime in the region, such as the intelligence-led local action supporting enforcement and reassurance—LASER—operation, the community engagement model, and the partnership tasking model.

I am happy to agree with the sentiments that my colleague expresses, although I would apportion the considerable success not to any particular effort on my part but rather to the excellent efforts of the police and all those who work in the community safety teams in Fife. I understand that the community engagement  model was developed in Levenmouth. The alcohol diversion scheme was highly commended at the recent Scottish policing awards in November 2010, and a project with the rather dramatic title of the revolution bus was noted as making an outstanding contribution. All those activities have been considerably helped by the Scottish Government enabling Fife, like all other parts of Scotland, to gain more bobbies on the beat.

I think that that takes us well and truly into the area of party politics. I suggest to the member that, rather than fret and worry unduly about what might happen in the future, we should acknowledge the excellent efforts, which were mentioned by Tricia Marwick, that have taken place in the past and are taking place at present. As I said, they have resulted in a substantial reduction in crime in Fife—including knife crime, a matter that is frequently raised by the member’s colleagues—and a general improvement in community safety in the kingdom of Fife. I expect that everyone who works in justice, in community safety and in tackling crime in Fife will rise to the challenge. In that respect, they will be considerably aided by the excellent budget proposals that John Swinney has put forward, which will provide the wherewithal for that good work to be continued.

As I have recently discussed with Mr  McNulty, early next year we will carry out an open, public consultation on the law on prescription and limitation. Our approach will certainly take full account of human rights considerations, as we are bound to do by the terms of the Scotland Act 1998.

Des McNulty makes a very reasonable and sensible point that he and Marilyn Livingstone raised with me at a recent meeting that we had on this topic. I understand that, weather permitting, Shona Robison, Adam Ingram and I will address some of the issues at the next Public Petitions Committee meeting. I should also add that these are the most sensitive issues that the Parliament can address and we will certainly give careful consideration to the SHRC’s points and the point about legal aid that Des McNulty has just raised.

The Scottish Government is committed to making our communities safer and stronger. With record numbers of police on our streets and a renewed focus on prevention and education, that commitment has resulted in recorded crime at its lowest levels since 1978, including a 15 per cent reduction in vandalism last year alone. Our innovative approach to tackling antisocial behaviour is set out in “Promoting Positive Outcomes: Working Together to Prevent Antisocial Behaviour in Scotland”, which was published in spring 2009 and continues to have the full support of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland, the Society of Local Authority Chief Executives and Senior Managers, academia, the third sector and other partners. The first annual progress report to Parliament on implementing the framework was published on 30 November.

Obviously, I do not know and am not familiar with the case that Mary Mulligan has referred to. However, in tackling antisocial behaviour, local authorities still have available to them various tools such as antisocial behaviour orders and can take many other statutory measures that were passed by the Administration of which she was a member. We would study any comments that the sheriff made on the matter, but I am not aware of the substance of those comments. Of course, it is the sheriff’s job to deal with the prosecution of crime.  Some aspects of antisocial behaviour may not necessarily constitute criminal behaviour and may be more appropriately dealt with in other ways. We generally need to tackle the causes of crime, and addiction to illegal drugs is one of the most serious contributory factors in relation to crime. In that context, I am pleased that we have support across the chamber for the delivery of our drugs strategy, which I hope will bear fruit.

Some of us.

It is not here, either.

In 2009-10, there were 5,027 firefighters in Scotland's fire and rescue services. The responsibility for the assessment of the number of firefighters belongs to our local authority partners through their fire and rescue authority structures.  They have tools at their disposal to enable the adoption of a risk-based approach to ensure that, even with reduced budgets, resources remain focused on the greatest need and therefore continue to deliver our desired outcome of a safer, stronger Scotland.

There is a great deal of consensus in the chamber on the sentiments that the member has just expressed. It is essential that we protect front-line services. As a result, we are reviewing all aspects of the fire and rescue service to ensure that we continue to provide the front-line services that are so important to the public, but within the reduced budgets available. We should not consider closing fire stations or removing fire appliances until or unless we are clear that every possible saving has been made in all other areas. Work on finalising the priorities and objectives for a revised fire and rescue framework is related to discussions between national and local government and the fire and rescue service on the available options. However, given the framework's statutory role, it is important that any new burdens are balanced and achievable and it would be inappropriate to place additional burdens on the service until a final decision on options has been agreed.

The Scottish Government is working with the violence reduction unit and other partners to tackle violent crime by young people. Recent figures published in the "Scottish Policing Performance Framework: Annual Report 2009-10" show that crimes of violence committed by young people fell by 17 per cent between 2008-09 and 2009-10. Overall levels of youth crime are down by 12 per cent over the same period, and violent crime is at its lowest level in more than 30 years. Those successes have been achieved through a combination of tough enforcement, supported by record numbers of police officers, and innovative early intervention initiatives like our groundbreaking no knives, better lives campaign, which has led to a 35 per cent reduction in knife carrying in Inverclyde over the period of the campaign. We have also committed £20 million to cashback for communities, with £500,000 going specifically to reducing violence.

One initiative that the Government has taken is to encourage medics against violence, which involves volunteers from the NHS, in their own time, providing information to schoolchildren. Medics against violence is particularly active in Inverclyde, but the initiative is being rolled out in other parts of Scotland to warn children of the consequences of carrying a knife; for example, maxillofacial surgeons show them pictures of the consequences of a typical knife wound to the face. Medics against violence is an excellent initiative. I am pleased to say that I will support it tomorrow evening when I attend its charitable event, which is a masked ball.

I congratulate Willie Coffey on providing us with an opportunity in our Parliament to debate these important matters. I pay tribute to him for the way in which he set the scene for this evening's debate and for his description of the extent of the problem, which is serious. I thank all the members who stayed to take part in the debate for their contributions, which—without exception—were highly positive and relevant. The Scottish Government recognises the importance of providing as many opportunities to learn as we can to offenders while they are in custody and of maintaining that learning experience when prisoners go back into the community. Willie Coffey referred to the importance of throughcare and the difficulties of transition. Those problems are well understood and are difficult practically to solve in many cases.  Much is already being done in prisons. Having visited most of the prisons in Scotland—most of them more than once—I have had the opportunity to see that every prison is doing its best to provide prisoners with as much learning opportunity as possible. I say that with knowledge of the practical constraints in prisons of keeping people banged up and shunting them around within secure areas. Those are logistically difficult matters that must be planned and arranged. Inevitably, experiences may not be as extensive as anyone would like, but I pay tribute to governors, prison officers and all those who work in prisons for what they are doing. Although this is not in the script, I say that we need to do far more. All of us recognise that, and this evening's debate has provided us with a good opportunity to say it on a cross-party basis. Polmont and Cornton Vale have been mentioned specifically, as they deal with young people and female offenders respectively. Those two prisons already do a great deal of work, in a variety of areas, to provide learning opportunities. Skills Development Scotland has appointed a full-time careers adviser to address the career needs of under-18s who are in custody. The post works between Polmont and Cornton Vale to ensure that all people who leave custody have a key worker from Skills Development Scotland in their local area, to address the problem of what happens when they leave the secure establishment and return to their community. Willie Coffey was right to ask whether the care just stops at that point. The post in question is just one post, but it is important. It involves one person receiving help from another person at a time that makes a difference to individuals. Just a few weeks ago, I attended another engagement in relation to different work that has been done for female offenders, whereby key workers aim to help offenders with addiction problems—that has been mentioned by Robin Harper as being a facet of a number of difficulties that each offender has, including mental health problems, substance abuse and communication problems. They often all go together. Many people feel that communication difficulties and the inability not just to speak, read or write—although each of those are hugely important—but to express oneself at all, as well as difficulties with comprehension, can lead to frustration, anger, disillusionment or alienation, to feeling unable to advance into a career, training or apprenticeship and to being unable to make one's life a positive experience, as those of us who are more fortunate have been able to do. What is the chicken and what is the egg? Perhaps the communication problems lead to the addiction issues, which lead to the criminality. There is a very strong rationale for saying that. As  James Kelly said, however, these are matters where there will always be a greater need for research. James Kelly mentioned the hostile environment of prison. The issue is not simply about dealing with offenders in establishments; it is also about community payback and how we deal with offenders in the community. It is easier to assist offenders if they are doing community payback or community service—when they are outwith the confines of the four walls of a jail. I am pleased that the national literacy action plan that was launched yesterday by my colleague Michael Russell makes specific reference to work that is being done in the Scottish Prison Service to refine a new literacy and numeracy screening tool for offenders. I learned from Miss Jan Green of NHS Forth Valley of the need for screening and of the practical difficulties that exist in that regard. Responding to Willie Coffey's specific point regarding the SPS assessment for literacy impairment, I can say that the Scottish Prison Service, in conjunction with Learning and Teaching Scotland, has developed a screening tool to identify the literacy and numeracy needs of sentenced individuals, which will become operational from August next year. The tool is also being considered for use in the community. That, too, is being worked on in a positive fashion.

I imagine that there will be one. The screening tool is to become operational from August next year—but, as I fully expect to be in this position from August next year, I give an undertaking that we will have an evaluation. I might be getting a wee bit ahead of myself—my aim is but to please. I pay tribute to the work of all those involved in speech and language therapy work in Scotland, in particular those from the Royal College of Speech and Language Therapists, whose delegation I met on 10 February this year, alongside Her Majesty's chief inspector of prisons, Brigadier Hugh Monro, who has taken a close interest in the subject, and whose genuine human concern for the tragedies that lie behind almost every case of those who end up in those establishments is evident to anyone who has met him. Mary Turnbull, the chair of the royal college and service manager for NHS Forth Valley, was also present at that February meeting, along with Jan Green, to whom I have already referred. Kim Hartley, to whom Willie Coffey has paid tribute, was also present at the meeting. I learned a lot from all those people, as did the brigadier. The meeting has perhaps paved the way for other positive developments—such as the  conference—through increased awareness in the SPS of the importance of dealing with offenders' communication problems and a better understanding that if such problems can be ameliorated and solved there might be a greater propensity for individuals to live crime-free, positive, normal and happy lives. The debate has provided an excellent opportunity for us all to share what we have learned—there are certainly things that I did not know until fairly recently. Our having had the benefit of the expertise of individuals, some of whom I have referred to, and Willie Coffey's having secured this debate mean that there is at least an opportunity for political parties and the politicians who represent the people of Scotland to respond more effectively to what is undoubtedly an important and serious problem, which affects far too many of the most disadvantaged people in our society.  Meeting closed at 17:35.

As members will appreciate, I have absolutely no desire to repeat myself and repeat the arguments that I made in opening the debate. Instead, I will start by paying tribute to the fact that, throughout the chamber, members have mentioned the other parts of the bill—the parts that concern not the future regulation of solicitors but other matters, all of which are important. Mr Pringle, Cathie Craigie, Bill Butler and most other members covered some of those areas. I will mention one that I do not think was referred to specifically: the duty that section 96 imposes on the Scottish Legal Aid Board to monitor the availability of legal services. That measure was included at my suggestion, because, among other reasons, I attended a Scottish Women's Aid conference recently and heard Sheriff Mackie make the impassioned and effective argument that there are gaps in legal provision for women who are subjected to violence in this country, which is an absolute scandal. Those women do not have access to legal aid, and the solicitors who do the work do not have sufficient training, expertise or experience. The Scottish Legal Aid Board will now have a duty to  monitor those gaps, and Scottish Women's Aid will be on the access forum that will help to inform advice to ministers. My late wife, Margaret Ewing, played a huge part in the campaign to address domestic abuse, which still goes on today. The good work that is being done in this country to tackle that scourge that we all deplore should not pass unremarked. I will respond to one or two points that have been raised—I do not really have to, but I am that kind of minister. [ Laughter .] Nigel Don always asks the questions that ministers hope will not be posed in debates. That is a rare talent, which we are grateful that he possesses. His question was, "What will they be called?" I reassure him that we have thought about that. Under section 90(3), LLSPs will not be able to call themselves solicitors without clearance from the Law Society, but they will be able to do so with its agreement. I hope that Mr Don's mind is now at rest. I will not repeat my earlier points on ABSs, but I will address questions that were raised on the subject. Sporadic references were made to whether ABSs are in operation in other countries, particularly other European countries. My information is that the introduction of ABSs is not limited to England, Wales and Australia as was suggested. I understand that ABSs are part of an international trend. Indeed, across Europe they are being considered in some form—albeit, I concede, mostly limited—or they already exist. I have much more detail on that. Happily, I will spare members an exposition of the detail.

It seems that that is another very popular move on my part. Many members fairly expressed their reservations about the bill that we will pass today, which we recognise. I know of Cathie Craigie's hard work on the Justice Committee. She articulated the views that many have expressed. Likewise, Robert Brown and Mr Aitken expressed the common view that none of us has the divine prescience that would enable us to predict how the provisions of the bill will operate. Ministers are most certainly not complacent in thinking that we have produced a work of total perfection and that the bill will help the Scottish legal profession to reach the sunny uplands of business opportunity. However, I am convinced that we have produced a Scottish solution to an issue that needs to be dealt with right now. Mr Aitken was absolutely right to say that if we had not dealt with the matter now, Scottish solicitors could have been at severe disadvantage. I think that all members recognised that from the Justice Committee's stage 1 report. As I said, we are not complacent; we understand the reservations. We cannot predict  with certainty how the bill will turn out. That said, we are convinced that it will create many new opportunities, jobs and employment, particularly for young Scottish lawyers in the generations to come. I thank all the members who took part in the debate, particularly the party spokespeople: Richard Baker and James Kelly, Robert Brown and Mike Pringle, Bill Aitken and John Lamont, and Patrick Harvie. I have to say that Robert Brown kept us very busy over the past fortnight. We are very grateful to him for all the additional work, which we had not entirely anticipated would be necessary, but that is parliamentary scrutiny, that is why we are here, and that is the lot of ministers. I thank my officials who have produced a system that will not—as in England—cost several million pounds with a new quango. We may have produced a regulatory model that is not a Rolls-Royce but a Hillman Imp. I had a Hillman Imp once; it was a marvellous car. It broke down only once, on the way to catch the ferry to Mull. The system will cost only a very small amount of money. That is a good thing, particularly when money is tight. I am proud that that Scottish solution has been applied. I thank the Law Society; its current president Jamie Millar; its past president Ian Smart; and last, but certainly not least, Michael Clancy, who has spent so much time in the Scottish Parliament that we might make him an honorary MSP, had we the powers so to do. I commend the bill to the chamber and thank all members for the courteous and constructive way in which they have participated in its consideration.

I am delighted to open the final debate on the bill, and I thank members for their contributions this afternoon. I especially thank members of the Justice Committee, which was so ably convened by Bill Aitken. They bore the brunt of the work and we are grateful. We are also grateful for the discussions that have taken place during the past several days and which have allowed the relatively swift transaction of business this afternoon, although that swiftness might not have been evident to all members who were here. When the bill was introduced in the Scottish Parliament last year, I recall one member saying that it would be a straightforward, simple and uncontroversial bill. How wrong he was. It turned out to be more complicated than that, and the debate in the legal profession has been heartfelt, especially during the past year. When I took responsibility for the bill it seemed to me necessary, reasonable and fair to meet the people who had strong objections to and reservations about the bill on grounds of principle as well as pragmatic argument. I met those people and I respect their views. The debate has been turbulent and bruising at times, but it has always been conducted by those who are ultimately concerned for the continued success and independence of the legal profession in Scotland, and for the importance of Scots law and the Scottish legal system—a view that we all hold. The late Donald Dewar, who was remembered earlier this week in a marvellous piece of work, said that Scotland was the only country in the world that had a legal system but lacked its own Parliament. I think that as a proud Scottish solicitor he would have been interested in taking part in this debate. The debate has been difficult and has aroused strong emotions that have not waned entirely. Discussion will no doubt continue after the bill is passed, but I believe that a measure of consensus on the compromise position that was so long fought for has been reached today by the Parliament and the Law Society of Scotland. The legislative process can perhaps be viewed as an informal, unwritten partnership between the Parliament and the Law Society acting in tandem,  as well as involving other professions and individuals. It could be said—and some believe—that the profession has driven the legislation, as it reached a compromise that we adopted as our own. Richard Baker and Robert Brown have today rightly expressed strong strands of argument and views that are no doubt still held and argued among significant minority sections of the legal profession. It was right, and I am pleased, that we debated those today. I am somewhat pleased, not to say relieved, about the outcome for those particular amendments, but I pay tribute to everyone who played a part in drafting them. The bill has the potential to modernise the legal profession, and it will expand the opportunities that are available to solicitors, especially, as I have said on many occasions, to young solicitors in the generations to come. I am entirely confident that solicitors in Scotland—mainly, although not exclusively, those from larger firms—will take advantage of the opportunities that will, if the bill is passed, be available to them. I firmly and fervently believe that those opportunities would not be available if it was not for the bill. I am particularly pleased that the creation of those opportunities costs very little in taxpayers' money. The bill will allow business to create business, and will enable the business ingenuity of the Scottish legal profession to be employed to that end. It will enable Scottish solicitors to compete with ever greater success with their counterparts south of the border, especially if we as an institution go on—as I hope, believe and expect that we will—to reform the courts in Scotland and deliver a civil court system that is capable of acting more swiftly and involves less expense. There are huge advantages to be obtained from the bill, and I hope that businesses will embrace rather than fear the changes. In addition to allowing the big firms to deploy opportunities at that end of the market in commercial and technical areas of law, and in significant bodies of law in which the profession has perhaps lost out to England, I fervently believe that the bill will benefit high-street solicitors. They will be able to join with chartered accountants—provided they are approved, as they will be—and other professionals to share premises and costs, and to offer an improved service to their clients and to new clients. I believe that that is all to the good. I will say in closing that the bill makes other provisions—subordinate but significant—for the regulation of non-lawyer will writers. That was given overwhelming support in our public consultation and I am pleased to say we have taken a lead on England in that area. The bill gives new and important functions to the Scottish Legal  Aid Board, which has been praised by, for example, Scottish Women's Aid, and it also makes provision that will allow court rules to be made to permit lay representatives, or McKenzie friends, to make oral submissions in court. I am pleased to speak in support of the bill, which I commend to the chamber. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Legal Services (Scotland) Bill be passed.

Bill Aitken's amendments 151 and 156 make certain changes to the 1980 act that were proposed by the Law Society of Scotland some time ago. They were said to be consequential to the Legal Profession and Legal Aid (Scotland) Act 2007. Although such changes could ordinarily have been made using the power to make ancillary provision that is contained in the 2007 act, that power is currently limited in scope, owing to changes made through the UK Legal Services Act 2007. However, I lodged a stage 2 amendment to amend the Legal Aid (Scotland) Act 2007 to ensure that the power to make ancillary provision can be used as intended, including in areas that have been altered by the UK Legal Services Act 2007. That stage 2 amendment now appears in the bill as section 98A. Given that the issues can be addressed through that section, and that I undertake to consider addressing them in subordinate legislation, I respectfully invite Bill Aitken—if he agrees that that deals with the issues adequately—to withdraw and not move amendments 151 and 156 respectively.

Amendments 119 and 120 will amend the long title so that it reflects the provisions that were inserted at stage 2 in relation to the regulation of non-lawyer will writers and lay representation. I move amendment 119.  Amendment 119 agreed to.  Amendment 120 moved—[Fergus Ewing]—and agreed to.

I took some time to set out the arguments on this matter—longer than I took in debates on previous groupings—because of the importance of getting it right. Section 93 is a significant, important section. Along with the consideration of the guarantee fund issue, there has been a lot of debate, thought and work on this issue over the summer.  I appreciate the points that Mr Brown made and the Law Society's position. The amendments that we have lodged offer the correct approach. As Mr Baker has said, the regulatory committee needs to have a measure of independence and to be able to operate separately. That will be possible under the provisions that we have introduced. I want to respond in detail to some of the points that have been made. First, Mr Aitken raised a point about amendment 145. This is a somewhat technical and legalistic argument, but amendment 145 would remove the words "(acting in any other capacity)" from new section 3B(2A) of the 1980 act, which is inserted by section 93 of the bill. That wording was inserted because the regulatory committee is part of the council and so, when prohibiting the council from interfering unduly in the affairs of the regulatory committee, it is important that that does not include the section of the council that is legitimately carrying out those regulatory functions—the regulatory committee. Therefore, we do not support amendment 145, as the removal of those words could lead to some ambiguity about the different roles of the council. I think that I addressed some of Mr Brown's arguments in my lengthy opening remarks. Suffice it to say that I do not think that providing for arbitration is disproportionate. We in the Government encourage arbitration. It need not be a long or complex procedure. The role of the Lord President is to appoint an arbiter, not to adjudicate. Arbitration will not be conducted before him or the inner house of the Court of Session. It will be conducted by an arbiter. It is a simple process that avoids litigation and going to court. That is the point of arbitration. I do not believe that providing for it is disproportionate and I do not believe the argument that creating a provision for arbitration is a disincentive to use it. That is a surprising proposition and we do not support it. I do not believe that confusion surrounds this section, which is straightforward, clear cut and based on principle. I commend it to the Parliament. I respectfully invite Mr Brown not to move the amendments in his name. I invite Bill Aitken not to move amendment 145.  Amendment 94 agreed to.  Amendment 95 moved—[Fergus Ewing]—and agreed to.  Amendment 145 moved—[Bill Aitken].

The amendments in the group relate to discipline.

I hear that members are listening—that is encouraging. At stage 1, an amendment was lodged that sought to alter the Solicitors (Scotland) Act 1980 so that a solicitor's practising certificate would automatically be suspended if they had been convicted by any court of an act involving dishonesty or had been sentenced to a term of imprisonment. Such suspensions are already possible in those circumstances, but the Law Society wishes to prevent convicted solicitors from practising without waiting for the completion of the Scottish Solicitors Discipline Tribunal process. The amendment was not moved at stage 2, but I undertook to discuss the issue further with the Law Society, which has agreed that automatic suspension is not appropriate and that a discretionary power for the council of the society to suspend practising certificates in such circumstances is more suitable. We have also  agreed that there should be a right of appeal to the court. Amendments 105 to 107, 112 and 113 make necessary amendments to achieve those objectives. I move amendment 105.  Amendment 105 agreed to.  Amendments 106 to 110 moved—[Fergus Ewing]—and agreed to.

During my discussions with the Law Society, it was suggested that it might make the purpose of the guarantee fund clearer if the society could charge a separate fee to cover financial compliance work. The society suggested that, as with the guarantee fund fee, only principals and incorporated practices should pay. The guarantee fund contribution would be reduced accordingly and would cover only the costs of administration of the fund and grants from it. Amendment 111 inserts new section 37A into the Solicitors (Scotland) Act 1980 to make provision for the new accounts fee. I move amendment 111.  Amendment 111 agreed to.  Amendment 112 moved—[Fergus Ewing]—and agreed to.  Amendment 150 not moved.

Amendments 141 to 144, in the name of Bill Aitken, would make changes to the Solicitors (Scotland) Act 1980. They relate to membership of the Law Society. I understand that the society is currently revising its constitution and that those changes have been included in the latest draft, which is yet to be debated and voted on. I am not clear why the membership provisions  in the 1980 act are thought to be insufficient or why the society wishes to extend its membership to include non-solicitors. That came as something of a surprise to me. I understand that there has been a consultation on the draft constitution, but it is still to be determined whether the profession will be in favour of the changes. The proposals may therefore be subject to further change. Given that the policy behind them is unclear, at least to the Scottish Government, I cannot support amendments 141 to 144. Amendment 150, which is also in the name of Bill Aitken, would allow the Law Society to charge fees "in respect of the discharge of the Society's functions." The society has indicated that such fees would not be charged for services that are currently funded by the practising certificate fee, but would be charged in connection with other solicitor or non-solicitor services that are provided. The society currently has the power to charge fees in certain situations, including for the provision of training under section 5 of the 1980 act, so I am unsure about exactly which services it wishes to be able to charge for. Therefore, I do not support amendment 150. In view of the society's current powers, the lack of clarity that exists and the lack of a concluded and resolved debate within the profession, I respectfully invite Mr Aitken to withdraw amendment 141 and not to move the rest of the amendments in the group.

This group relates to the regulatory committee. To give brief background information, section 93 makes provision requiring a regulatory committee to be established by the council of the Law Society and for all regulatory functions of the council to be delegated to it. Section 93 also sets out rules relating to the committee, which will ensure that it performs its regulatory functions independently. In all other respects, the committee will be the same as any other committee that is established by the council. Amendment 95 will require the council to ensure that the regulatory committee carries out such functions as are delegated to it under proposed new section 3B(1) of the Solicitors (Scotland) Act 1980. That addresses the Law Society's concerns that, although the council will remain legally responsible for such functions, it might not be able to ensure that they have been carried out, as such action could be classed as undue interference under proposed new section 3B(2A) of the 1980 act. The policy intention in providing for a regulatory committee is that all regulatory matters that were previously dealt with by the council be transferred to that committee, which should operate independently of the council. A key part of that independence is that the regulatory committee alone should make decisions about regulatory matters. If the council retains the ability to exercise regulatory functions without reference to the committee or to revoke the delegation of functions to the committee, the whole concept of splitting off the regulatory functions would be undermined. Therefore, amendment 96 will clarify that, once the council has delegated its regulatory functions to the regulatory committee, it must not exercise such functions through any other means. However, amendment 97 will ensure that, when specific action is required by the council to ensure that its regulatory functions are achieved, the council has the ability to take such action, but only as explicitly directed by the regulatory committee. Amendment 145, in the name of Bill Aitken, would remove the wording "(acting in any other capacity)" in proposed new section 3B(2A) of the 1980 act. That wording was inserted because the regulatory committee is part of the council and so, in prohibiting the council from interfering unduly in the regulatory committee's affairs, it is important to clarify that that does not affect the council acting in its particular capacity as the regulatory committee. Therefore, I do not support amendment 145. Amendments 146 to 149, in the name of Robert Brown, also relate to the regulatory committee.  Amendment 146 would allow the council to set performance targets, standards and timescales for the regulatory committee, despite the prohibition on undue interference in the business of the regulatory committee. The Law Society has raised concerns about what would and would not be classed as undue interference in the regulatory committee's business, so it might be worth setting out the intention behind that provision. The regulatory committee will in most respects be just another committee of the council, so the council will have a legitimate oversight role in relation to it. For example, requiring regular reports to be made, exercising proper financial control and the removal of members under certain circumstances are all reasonable actions and are consistent with the independent functioning of the regulatory committee. Those functions would not, in my opinion, be classed as undue interference. On the other hand, some of the functions that the Law Society has in mind would likely be classed as undue interference. Examples would be setting the strategic direction of the committee or, as in amendment 146, setting targets, standards or timescales for the committee's work. Such actions would in my view cast doubt on the regulatory committee's independence. The committee must be able to set its own strategic direction, free from the influence of the council, and dictate the standards and timescales of its work. Amendment 147 is unnecessary because, as I said, the prohibition on undue interference would not prevent the council from removing members of the regulatory committee in certain reasonable circumstances, such as the member being insolvent. Amendment 148 would require the council to appoint one of its lay members as the convener of the regulatory committee, rather than allow the committee to appoint its convener. I do not agree with that proposal. It is vital that the regulatory committee be independent. I believe that removing its ability to appoint its convener would undermine that independence. Amendment 149 is completely unnecessary, as the 1980 act already provides that any committee of the council can delegate functions to a sub-committee. The Law Society has raised concerns about whether a sub-committee of the new regulatory committee should be required to have a lay member as its chairperson and whether it should be able to co-opt members who are not on the regulatory committee. As a regulatory sub-committee might deal with technical issues, I consider that it might be appropriate for a solicitor to chair it and for the committee to be able to co-opt those who are most able to deal with the  issues that are under consideration. Accordingly, amendment 99 makes such provision. However, I also consider it appropriate that Scottish ministers have a power to prescribe the maximum number of persons on any regulatory sub-committee and what proportion of the regulatory committee or sub-committee may be co-opted. New section 3E of the 1980 act, which will be inserted by amendment 103, provides for that. The society has also raised concerns about potential disputes between the council and the regulatory committee. New section 3D of the 1980 act, which will be inserted by amendment 103, therefore provides that arbitration be used to resolve such disputes, with an arbiter who is to be appointed by the Lord President should the parties fail to agree on one. I hope that that will never be necessary but, in the event of any problems, the provision allows a proportionate response to resolve the issue while avoiding recourse to the courts. The definition of regulatory functions is expanded slightly in new section 3F of the 1980 act to include the society's functions in respect of conveyancing, executive practitioners and registered European and foreign lawyers. Further examples are added to the list of particular regulatory functions to improve clarity. New section 3G of the 1980 act provides that if the society becomes an approved regulator, its regulatory functions include any relevant functions in relation to that role. Amendment 104 defines the regulatory committee for the purposes of the 1980 act. I respectfully invite Mr Aitken and Mr Brown not to move their amendments. I move amendment 94.

Amendment 134 would allow the Law Society to make rules that require firms of solicitors to register with the council and to charge an entity-level fee for that registration. That is in addition to the individual practising certificate fee. First, solicitors are under a duty to inform the society of their place of business and any changes to it, so a list of firms should already be available to the society. Secondly, given the permissive nature of the bill and the undertaking that I have given throughout that it will not have a significant impact on traditional firms that do not choose ABS, I have serious concerns about making such a fundamental change to the society's fee-charging structure. Regardless of any requirement for the profession to vote on such a change before implementation, it would appear to be a significant new levy imposed by a bill that I have repeatedly argued will not significantly affect those who choose not to form licensed providers. Indeed, I understand that certain members of the profession have already expressed some reservations about the new fee. I understand that the society has discussed its proposals with certain groups within the profession. I have discussed the amendment in a meeting with the president of the Law Society and his colleagues and I understand his position and  their concerns on these matters. However, I respectfully believe that a more comprehensive consultation should be carried out before significant changes are made. My experience is that changes to fee structures are almost inevitably more complex than they first appear to be, and that they often have unforeseen consequences. Therefore, without proper consideration being given to the implications of the change, I cannot support amendment 134. Amendments 138 and 139 would allow the Law Society to gather guarantee fund contributions from registered firms at an entity level rather than from individual principals. As with the proposed entity-level fee, I have concerns about that, given the lack of consultation with the profession, especially as it might result in some firms being charged more than at present. I say that having made robust representations to the SLCC that resulted in its reducing the levy by £40 for each solicitor in Scotland, which resulted in a saving of half a million pounds for the profession. In that regard, we have some good form in saving solicitors some cash. I invite Bill Aitken to withdraw amendment 134 and not to move amendments 138 and 139.

Amendments 85, 87, 91 and 92 make minor technical changes to provisions relating to the guarantee fund in the Solicitors (Scotland) Act 1980. They ensure that individual solicitors who are members of incorporated practices are referred to where appropriate. Under the Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) (Scotland) Act 1990, the Law Society is obliged to maintain a compensation fund in relation to independent conveyancing and executry practitioners. Under a memorandum of understanding, the Scottish ministers currently underwrite claims on the fund. The society has recently confirmed that there is little money in the fund and that it is not fit for purpose. As there is only one such practitioner, and no further  practitioners are possible in future, further contributions to the fund will be extremely limited. The Scottish Government and the Law Society agree that an acceptable solution is to allow the sole remaining practitioner to contribute to and be covered by the guarantee fund. That would result in the present liability on the Government being removed, thereby saving public money. Amendments 90 and 93 extend the guarantee fund to cover such practitioners and require them to contribute to it, while repealing the relevant section of the 1990 act. I move amendment 85.  Amendment 85 agreed to.  Amendments 86 and 87 moved—[Fergus Ewing]—and agreed to.

Section 53A was inserted at stage 2 to ensure that questionable investors could not hide behind the corporate veil. However, the phrase "control or substantial influence in the body's affairs", which was inserted by an amendment that was lodged by Robert Brown, presents some difficulty, as no indication is given of how those terms are to be measured. Amendment 55 seeks to substitute Mr Brown's term with "ownership or control of the body, or ... any other material interest in it". That will ensure that when it considers a non-solicitor body's fitness to be an investor, a regulator must consider the fitness of those who have, to any extent, "ownership or control of the body, or ... any other material interest in it". Section 52(2) allows the Scottish ministers to make regulations about interests in licensed providers and to make provision for licensing rules about persons who have an interest in a licensed provider. Amendment 59 seeks to clarify that such regulations may include further provision about what counts as an interest in a body that has an interest in a licensed provider. That might be necessary to ensure that when the fitness of a body that is investing in a licensed provider is considered, the fitness of those persons who are involved in that body may also be considered.  Amendment 61 seeks to extend the definition of a solicitor investor to include firms of solicitors and incorporated practices. Amendment 62 seeks to extend it to include registered foreign lawyers. Those who can own law firms in Scotland should not be subject to the fitness test. Amendment 62 seeks to correct the omission of registered foreign lawyers that was effected at stage 2. I move amendment 55.  Amendment 55 agreed to.

Following the insertion at stage 2 of provisions that require majority solicitor or other regulated profession ownership, the Law Society of Scotland raised concerns about temporary situations that would result in the failure of a licensed provider to meet the majority ownership criteria. That could happen, for instance, following the death of a solicitor owner. It is clear that revoking a licence in such a situation would be disproportionate. Therefore, amendment 64 will give approved regulators the discretion not to revoke a licence when they are satisfied that the situation is temporary and that clients are sufficiently protected. Additionally, I think that it would be useful to give approved regulators further flexibility, so amendment 66 will allow an approved regulator to suspend a licence pending rectification of the situation, if that is appropriate. Bill Aitken's amendment 129 is not strictly necessary, as licensed providers are already required to notify their regulator without delay should the circumstances in section 54(1) arise. However, I feel that it would be useful to set a deadline, as Mr Aitken's amendment seeks to do so, on reflection, I have decided to support amendment 129.  Mr Aitken's amendment 130 is unnecessary—there is no need to state that a licensed provider continues to be licensed if its licence is not revoked under section 54. I move amendment 64.

Amendments 131 and 132, in the name of Bill Aitken and supported by James Kelly, would allow conduct complaints against designated persons to be made to the Scottish Legal Complaints Commission. That is not appropriate. The commission deals with complaints about legal practitioners who are regulated by professional bodies such as solicitors and advocates. It does not deal with complaints about other members of staff who are working for traditional law firms, such as paralegals; such complaints would be dealt with internally by the firm. It would be odd if a paralegal were to take the rap for his boss; that does not seem to be a principle that many of us would support, and it is not the system at the moment. The current position is proportionate and complaints about designated persons who are not solicitors or other legal professionals should be treated in the same way. Amendment 70 will require approved regulators to pass on any complaints that they receive about legal practitioners to the SLCC to ensure that such complaints are dealt with. That mirrors a similar requirement on professional organisations, such as the Law Society or the Faculty of Advocates, in the Legal Profession and Legal Aid (Scotland) Act 2007. The other amendments make minor adjustments relating to how approved regulators and approving bodies deal with regulatory and conduct complaints. That is to ensure that the relevant parts of the said act apply, following some minor concerns that were raised by the SLCC. Amendments 71, 80 and 83 are minor drafting amendments. In light of my earlier remarks, I respectfully invite Bill Aitken to withdraw amendment 131 and not to move amendment 132.

Amendment 133 would allow the Scottish ministers to make regulations for the regulation of estate administrators. There have been suggestions from various parties, including the Scottish Law Agents Society, that, as Richard Baker has said, our regulation of confirmation agents and non-lawyer will writers does not go far enough and that regulation should be extended to the whole executry process, not all of which is a reserved matter requiring the involvement solely of solicitors. However, additional regulation in those areas would be a significant expansion of the regulatory regime in part 3 and would require further consultation to allow an assessment to be made of the potential impact on those who are currently involved in the process. For example, extending regulation to executors could catch a huge number of people who are involved in administering estates, perhaps including relatives of the deceased, who are often named as the executors. I am sure that it is not Richard Baker's plan that an ordinary individual who is winding up his dad's or his mother's estate, which may not involve a lot of money, should be involved in regulation or additional expense. There is no reason why people in that situation should have to incur additional burdens and costs. They can do the work themselves, often with a bit of help from sympathetic court staff and others. However, regulation could potentially prevent such people from being involved, leading to the additional cost of employing appropriately qualified persons to wind up an estate in every case. The matter has not been debated. In considering the bill, we have pursued an approach of avoiding pushing through things that have not been properly debated and consulted on. This is an example of an area in which more thought and consultation is needed before we act. For those  reasons, I do not support Richard Baker's amendments and respectfully invite him to withdraw amendment 133 and not to move amendment 153.

We would act as we do in every other way, in committees of the Parliament, by considering the matter as swiftly as possible after proper consultation and debate. The approach is practical. That is what the bill, which has nearly 100 sections and nine schedules, provides. After a debate that has been fought so hard and for so long, within and outwith the Parliament, if  we join together and support the compromise that is supported by the Law Society of Scotland, ICAS and consumer bodies that represent the public interest, we will be doing a good thing for Scotland. I strongly believe that there will be new opportunities, businesses and jobs for many young people in the next generations in this country. The ingenuity that McGrigors and other firms have shown in taking advantage of business opportunities, to which Mr Kelly referred, will lead to many of our constituents having the chance to pursue new careers, new opportunities and new jobs. That is good for Scotland.  Amendment 45 agreed to.

Amendments 50, 51, 53 and 54 will make changes to sections 46 and 50, which set out the levels of fines and terms of imprisonment that can lead to disqualification from named positions within licensed providers or to a presumption that a person is unfit to invest in such an entity. I have some concerns—which are shared by the Law Society—that the levels of fines and the terms of imprisonment that are specified in those sections are not consistent. Amendments 50 and 51 will alter section 46 to specify a fine that is equivalent to level 4 or more on the standard scale instead of level 3, and a sentence of imprisonment of one year or more instead of two years. Amendments 53 and 54 will do the same for section 50. Amendment 128, which was lodged by Bill Aitken and is supported by James Kelly, provides that a non-solicitor investor should be presumed to be unfit if he or she has been convicted of an offence that involves violence, in addition to offences that involve dishonesty as the bill currently specifies. The bill refers specifically to  dishonesty because it has relevance—as is obvious—for legal work. Violence does not, and would in any event fall under the general provisions in the bill that relate to crimes. A person is presumed to be unfit if they are sentenced to a specified term of imprisonment or fined an amount that is equivalent to the relevant level on the standard scale, so convictions for serious violent offences would already lead to a presumption of unfitness. However, I have some sympathy with Bill Aitken's position, and I will listen carefully to what he says on the matter. Amendments 75 and 84 will insert new sections that provide for corporate offences, to ensure that responsible officials as well as organisations commit an offence under parts 2 and 3 if the act in question involves their connivance, consent or negligence. I move amendment 50.

I have listened carefully to what Bill Aitken and James Kelly have said, although I am not entirely sure that I agree with the remarks about soft-touch justice—an issue on which I imagine I would have the support of Ken Clarke and Ed Miliband. However, setting aside that point as it is not directly relevant to the matters before us, I have some sympathy for amendment 128. In the light of the arguments by Mr Aitken and Mr Kelly, I am minded to support it.  Amendment 50 agreed to.  Amendment 51 moved—[Fergus Ewing]—and agreed to.

Amendments 124 and 127 would change the words "carry out legal work" to "provide legal services" in connection with designated persons. That may seem like a subtle change, but it is not. There is an important distinction between the provision of legal services by an entity and the connected work performed by those within it. Legal work covers the broad range of work that is done by solicitors, paralegals and other staff. Legal work, especially that which is performed by paralegals, may be technical and specific; it might not be classed as the provision of legal services as set out in section 3. To ensure that designated persons can do the same work as they would do in a traditional firm, the current drafting should be maintained. If it were not maintained, the danger would be that they could not continue to do what they legitimately do at the moment. That would plainly be an unintended consequence. I have several other pages of objections, but that is perhaps one of the most telling, so I move on to my amendment 52. Amendment 52 will remove the provision that allows an investor who does not work in the licensed provider to be a designated person. Robert Brown lodged a similar amendment at stage 2, which I opposed because I was concerned that it might have unintended consequences. After having reflected, I am now satisfied that it will not, and I therefore agree that there is no need for section 47(3)(b)(ii). In light of that truncated version of my objections to Mr Aitken's amendments, I respectfully invite him to withdraw amendment 124 and not to move amendments 125 and 127.

Will Mr Brown confirm that the Law Society compromise position, which the  Government supports, was reached after years of difficult and bruising internal debate, whereas his proposal has never been debated and was not brought forward until two weeks ago? The legal profession has had no opportunity to debate his proposal.

The Scottish Government entirely respects the very strongly held views, both within and outwith Parliament, in the debate that has taken place on this issue. With regard to the two principal amendments in this group, it is fair to say that Mr Baker's amendment 46A was substantially considered by the profession, but it was clearly rejected. Robert Brown's proposal, on the other hand, has not been  debated within the profession. I am not being unfair to Mr Brown when I say that I extracted that from him in my intervention. The profession has been considering this thorny issue for years—years of bruising, turbulent, divisive internal debate. That process of debate resulted in a compromise that was hard won by the proponents of 100 per cent ABS, who thought that that was best, but who, in the interests of a unified profession, decided to approve the compromise.

Patently it is to protect the interests of the public. I was just coming on to that. We should not throw away years of hard work, which has seen a very difficult debate being concluded with a majority position that we have moved towards by compromising. As regards protecting the public, consumer bodies have lobbied every member of the Parliament, as Mr Rumbles knows, arguing that the proposal will deliver a better deal for consumers. Relatively small practitioners, such as Austin Lafferty, have argued that it will serve as a quality control test for lawyers in providing a better, perhaps even cheaper, service for their clients, something which, I respectfully suggest, the public might welcome—speaking as a former practising solicitor. Patrick Harvie asks whether the changes that are to be made are reversible. Section 99A says yes. The percentages relating to ownership can be changed. That means that they can be reduced or increased. The procedure is available. If Mr Harvie's fears were proven true, the Parliament could consider the matter again and act to reverse the situation.

Amendment 45 will clarify that sections 37 and 37A, which deal with eligibility criteria and majority ownership by regulated professionals, both apply for the purposes of licensing a licensed provider.  My amendments 46, 46D to 46F and 114, Richard Baker's amendments 46A to 46C and 154, and Robert Brown's amendments 123 and 155 all relate to external ownership of licensed providers. As many members will be aware, external ownership has been the subject of much discussion and deliberation in the past few years. The legal profession has been split by the issue, with a series of impassioned debates and votes taking place before stage 2. However, a measure of consensus has been achieved, with the Law Society council now supporting the compromise position that was inserted at stage 2. I argued strongly against that compromise, which requires 51 per cent of any licensed provider to be owned by solicitors or other regulated professionals. My preference was for the greater opportunities that would be provided by 100 per cent external ownership. However, given the support of the Law Society and the Opposition parties for the compromise, I have decided not to pursue further amendments on that at stage 3. Amendment 46 will simply improve the drafting and ensure that the definition of "regulated profession" and other related terms can be further specified by regulations that will be subject to affirmative procedure. I believe that the compromise, which was achieved at no small cost to those involved, should not be thrown away lightly, and I suggest with great respect that Richard Baker's amendments 46A to 46C risk doing that. They would require 51 per cent solicitor ownership and limit ownership by those who are not regulated professionals to 25 per cent. That would be a fundamental shift from the compromise that was agreed at stage 2 and would perpetuate unnecessary restrictions on the business models that solicitors can adopt. For example, the amendments would prevent business models that would otherwise be likely to form, such as firms of accountants or surveyors that employ a number of solicitors to offer legal services. Amendments 46A to 46C would severely restrict access to external capital, which would reduce the ability of Scottish firms to expand and compete with firms in England, which are soon to benefit from the full implementation of the Legal Services Act 2007. The model would fail to increase competition significantly in the legal services market, which would be to the detriment of the legal profession, consumers and the Scottish economy. Furthermore, the 25 per cent model was not supported at stage 2, nor was it supported by the legal profession at the latest special general meeting of the Law Society. The current provisions on external ownership were supported by all Opposition parties at stage 2, the Law Society, four of the largest law firms in  Scotland, ICAS and various consumer groups, all of which have expressed reservations about Richard Baker's amendments. For those reasons, I strongly urge members to continue to support the compromise, which was so difficult to achieve, and not to impose further restrictions that have not been debated properly, are not supported by the Law Society, ICAS or consumer groups, and which degrade significantly the potential benefits of the bill. Robert Brown's amendment 123 would require 51 per cent of any licensed provider to be owned by solicitors, but proposes no restrictions on the remaining 49 per cent. That would still rule out many potential business models, such as an accountancy firm employing solicitors and sharing ownership with them to provide legal services to its clients. Again, I strongly urge members to reject amendment 123. My amendments 46D to 46F are an attempt to provide comfort to those who still have concerns about the ability of regulated professionals to own licensed providers. As it stands in my amendment 46, section 37A allows but does not compel Scottish ministers to make regulations about what is to be regarded as a "regulated profession" and the other related terms. Concerns were raised that if Scottish ministers were not to set out what is meant by "regulated profession", it would be unclear which persons were covered by that definition and so could have a controlling share in a licensed provider. Amendment 46D ensures that Scottish ministers must make regulations about what is or is not a regulated profession. Amendment 46E retains the optional nature of the power in relation to the other related terms that are less crucial. Amendment 46F requires the Scottish ministers to have the Lord President's agreement and to have consulted various bodies before making such regulations. That amendment was lodged after representations by Mr Baker and, in particular, Ms Craigie, for which I am grateful. Amendment 63 indicates how the term "solicitor investor" is to be interpreted in part 2. The other amendments make minor changes. I strongly urge Mr Baker and Mr Brown not to move their amendments. I move amendment 45.

Will the member give way?

As I mentioned earlier, I do not intend to seek to overturn the stage 2 amendments to the bill that require the Lord President's consent before the Scottish ministers can take various actions under part 2. However, my amendments in group 5 will make slight drafting changes to the provisions. In particular, they will require the Lord President's "agreement" rather than "consent". That is more appropriate wording in the context of the primary role for the Scottish ministers, but it does not change the intended effect. In my view, the provisions are also worth restructuring a little for the sake of readability. Robert Brown's amendment 122, which is supported by James Kelly, relates to the step-in powers in section 35, which allow the Scottish ministers by regulations to create a body to act as an approved regulator, or to act as one themselves if that is necessary for the continued effective regulation of licence providers. Before stage 2, the Justice Committee and the Law Society raised concerns about those powers and when they might be used. That was absolutely appropriate. Consequently, I lodged an amendment that provided that such regulations are not to be made unless ministerial intervention is necessary as a last resort. That clarification was  provided in order to respond to the committee's clear invitation and, indeed, to the cross-party arguments on the matter. As I stated in relation to a similar amendment at stage 2, I question the need for the Scottish ministers to be required to have the Lord President's consent before taking action. Stepping in would be a matter of last resort in accordance with the regulatory principles. The key argument is that it might require to be done very quickly in an emergency situation. We are talking about a last resort. The situation is unlikely to occur, but if it did, it would be an emergency. In an emergency, one needs to act quickly. I therefore have some concerns about amendment 122, but of course I will listen to what Mr Brown has to say. I move amendment 22.

I listened carefully to what Mr Brown and Mr Kelly said. In the light of their arguments, and given that the bill elsewhere—indeed, throughout part 2—provides a role for the  Lord President and requires him to be approached for his agreement, in the interests of both consensus and verisimilitude, I will accept the course of action that is proposed.  Amendment 22 agreed to.

All the amendments in the group are minor drafting changes that will abbreviate the term "licensed legal services provider" to "licensed provider". I move amendment 26.  Amendment 26 agreed to.

During stage 2, the Law Society expressed concerns about plans to allow licensed providers that it does not regulate to contribute to and be covered by the guarantee fund. I suggested that giving limited monitoring and oversight functions to the Law Society may provide some comfort, and had extensive discussions with it over the summer to resolve that important matter. Those discussions were useful in setting out what that role should involve. Amendments 33 to 35 will require approved regulators to report to the Law Society any breaches of the practice rules relating to accounting and auditing. They must also make available to the Law Society any financial compliance inspection reports. If the society has concerns that are not resolved following discussions with the approved regulator, it can  report the matter to the Scottish ministers, who will take action, if necessary. The Law Society can seek permission from the Scottish ministers to inspect documents relating to financial matters that are held by the licensed provider if it thinks that that is necessary to ensure that the relevant accounts rules are being complied with. The Scottish ministers will, of course, treat such requests with urgency where necessary. Those inspections would be a last resort. I certainly do not expect them to be commonplace, but it is appropriate to make provision to allow them. I hope that that reassures those who still have doubts about allowing licensed providers to be covered by the guarantee fund. Amendment 137, in the name of Bill Aitken, also makes provision for an oversight inspection function for the Law Society. However, unlike in my amendments, there is no role for the Scottish ministers in relation to any action that is taken by the Law Society, and there is no requirement for the society to consult the approved regulator. My proposed model is the result of extensive discussions with the Law Society and the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland over the summer. It will confer a monitoring and inspection function that is consistent with the framework in the bill, and will allow the society to minimise risks to the guarantee fund while not interfering unduly in the business of other approved regulators that have the primary role in monitoring compliance with their accounts rules. In the light of those assurances, I will listen to Mr Aitken with interest, but hope that he will consider not moving amendment 137. I move amendment 33.

I am happy to respond to points that have been made in the debate. It is plain that ensuring that there are appropriate arrangements to protect the public and clients of licensed service providers is one of the more serious issues in the bill. The Scottish Government's proposed amendments were discussed at length with the Law Society and ICAS over the summer, and a great deal of thought has gone into the question of their efficacy. I am happy to give Bill Aitken the assurance that the Scottish ministers would act swiftly in the event that their permission was sought to invoke the powers. I emphasise that we do not anticipate that the powers are likely to be used frequently: they will not be used as a matter of common practice. The history of claims to guarantee funds does not suggest that the powers are likely to be used frequently, but it is nonetheless important that the provisions are thorough and sufficient.  Mr Aitken's proposed measures are, for the reasons that I outlined, technically infelicitous. The amendments that we have lodged, with considerable thought, address the necessary aspects of regulation without being disproportionate, and they cover the need for proper enforcement. Therefore, I encourage members to support the Government amendments and I invite Mr Aitken, in the light of those assurances, to consider not pressing amendment 137.  Amendment 33 agreed to.  Amendments 34 and 35 moved—[Fergus Ewing]—and agreed to.

Amendments 21, 25, 27, 28 and 29 relate to compensation arrangements for licensed legal services providers. At stage 2, there was broad agreement that clients of licensed providers should be given the same protection against fraud as the Scottish solicitors guarantee fund gives to clients of traditional law firms, and that that is one of the most crucial issues to resolve if alternative business structures are to be successful. However, following stage 2, the bill did not fully provide for a compensation fund for licensed providers because of the defeat of certain Government amendments following concerns that were expressed by the Law Society of Scotland about the use of the guarantee fund by licensed providers that it did not regulate. I committed to discussing the matter with the Law Society during the summer and I am glad to be able to report that those discussions were extremely constructive. The Law Society of Scotland is now content for the guarantee fund to be used by other approved regulators as long as it has an oversight role and can inspect licensed providers in certain circumstances. The Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland is the only other body that has thus far expressed an interest in becoming an approved regulator, and it is also content for the Law Society to have the role. I have therefore lodged amendments 21, 25, 27, 28 and 29, which will require approved regulators either to establish their own compensation fund or  to use the guarantee fund. I have also lodged amendments to give the Law Society a monitoring and inspection role in relation to the guarantee fund, which will be discussed in a later group of amendments. My amendments requiring approved regulators to choose the guarantee fund or to set up their own compensation fund apply equally to all approved regulators. However, Robert Brown's amendment 27A would exclude the Law Society from the provisions and makes specific provision for it that includes denying it the option of establishing an alternative compensation fund. I do not fully understand the rationale behind the amendment and see absolutely no reason for making separate provision for the Law Society when the general provisions are fit for purpose. Robert Brown's amendment 27B is also unnecessary. In addition, I do not think it appropriate to state in the bill what details must be supplied to the Law Society; instead, I intend to set out any necessary details in regulations that will be made under proposed new subsection (2) of my amendment 29. Robert Brown's amendment 28A would require the Law Society to make rules requiring its licensed providers to make contributions to the guarantee fund. My amendment 28 already requires that approved regulators that choose to use the guarantee fund make rules requiring their licensed providers to make contributions to it. Amendment 28A would be necessary only if the Law Society were treated differently from all other regulators. It is vital that the clients of licensed providers have the same protection against dishonesty as the clients of traditional firms. Our provisions are designed to achieve that. Nevertheless, it is important to ensure that those arrangements, which allow a licensed provider to use the guarantee fund, do not extend to the provision of non-legal services, such as accountancy, that are provided by a licensed provider. That would put a disproportionate burden on the guarantee fund and would not be consistent with its purpose. Therefore, amendment 86 ensures that licensed providers are covered by the guarantee fund only in connection with their provision of legal services. Amendment 88 is consequential on that change.

Bill Aitken's amendment 135 would extend the list of persons to whom grants cannot be made. I will listen with interest to what Mr Aitken has to say on his amendments 135 and 136. Since my time is short, I will foreshorten the four remaining pages of my speech. I am bound to say, though, that there are difficulties of a  technical nature regarding the amendments which would, I fear, cause problems. I move amendment 21.

On Robert Brown's amendments, I point out that the guarantee fund is not the Scottish solicitors guarantee fund—it is a statutory fund. It is perceived to be the solicitors fund, but it was set up by statute for Scotland. Therefore, it would be wrong for the bill to make separate provision for solicitors as a regulator as opposed to any other regulator. There must be a uniform system. I can assure Bill Aitken that there is no question of anyone benefiting from their own dishonesty by virtue of the provisions of the bill: quite the opposite is the case. The bill contains a robust regulatory regime that will ensure that any such conduct is most stringently dealt with. My answer to Bill Aitken's advocacy of amendments 135 and 136 is that they are not necessary, because the matters that they deal with are dealt with and fully covered in my amendments. Amendment 86 will limit the use of  the guarantee fund to losses that are suffered by reason of dishonesty on the part of licensed providers. Amendment 136 would essentially have the same effect, but my amendment 86 will insert the provision in the correct place in the bill. In addition to that technical argument, there is a substantive argument, which is that Mr Aitken's amendment 136 refers to those who manage or control a fund having given an "irrevocable undertaking" that, in the event of a grant being made out of the guarantee fund, they will reimburse the Law Society the amount that was paid out. It has not been made clear at all why such an amendment to the Solicitors (Scotland) Act 1980 is thought to be necessary, as no equivalent provision is present in that act in relation to solicitors or incorporated practices. Because of that, I feel that there are ambiguities and uncertainties in the amendment, although I entirely accept Mr Aitken's aims and purposes. I respectfully invite Mr Brown and Mr Aitken not to move their amendments.  Amendment 21 agreed to.

Following various amendments at stage 2, section 6, which provides for the approval of regulators, was left in a slightly confusing and inconsistently drafted state. Amendments 7 and 9 to 18 seek to improve the drafting and to ensure internal consistency in the section without overturning the effect of Opposition changes that were made at stage 2. Amendment 8 seeks to ensure that potential approved regulators have an understanding of the application of the regulatory objectives and professional principles, rather than just an understanding of the objectives and principles. Amendment 19 is a drafting amendment. Amendment 20 seeks to correct an omission at stage 2, whereby the bill does not provide for the restrictions relating to the categories of licensed provider or legal services to be varied. Amendments 76 and 78 seek to remove the requirement for the Lord President's consent to be given in relation to the certification of applicants as approving bodies of confirmation agents, and to the addition or variation of conditions that are attached during that process. I resisted the amendments at stage 2, and noted that Robert Brown was, in his words, slightly less than convinced that the area requires the Lord President's involvement. Although I am not seeking to reverse the similar requirements that have been inserted into part 2, I maintain that the Lord President's having such a role in relation to confirmation agents is unnecessary. Furthermore, the Lord President has indicated that he has no strong views in relation to his role under part 3, as opposed to part 2 of the bill. The Lord President noted that there is no requirement for his consent in respect of the regulation of non-lawyer will writers, so removing the requirement for confirmation agents is consistent with those provisions. Amendments 77 and 79 are drafting amendments. I move amendment 7.

Sections 5 to 35, in part 2 of the bill, deal with the provisions on approved regulators, as part of a peculiarly Scottish approach to the issue. As Robert Brown mentioned, a different approach has been taken south of the border, which involved setting up a body that requires staff and premises and is costly to run; the costs extend to several million pounds. The system that the Government has set out in the bill avoids that expense: the expense detailed in the financial memorandum, to which I will come in a moment, is relatively modest in comparison. We will not go down the route that has been taken  south of the border, although, to take up Mr Brown's language, to characterise that body coming in as sounding a "death knell" is unduly cataclysmic and not in keeping with the usual moderation that we expect from the Liberal Democrat approach to politics. Turning to the text of amendment 121, one reason for opposing it is that there should be no impediment to appropriate "professional or other" bodies, to which section 5(1) refers, seeking to be regulators. Nonetheless, having reached this stage, it does not seem that there will be a long queue waiting outside St Andrews house, Drumsheugh Gardens or anywhere else to take on the role. It is difficult to see how there could be any regulatory competition, because it is hard to see how any financial gain could be made; that is a new Liberal Democrat oxymoron that has been brought into the debate today. I therefore see no reason to oppose Richard Baker's amendment, because it provides for no more than three regulators and we do not expect at present that there will be more than three, although if there are that can be dealt with under the second part of amendment 121. For that reason, in the interests of following a consensual approach whenever possible in relation to the bill, and in light of the arguments that Mr Baker put to me in private in a series of meetings—

With his colleagues, I hasten to say. For those reasons, we are happy to support the amendment.

I can say without fear of contradiction that this will be a very long afternoon. I am grateful, however, to my colleagues in various parties with whom discussions have taken place, especially over the past fortnight, which I hope will help to smooth proceedings to some extent this afternoon. For that I thank them all. Amendments 1 to 4 are drafting amendments that adjust some ordering in the lists of regulatory objectives and professional principles in sections 1 and 2 in order to keep things that were added at stage 2 within the structure of those sections, but without changing their effect. Amendments 5 and 6 ensure that the requirements that are placed on the Scottish ministers to act in a way that is compatible with the regulatory objectives and to consult in relation to their functions under part 4 do not extend to their functions under sections 96(c) and 98A(1). Those functions are not of the same regulatory character as the Scottish ministers' other functions in the rest of part 4, as they relate, respectively, to receiving information from the Scottish Legal Aid Board and to making orders under the Legal Profession and Legal Aid (Scotland) Act 2007. It would not be appropriate to require the Scottish ministers to be bound by the regulatory objectives or to consult in relation to those functions. I move amendment 1.

We thought carefully about whether it was necessary to make explicit in the bill a duty of confidentiality. Members such as Mr Brown and me, who were practising solicitors in a former life, have the duty of confidentiality to clients ingrained in our DNA, so at first sight it appeared that the duty was so basic that it did not require to be explicitly incorporated into legislation. However, there is the obvious fact that the bill sets out and makes explicit the other duties, principles and objectives. Therefore, it occurred to us that to omit the duty of confidentiality might be regarded by some people as a failure to make clear that there is such a duty. That is why we lodged amendments 3 and 4. I am grateful that they appear to enjoy support in the Parliament.

I am delighted to participate in the debate and we were delighted to hear the cabinet secretary's announcement of the establishment of a Scottish tribunals service on 1 December. It was gratifying to see that that announcement, which will be good for Scotland, was made with the support and co-operation of the Lord Chancellor, Minister for Justice and fellow jazz lover, Ken Clarke. We are pleased that the respect agenda continues in that regard. The service will initially bring together into one organisation the administrative support for five devolved tribunals. The cabinet secretary identified them in his opening speech. They are: the Mental Health Tribunal for Scotland, the Additional Support Needs Tribunals for Scotland, the private rented housing panel, the Pensions Appeal Tribunals for Scotland and the Scottish charity appeals panel. The debate has been so wide ranging that one sometimes felt that the speeches strayed over the boundary of relevance, in cricketing parlance. Throughout it, we heard experiences from  members' working lives in education appeals, which Mr Pringle mentioned, children's hearings, which various members mentioned, and constituency work, which a great many members mentioned. That gave us the picture of a huge amount of important work, about which we hear little, being carried out in tribunals. We also debate tribunals little in comparison with the Scottish Court Service, which we debate all the time. This debate has provided an opportunity for members to give their points of view, and I am grateful to them for so doing. Bringing together the Scottish tribunals service will create considerable benefits for Scotland.

I entirely agree, and I had planned to expand and expatiate on that important issue later in my speech. Approximately 50,000 cases a year go to tribunal, and 42 tribunals operate in Scotland. Some tribunals, such as the mental health tribunals, handle a huge number of cases; others hear very few. The Scottish charity appeals panel has been asked to intervene either once or not at all. There is huge variance. Mr Brown's point is absolutely right—I may as well deal with it now, since he has raised it. The Scottish Government has been doing considerable work to support mediation. We give financial support to the Scottish Mediation Network. We believe that it is better to try to avoid going to court. As a former solicitor, Mr Brown, like me, will remember that too often the main gainers in court actions are the solicitors rather than the clients, irrespective of the outcome. It is a sad fact of litigation that if there are two parties only one can win, and often both of them feel that they have lost. Even if one of them has been the nominal victor, the costs of pursuing litigation are extremely high, particularly for more serious matters. Even a minor matter in a summary case can lead to huge expenses on either side, out of all proportion to the original prospect. I read of a case—in the papers, so one does not know whether it is entirely true—of a lady who was sequestrated and had incurred legal costs of hundreds of thousands of pounds for a disputed factorial bill of a couple of hundred pounds. Most people know that pursuing litigation for such matters is not sensible. What most people perhaps do not appreciate is just how emotionally draining and taxing it is to be involved in a litigation.  I agree entirely with Robert Brown. A huge amount of work has been going on to support mediation. The same applies to arbitration, which was mentioned by several members. In the past few days I have attended a meeting with those who are involved in arbitration, with a view to implementing yet another of our manifesto pledges—in addition to 77 out of a total of 94—namely, the establishment of a Scottish arbitration centre. Seventy-seven out of 94 ain't bad, and is a record that I wish I had achieved in my examination results at school. We want to establish a Scottish arbitration centre partly because we believe that it will facilitate faster solutions to people who have disputes. We believe that it is right that they should do so. It is an extremely serious point. It has been an extremely general debate, so if other comments are considered relevant then this one must be relevant, too. I hope so.

I am not sure about the precise detail of the proposal in Ms Ferguson's bill, but in general and in principle, we support alternative dispute resolution and believe that people should pursue every reasonable option to try to resolve differences without going to a tribunal or a court. That is just an extension of common sense. We have various other measures, but time probably does not permit me to go into them, so I will move swiftly on. We believe that the Scottish tribunals service will create a more efficient and effective administration that will be able to use its scale to make better use of resources. As the cabinet secretary said, it will begin to tackle the fragmentation of the tribunals—a point that many members made during the debate. We are working towards all tribunals in Scotland being part of a coherent Scottish justice system that is administered in Scotland. Indeed, there is a timetable for the achievement of that, which brings us up to around 2015, by which time we hope to see the Scottish tribunals service include all tribunals; that is the aim. Many members, principally Mr Robert Brown, referred to the role of tribunals that deal with reserved areas, one of which is, of course, industrial tribunals. Employment law is substantially reserved to Westminster. It is an area in which I had some practice, although unfortunately for me I was usually up against Mr  Brown's partner, Rod McKenzie, or Raymond Williamson, who are avowed experts in employment law, and I thereby secured defeat for my unfortunate clients. I did have some success on other occasions. It is striking that in employment tribunals claims have to be made within a short time; three months is the cut-off point for unfair dismissal claims. There is then a very quick process of getting a day in court. The dates are assigned through a commonsense process so that, within a reasonable amount of time after someone loses their job, they get their day in court. In most cases, they do not have to go through an overly complex, endless and byzantine process of adjusting pleadings—as one has to do in the civil courts, which can go on for years. They have to go through a fairly rapid process to get to the hearing for their dispute. We should value that and praise all those who work in our tribunal system for achieving it. Mr Brown referred to complex cases, and there are many that might well go on to the employment appeal tribunal or even further, but that is relatively infrequent. By and large, in comparing and contrasting the employment tribunals with the civil court system, my experience is that the employment tribunal was a far less stressful and more satisfactory experience for clients. That is merely my experience, and it might not be wholly accurate, but it is a tribute to the Scottish tribunal system and all who work in it that we have such a good system. Because we have responsibility for the area, I decided to meet those who head our employment tribunals in Scotland. I met Shona Simon, the president of employment tribunals in Scotland, and Susan Walker, who is the vice-president. There are a great many issues of huge importance, some of which have been raised today by Cathie Craigie, who covered her constituents' many concerns in her remarks about the difficulties that constituents have in accessing tribunals. In response to some of Cathie Craigie's points, and those of other members, I say that an element of legal advice and assistance is provided in the preparation of cases that are going to tribunal under the advice and assistance scheme, and the assistance by way of representation—ABWOR—scheme. I have the figures with me, but I do not want to bore members in the chamber so I will not read them out.

I do not like to disappoint, Presiding Officer, and some remarks are being  made off-stage; unfortunately, I cannot hear them. I reassure members that there is an element of publicly funded assistance for the preparation of cases going to tribunal. It is important because getting the facts right and presenting them coherently is the basic requirement for success in any case.

I am grateful to Cathie Craigie for making that point, as it brings me neatly to the next segment of my speech—although I note, Presiding Officer, that we are running out of time. [ Laughter .] Cathie Craigie is absolutely right. She mentioned citizens advice bureaux earlier—as have other members—which do an excellent job in helping people to prepare cases before tribunals. In my intervention, which Cathie Craigie kindly took during her speech, I alluded to my and my party's concern that there will be a considerable growth in the number of appeals against the refusal of employment support allowance throughout Scotland. When I visited the Nairn and Inverness citizens advice bureaux, I was told that there are already a huge number of such appeals. I place on record our worry that there will be very serious consequences if there are reforms to benefits whereby people on low levels of benefit have them removed. The appeals system is under great strain at the moment, which I believe is because of difficulties in dealing with the private company that has the responsibility for dealing with medical evidence. I suspect that those matters will become issues of great political controversy in quite a short time, should the UK go ahead with its avowed intention further to reform and make difficult the availability of benefits. I want to provide some relief to Cathie Craigie by reassuring her that, in addition to the measures to which I have just alluded, which I am sure she will welcome, we will in the stage 3 debate next week on the Legal Services (Scotland) Bill, which I know has cross-party support, propose a number of measures that specifically address the points that she has raised. For example, if the Legal Services (Scotland) Bill is passed, citizens advice bureaux will be able to employ solicitors for the first time. They cannot do that at the moment, but they will be able to assist Cathie Craigie's constituents further—

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Organisations such as Scottish Women's Aid, to whose conference I spoke but a few weeks ago, will be able to employ a solicitor if the Parliament passes the Legal Services (Scotland) Bill next week. That means that they will be better able to deal with the hugely important and sensitive task of obtaining matrimonial interdicts for females who are the victims of violence. The bill will be of assistance to them, too. I can further reassure Cathie Craigie, who raised the topic, that if the Legal Services (Scotland) Bill is passed next week, we will have the benefits of section 96, which will place a new duty on the Scottish Legal Aid Board. It will not just be a passive body that dishes out legal aid on application and administers it prudently, but will have a duty proactively to monitor the availability of legal aid throughout Scotland. If the Parliament passes the Legal Services (Scotland) Bill next week, all those points—

Most certainly.

I know that the chamber will be agog next week during stage 3 of the Legal Services (Scotland) Bill and I do enjoy speaking to a full house, but I can reassure Cathie Craigie that this Government has been very generous to those voluntary organisations, as Mr Neil can testify, because he has provided considerable support to those bodies, which do an excellent job throughout Scotland. I thank all members for what has been a highly stimulating debate.

I want to raise a matter that I had hoped to raise with Robert Brown: the burden that is brought about by the massive increase in cases that relate to employment support allowances and benefit appeals, which Cathie Craigie rightly mentions. Is she concerned, as we are, that further changes to benefits law in the UK would inevitably mean that the existing huge workload in relation to benefits appeals would be significantly enhanced by a further significant increase in the number of such appeals?

Mr Brown referred to an audit to establish whether bodies comply with the ECHR. Plainly, the Scottish Government has a duty to comply. If Mr Brown wishes me to answer the point later, I wonder whether he would explain more about his concerns. Are there particular examples of non-compliance by tribunals or those that use them?

Will the member take another intervention?

The Scottish Prison Service substance misuse strategy, which was published in July this year, focuses on recovery, in line with Scottish Government policy. One in five prisoners is prescribed methadone, and in the vast majority of those cases—85 per cent—there is a continuity of prescriptions that were initiated in the community. According to the 2009 prisoner survey, 23 per cent of prisoners who are on methadone are on a reducing dose as part of their recovery programme.

Methadone is a drug for which there is a very legitimate use, and all the evidence confirms it—that is the fact of the matter. It is a bit unfair to all the people who work in the Prison Service to say that they are doing nothing to assist people who are "parked on methadone". That is simply not the case as I see it. I praise the work that has been done at Saughton, for example. I visited the addiction support wing there, which is an eminently sensible initiative. That is one of a wide range of measures that we are taking in conjunction with the Scottish Prison Service to get more prisoners on the road to recovery. I fully support the work that our excellent prison officers and staff are doing in that regard. I hope that all members will back that sentiment.

Of course we acknowledge that concern. Indeed, we recently debated the issue thoroughly in an excellent debate, in which there was an acknowledgement across the board of this huge and difficult problem. However, there has not been a recognition of all the work that has been done in prisons. I will refer to some of that work. Last year, the Scottish Prison Service undertook 19,650 tests on 23,122 admissions. I say that to provide a little bit of perspective and to put the other side of the case about the work that is done day and daily by those in our Prison Service who work on the health side, the prison officers and the governors, who are all doing great things. It is very difficult to provide comprehensive treatment for those on short sentences, because there ain't enough time to provide the structured programme of support that is required. Therefore, the more that people who are currently given short sentences instead do more suitable community payback, the more effectively we will be able to tackle drug addiction problems in Scotland.

Gil Paterson is entirely correct. The Scottish Government is starting with the Scottish prisons naloxone programme. The pilots that preceded the rolling out of that programme showed that there were 55 instances where naloxone—an opiate antidote—was used to bring people back from drug overdoes. That means that potentially 55 lives in Scotland have been saved. There is a particular risk of overdose for prisoners on their release from prison. That is why we have decided to commence the programme with those in the Scottish Prison Service. I very much appreciated the support across the chamber that I gather we had for that good programme. I am very pleased that the Scottish Government is able to act in that way.

I am grateful for Sarah Boyack's continued interest in that area and the proposals that she discussed with the Minister for Housing and Communities on 2 June. I met the minister on 1 July to discuss those proposals further, and since then I have taken an on-going interest.  As Sarah Boyack is aware, we intend to introduce a Scottish statutory instrument by the end of this session of Parliament that will amend part 7 of the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004 to make it easier for local authorities to issue antisocial behaviour notices to owners of party flats and to bring a case to court with the prospect of a successful verdict.

I acknowledge Sarah Boyack's interest, and I know that Shirley-Anne Somerville and Malcolm Chisholm have also been pursuing the matter. It is a serious issue, and I accept that all existing powers should be used in the way that Sarah Boyack describes. I am pleased that we are able to act on a cross-party basis to introduce the necessary legal measures to deal with the relatively few, but significant, cases that would benefit from those measures. Partying in Scotland did not begin in 2007 when the Scottish National Party came to power; it has been part of the warp and weft—as far as I have seen from my limited participation in such events—of Scottish life for some considerable time. We are not, as a party or a Government, anti-party, but we hope that people behave with proper decorum, especially in the capital city.

I have found the debate to be extremely useful. Almost every speech has been thoughtful, positive and constructive and in some cases, as has been mentioned, members have reflected the experience that they brought to the Parliament. As Dr Richard Simpson said, Dr Ian McKee's description of the typical approach that a GP would take to someone who presented with a drug problem was a textbook example that we could all learn a lot from simply by reading it, if nothing else. I want to respond to as many of members' contributions as I can and although I will not be able to respond to them all, because almost all of them have been so thoughtful, I undertake that my officials will study each one after the debate. I will request advice on, reflect on and consider all the suggestions that have been made, particularly the positive suggestions about how we can move forward with "The Road to Recovery". I will respond first on the issue that commanded most of members' time—the problem of drugs in our prisons. The starting point is to acknowledge that the strategy devoted considerable attention to the two major challenges that face the Scottish Prison Service: preventing drugs from getting into prisons and managing prisoners with drug problems. I am pleased to say that since "The Road to Recovery" was unanimously approved by Parliament, progress has been made, and I think that it is fair to outline some of that for the benefit of those who are following the debate. We all know that mobile phones were used to arrange for the delivery of drugs into prison. An inmate would phone up a friend to have drugs chucked over the wall at a particular time so that  they could be ingathered, or to arrange for them to be brought in at a particular visitation. Mobile phones have been banned in prison under prison rules, and it is now against prison rules and an offence under the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Act 2010 to introduce or to attempt to introduce a mobile phone into a prison. That provision will come into effect shortly. Body orifice search system chairs are used to detect weapons and mobile phones. Mobile-trace machines are used and drug-analysis machines can detect minute traces of drugs on skin or clothing. I have seen all those items for myself at various prisons that I have visited. In defence of the work that is done by our prison officers day in, day out, I would like to say that the prognosis of the current scenario is not altogether bleak. The figures for 2009-10 show that 56 per cent of prisoners proved to be positive on drug testing on admission to prison. However, on exit from prison, that had been reduced to 18 per cent positive. It would appear that there has been a 38 per cent reduction in the proportion of prisoners using drugs during their time in prison. I mention that because it is fair to mention the good news and all the good work that is being done with prisoners, which members will want to support. In addition, perhaps as a result of the improved security measures, the number of drug seizures rose to 1,829 between April and March 2009-10. Early indications are that that figure is improving further following the introduction of the measures to which I have just alluded on mobile phones, 584 of which were seized in one quarter. One of the problems with prisons is that those prisoners who spend 30 days or fewer in prison do not really have sufficient time to access the enhanced addiction casework services. They can, of course, get a methadone script immediately, where appropriate, and 85 per cent of prisoners who are on methadone were on it before they went into prison. However, those who serve short sentences in prison cannot access full treatment services. John Lamont referred to the situation in Pennsylvania, which we have heard about before.

We do not have up-to-date information about how efficacious the Pennsylvania approach has been, but if we wanted to follow that example in Scotland, if that is what is being advocated—I am not sure that it is being advocated per se—there would be no visitors to prisons. Families would not see each other. I am not sure that the best way of helping  people to deal with psychological or mental health problems is to tell them that they cannot see their family. I do not think that that is being advocated, but I mention it just to put it into perspective. The SPS recently published a substance misuse strategy and we recognise the progress that it is making. I am sure that all members will wish to recognise the good work that is being done, but as Bill Aitken and James Kelly said, there is a long way to go. James Kelly was right to focus on the need for enforcement measures, so I am delighted that, between 2008 and 2010, the SCDEA seized more than 1.1 tonnes of class A drugs with a value of approximately £64 million. During the past two years, we have seen some of the most successful operations in the history of Scottish policing, in parts of Scotland such as Grampian and West Lothian. I attended a debrief of one of those operations, at which I learned that more than 100 people were involved in a dawn raid on a great number of dealers. Despite the number of people who were involved in and were privy to that exercise, there was not one leak to any drug dealer. If only we could say that about discretion among our political colleagues. Mary Scanlon made a thoughtful speech, in which she referred to the research base and a document that was commissioned by the Scottish Government for the purpose of identifying the gaps. I will pursue the points that she raised and write to her about them. Many members referred to the role of methadone, its cost, and the plight of people who have been parked on it for far too long. A clear consensus now exists in Scotland because of the evidence base and the orange guidelines, which are entirely consonant with the road to recovery strategy, and because of the excellent work of true experts such as Dr Roy Robertson and Dr Brian Kidd. The consensus is that substitute prescriptions such as methadone can play an invaluable role in stabilising drug users, but there is a concern that more needs to be done and a recognition that more must be done for those people who might have been on methadone for too long without other interventions. In bringing my remarks to a close, I am delighted to say that we will support all the amendments this afternoon to reflect the consensus. The wording will perhaps not be absolutely as I would have drafted it, but setting that aside we will support it because we recognise that there is an overwhelming desire among us, which transcends all party differences, to see that the road to recovery strategy is delivered to tackle the scourge of drugs that so badly afflicts our country.

In May 2008, the Parliament and all MSPs from all parties agreed that we had to work together to put Scotland on the road to recovery. A radical shift was needed to tackle drug misuse and its destructive and tragic impact on individual lives, families, communities and our country. At the heart of "The Road to Recovery" is the fundamental principle that people can and do recover from drug misuse. I have witnessed that fact for myself across Scotland and I have been proud to celebrate the achievements of those who are defined by their potential as individuals and not by their addiction. I have seen the strength and determination that are needed to embrace recovery. Two years have elapsed since we approved the strategy unanimously. I will use this opportunity to recognise the significant efforts and personal dedication of front-line workers, to update Parliament on the progress that has been made so far and to consider the future impact of the strategy. Alcohol and drug partnerships have a crucial role. ADPs take the lead in developing local solutions that will ultimately help individuals and communities to recover from the harm that drug and alcohol misuse can cause. We greatly value the role of the voluntary sector, which other parties have rightly highlighted in their amendments. The Government will, of course, continue to support voluntary sector organisations as integral partners in delivering recovery. Just last Saturday, I spoke at the conference in Stirling of Scottish Families Affected by Drugs and heard about the excellent work that it does to support families around the country. Secondly, there has been increased funding for health boards. I recognised that an ambitious new strategy would require significant amounts of taxpayers' money. Every year since the strategy was published, I have increased the allocation to health boards for front-line drug services. Over three years, that represents a 20 per cent increase in funding—an investment offering hope and the opportunity of recovery for people struggling with  addiction, but also an investment that will make essential and enduring savings for our economy. Thirdly, I turn to the social, health and economic cost. The annual cost to Scotland of drug misuse is estimated at £3,500 million. That is more than £60,000 per annum per problem drug user—a cost for the whole country. However, costs typically decrease by tens of thousands of pounds once an individual engages in treatment. Treatment works, but it pays, too. Fourthly, there is the health improvement, efficiency, access and treatment—HEAT—target. When the strategy was launched, we knew that too many people were waiting too long to receive the help that they needed. Last year, we set a challenging target so that, by 2013, 90 per cent of those who needed treatment would get it within three weeks. Since then, we have already seen a significant improvement in waiting times. We are well on our way to achieving our target, with more people getting access to treatment, care and recovery support that is right for them. When someone needs help, it must be offered as quickly as possible. We must continue to focus on recovery in the widest sense. Getting into treatment is just the start but can bring about a stability from which recovery can begin and allow an individual to move from the first step of asking for help to future opportunities in education and employment. Fifthly, I turn to the issue of drug-related deaths. Sadly, there are still those who do not seek help in time. Last year, we lost 545 people to drug-related deaths in Scotland. "The Road to Recovery" is beginning to make a difference, but we must do more to reduce drug-related deaths. One method of seeking to prevent deaths is through the use of naloxone. Naloxone is an opiate antidote for use in the event of drugs overdose. It is not the solution to drugs deaths, but it can buy those 20 to 30 crucial minutes that can make the difference between help arriving and death. Over the past two years, I have been persuaded that a national approach to naloxone is needed in Scotland. Over the next 18 months, the Scottish Government will fund implementation of the recommendations of the national forum on drug-related deaths to ensure that training for key workers is available across Scotland and that health boards are reimbursed for every naloxone kit that they give out; that effective evaluation is undertaken to determine the long-term impact of naloxone provision; and that all prisons in Scotland supply naloxone and training to those vulnerable to overdose on release from prison. A national roll-out will build on the success of pilots in Highland, Lanarkshire and Glasgow, where 55 reported uses of naloxone have potentially saved  55 lives. Under the national roll-out, those numbers will increase. Our prisons are the right place to catalyse the programme. The Scottish Prison Service has a new substance misuse strategy, which was launched this year. It focuses on robust security systems to divert, disrupt, detect and deter the supply of illicit substances. Importantly, it will provide for integrated treatment and care packages that are tailored to the individual and their long-term recovery. I look forward to engaging today in discussion with colleagues about how we can further improve the work that is being done in prisons. At the other end of the spectrum, early intervention and effective education are key to tackling drug misuse. To that end, I have invested in a programme of substance misuse education. Our know the score website and helpline provide credible, accessible advice and support 24 hours a day. Our programme of cocaine awareness weekends and campaigns has engaged with some of the people who are most at risk from the destructive impact of that drug. I have commissioned a programme of training for key workers, which will focus on so-called legal highs, and I have asked young people from across Scotland to investigate what works best for them in terms of peer education and to report back to me at the end of the year. Our legacy of drug misuse will not be turned round in just two years. It is a long-term plan, which must be continually challenged. Recent research suggests that the average duration of an individual's journey of recovery is between five and seven years. That is why I have established the Scottish Drugs Strategy Delivery Commission. Chaired independently of Government, and with a membership of experts from across Scotland in the fields of medicine, pharmacy, recovery, enforcement, academia, local government and the voluntary sector, it also contains individuals with direct experience of recovery. The commission's remit is to assess and challenge the direction and pace of progress in delivering "The Road to Recovery". The Scottish Drugs Recovery Consortium, which was established this year, has a crucial role to play, too, ensuring that, as the strategy is translated into delivery, recovery remains at the heart of services.

Yes, they will. That is one of the things that they aim to do. Robert Brown is perfectly correct to point to the importance of research in this field. The work that both the Scottish Drugs Strategy Delivery Commission and the Scottish Drugs Recovery Consortium are doing is very important, and it supplements the work that is carried out by my officials. Dr David Best and his colleagues in the Drugs Recovery Consortium make some effective expositions of how recovery works and succeeds, and of how getting into treatment is the start. A series of positive things in life can also assist people with their recovery. For example, an individual can get family support or support from a friend who is willing to help them to cope with their addiction on a day-to-day basis, perhaps getting involved in group discussions or peer therapy, in which the individual is with other people who have been through the mill. Some structure can be provided to the day, so that the individual is not sitting at home doing nothing in a spiral of depression. They should get into education or training wherever possible. They might get into a relationship—one chap I spoke to in Ayrshire said that the key to his recovery has been his girlfriend. His life was transformed, and he had a reason to escape from the clutches of drug addiction. All those things create a virtuous circle in which recovery becomes possible, and it works. It can be a matter of associating with people who are not addicts, who are sober and who have been through the mill themselves—they have come through to the other side of addiction. People can get away from the bad influences and the old friends who got them into drugs in the first place. All those factors play a part in helping with recovery.

I certainly will, and I also acknowledge the contribution of Alcoholics Anonymous and Cocaine Anonymous. Such groups bring together people who have faced up to their problems. In some cases they pursue the 12-step recovery programme, which works for many people, albeit not all people. I agree with the points that were made by Mary Scanlon and Robert Brown, which illustrate the consensual approach that I am pleased has been taken over the past two years. Finally, on 24 and 25 September, Glasgow Green will host the recovery weekend, one of the biggest events held in Scotland—I think the  biggest that there has ever been in Scotland—to promote recovery. I invite all members to joint us there to show their support. I look forward to a full debate. I welcome members' views, and I believe that the debate will demonstrate the continued constructive and non-partisan consensus on tackling Scotland's relationship with drugs. I move, That the Parliament notes the progress made in delivering Scotland's national drugs strategy, The Road to Recovery; welcomes the fact that Scotland is leading the way in ensuring that recovery and the needs of the individual are at the heart of drug services; notes the progress made in significantly bringing down waiting times for access to services, and calls on the Scottish Government and all relevant national and local agencies to continue to drive forward the delivery of the strategy.

It would not be appropriate for the Scottish Government to submit a response to the consultation, which is about the local operation of legislation relating to public processions. Under the current legislation, which was amended by the previous Administration in 2006, responsibility for the regulation of marches and parades in Scotland rests with local authorities. It is for them, in consultation with the local chief constable and other local interests, to agree how to operate the legislation locally, to decide whether events should go ahead, and to decide whether any restrictions should be placed on them.

I am aware of the close interest that Bill Butler and other members have taken in public processions. He is correct to say that the police costs for managing parades are significant—they amounted to an estimated £1.7 million in Strathclyde in the past financial year. It is therefore legitimate for local authorities and the police to encourage march organisers to consider the strain on resources that large-scale or contentious events present, particularly in the current economic climate, and to take account of that in the planning process. I take up Bill Butler's invitation to encourage all relevant bodies to work together nationally with parading organisations to develop an approach that will lessen the impact of parades on communities throughout Scotland.

It appears that those claims were in the main based on the views of drug dealers interviewed as part of a 2005 Joseph Rowntree Foundation report entitled, "Understanding Drug Selling in Communities". The Scottish Government objects in the strongest possible terms to any suggestion that there are anything other than appalling and life-destroying consequences from having drug dealers operating in any community. Drugs affect every area of Scotland. There were 574 drugs-related deaths in 2008—the highest figure ever—and the social and economic costs of drug misuse are estimated by Audit Scotland to be more than £2,600 million a year. Drugs wreck communities and the lives of the individuals living in them, and that is why the Scottish Government's focus is based on the principle of recovery.

I agree with the member that the effects of drug dealing on communities are entirely bad and extremely damaging. I pay tribute to the work of the police and, in particular, the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency, in having conducted, over the past couple of years, some of the most successful policing operations ever in the history of Scottish policing against drug dealers. I also pay tribute to all the people in alcohol and drugs partnerships throughout Scotland—many of whom I have visited over the past few months—who are doing good work to try to remedy the most serious problems caused by drug addiction that face Scottish society.

I certainly recognise that DTTOs play a part. Indeed, I discussed the issue when I visited Campbeltown on Monday and met the Argyll and Bute alcohol and drugs partnership. I spoke to some individuals who had been through the DTTO procedure, which involves, as an alternative to custody, submitting to drug testing and regular appearances before the sheriff. We have shown our commitment to DTTOs by supporting them and by, in a pilot scheme, extending them to lower tariff offences. I hope that we will show that commitment further in early course. I appreciate that there is widespread cross-party support for these measures.

Statistics on the number of antisocial behaviour orders issued to adults and under-16s between October 2004 and March 2008, by local authority area, can be found on the Scottish Government website. However, we prefer to focus on the good preventive work being done by practitioners, which reduces the need for enforcement action after the event. For example, I am sure that the member will acknowledge, as I do, the good partnership working taking place to prevent alcohol-fuelled antisocial behaviour in Fife, which I saw first hand when I visited the Fife equally well project last October.

Although antisocial behaviour orders are a mechanism that is open to a local authority to use where it considers it appropriate, we do not believe that the orders are the solution  to the problem. In fact, I well recall that the previous Administration devoted £7 million over four years to junior antisocial behaviour orders. Only four ASBOs were issued over that period, which means that they cost well over £0.5 million each. We believe that that money would have been far better spent following the Scottish Government policy of using early intervention to prevent the reason for the antisocial behaviour occurring in the first place, whether that is alcohol, drugs or knives. We want to be tough on crime and tough on the causes of crime.

I entirely agree with Angela Constance about the example she used. Surely it is better to divert youngsters from becoming involved in antisocial behaviour through programmes such as the one she mentions in West Lothian and others that operate throughout Scotland to help to turn around—as I believe is the meaning of the Latin from which "divert" derives—the behaviour of young people rather than issue them with an ASBO, which some of the hardened core are actually proud to receive.

I refer the member to the answer that I provided to question 3, from Dr Ian McKee, on that subject.

I agree with the Daily Record 's criticism of the views that were presented, although as a minister I would not use terms of that nature. However, I pay tribute to all the people  throughout Scotland who are attempting to deliver the drugs strategy "The Road to Recovery", with—I am pleased to say—the support of every MSP, and alcohol and drugs partnerships, many of which I have visited; I will visit one in Musselburgh next week. The partnerships do good work. They help people to recover from drug addiction and they help families to get back sons and daughters lost to the consequences of drug abuse. They do a marvellous job for Scotland. Let us praise them and not be too distracted by the views of those on the fringes.

The Scottish Government is committed to making our communities safer and stronger. In March 2009, Councillor Harry McGuigan of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and I published our shared vision for tackling antisocial behaviour in Scotland, entitled "Promoting Positive Outcomes: Working Together to Prevent Antisocial Behaviour in Scotland", which was developed in partnership with COSLA and other national partners and received cross-party support when it was debated in the chamber on 2 April 2009. The framework empowers local agencies to focus on addressing the causes of antisocial behaviour before it occurs, resolving such behaviour when it occurs and working together more effectively.

We entirely support local authorities that decide to use the powers that are available in applying for antisocial behaviour orders where those are appropriate. The ASBO is one of the tools in the box and it is up to local authorities to decide whether to use it. I and my friend Councillor Harry McGuigan, of Mr Whitton's party, are united in our approach to tackling antisocial behaviour, as are the police, the fire service, the Crown Office, Victim Support Scotland, Youth Scotland, voluntary workers and virtually every person who is involved in tackling antisocial behaviour in Scotland. They know that  we must tackle the causes, not just deal with the symptoms.

We are pursuing the policies that I outlined earlier. In addition, on 1 March I announced £20,000 of funding for South Lanarkshire Council's successful bid in our community wellbeing champions initiative. That will enable the council to develop further its positive communities model, engaging with a range of community and tenants groups to identify and prioritise local issues and influence the direction of those resources.

I am entirely aware of the problems that Karen Gillon mentions—as a constituency MSP I have encountered them, as she has, in the many surgeries that I have held. I will certainly engage with Alex Neil on the matter.

We certainly support the objectives that Mr Kelly seeks to achieve, but we take the view, as we did at stage 2, that, with great respect, he has misunderstood the legal provisions that already apply, which make his amendment unnecessary. The provision that he seeks to make is available under the existing law. In Scotland, unlike in England and Wales, there is a legislative presumption against 24-hour licensing. A licensing board here must refuse an application for 24-hour licensing unless it is satisfied that there are exceptional circumstances that justify such an application. The Scottish ministers' guidance to licensing boards states that more detailed consideration should be given to any application for a licence that requests opening times in excess of 14 continuous hours. Licensing boards must consider such matters, as I think Bill Aitken suggested earlier and in committee. There are therefore a number of safeguards in place that restrict the ability of a licensing board to grant 24-hour licences. That is right and proper. The system in Scotland has worked because we are simply not seeing such licences emerge, unlike south of the border, where 24-hour licences are granted, notably for large supermarkets. Licensing boards are already under a general obligation to have regard to advice that is given or recommendations that are made by local licensing forums. I say with respect to Mr Kelly that that knocks on the head his suggestion that the law does not cover the issue; it does. Rightly and properly, the views of local licensing forums must be taken into account and considered by licensing boards. Amendment 199 seeks to allow licensing boards to revoke or vary a 24-hour licence following the recommendation of a local licensing forum but, as I said, licensing boards can already take those steps—the relevant powers exist under sections 36 and 37 of the 2005 act. Therefore, if a 24-hour licence is granted and it subsequently causes concerns that are relevant to any of the licensing objectives, a licensing board has the power to take the action that is envisaged in amendment 199. We believe that safeguards for communities against 24-hour licensing are already contained in the 2005 act and that amendment 199 could undermine the effectiveness of those safeguards. I assume that Mr Kelly has no wish to do that. If that is the case, I trust that he will seek to withdraw amendment 199.

The Interpretation Act 1978 defines a number of commonly used terms so that separate definitions do not have to be provided in each piece of legislation by the United Kingdom Parliament. As amended by the Scotland Act 1998, it provides definitions of "Act" and "enactment" that exclude acts of the Scottish Parliament and instruments made under such acts. There are a large number of references to "Act" and "enactment" in statute. For example, section 307 of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 defines "crime" as "any crime or offence at common law or under any Act of Parliament whenever passed". That leads to anomalies. There is no good reason why the definition of "crime" in the 1995 act should not include crimes that are created by the Scottish Parliament, without the Scottish Parliament specifically having to say so every time that it legislates. Amendment 168 provides a solution specifically for the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995, the Criminal Law (Consolidation) (Scotland) Act 1995 and the licensing provisions in the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982, which are the main pre-devolution statutes that are dealt with in the bill. Each reference to "Act" or "enactment" has  been checked to ensure that the extension to include acts of the Scottish Parliament is appropriate. I move amendment 168.  Amendment 168 agreed to.

Amendment 169 is a minor technical amendment that tidies up the wording of section 143, following amendments that were made at stage 2. Amendment 170 is a minor technical amendment that provides that section 145 of and schedule 5 to the bill will come into force through a commencement order made by the Scottish ministers. I move amendment 169.  Amendment 169 agreed to.

Amendment 166 amends section 45 of the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005 to provide that the provisional period within which a provisional premises licence must be confirmed is increased from two to four years. Members of the Justice Committee will recall the debate on Robert Brown's stage 2 amendment—I think that it was amendment 543—on provisional premises licences. We said at stage 2 and continue to believe that the ability to scrutinise applications effectively, either at the start or at the end of the application process, is imperative. The police and licensing boards must have the ability to consider provisional premises licence applications to ensure that policing and overprovision implications of proposed developments can be given timely and effective consideration. It is equally important that the public  know exactly what developments are being proposed in their communities. The original amendment did not achieve that because it undermined significantly the ability of the public to know what was being proposed in their communities and the police's ability to comment effectively on the effect on the area or the increase in policing required. For licensing boards, the vague outline effectively reduced any sensible consideration of what was or was not going to be built. When premises were completed, there was no effective method for the public, the police or even the licensing board to influence the licence until the premises were operating. Bill Aitken raised a good point during the stage 2 debate: "A two-year provisional licence might not be appropriate in respect of larger-scale developments. The last thing that any member wants to do is to inhibit development, in particular in the difficult economic times that are likely to be faced by the licensed trade and everyone else."—[ Official Report , Justice Committee, 11 May 2010; c 3132.] We agree with Bill Aitken's judgment, and not for the first time. Under the 2005 act, the licence has to be confirmed within two years, otherwise it will be revoked. We recognise that the current timeframe of two years for provisional premises licences can, on occasion, present difficulties for some developers who do not complete the development within two years. Indeed, we recall that this place was supposed to have been completed within two years, by 2001; we might also recall that that did not happen. Developments might not be completed within two years, which is why we propose that the period be extended from two to four years. The licensing board will be able to extend the period if construction or conversion work is delayed for reasons outwith the licence holder's control. I move amendment 166.

The key points are that there must be the opportunity properly to scrutinise the licence application and the operating plan, and for the licensing board, the police and the public to know what is being proposed. Of lesser importance is the length of time that it takes for a development to be completed. In this Parliament, we all know that developments take longer than they might otherwise have done because of economic difficulties. Are we really going to penalise developers further by stating that the limit of their provisional premises licence will be two years when, for reasons that might be outwith their control because of financial difficulties, a development could take longer than two years to complete? Are we going to put further obstacles in their place? I submit that we should not do so. I agree with the comments that Robert Brown has made, and I agree with the comments that Bill Aitken made so sagaciously at the Justice Committee. I very much hope that Parliament will support amendment 166.

Amendment 167 amends the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005 to require licensing boards to provide copies of premises licences and occasional licences, and summaries of those licences, to the police when they send copies to licensing applicants and licence holders. It is important for the police to be made aware of the licensing conditions attached to each licence in order for the conditions of that licence to be properly enforced. We believe that amendment 167 will assist the police when they undertake their licensing enforcement duties, and that it will make a positive addition to the existing enforcement measures that are already available to licensing boards and the police under the 2005 act. I move amendment 167.  Amendment 167 agreed to.

Amendments 82 to 89 set out in more detail the way in which applications for witness anonymity orders can be made and how appeals arising out of such applications are to be dealt with, in particular at what points appeals must be made. The amendments are mainly technical and are designed to make the arrangements workable in practice. The overall principle behind the amendments is to ensure that the anonymity of a witness can be protected until an application for a witness anonymity order is determined. I have several more pages of speaking notes, but I propose simply to leave it there and say that I am happy to deal with any specific queries on amendments. I move amendment 82.

On amendment 87, the judgment is a matter of balance. The granting of a witness anonymity order is a serious matter and it should be appealable. However, we want to safeguard against spurious appeals or delaying  tactics and have concluded for that reason that there should be leave to appeal.  Amendment 82 agreed to.  Amendments 83 to 89 moved—[Fergus Ewing]—and agreed to.

At stage 2, the Justice Committee agreed to amendments proposed by David McLetchie and supported by Age Scotland to remove the upper age limit for jury service in criminal trials. The amendments provided that those aged 71 or over be entitled to be excused from jury service as of right. In other words, those aged 71 or over may serve on juries in criminal trials but do not have to if they do not wish to. The committee also agreed to our amendments to provide that persons who seek excusal as of right do so within seven days of receipt of the revisal notice, which is the first warning of potential jury service. As I said at the time, there is an interaction between our amendments and David McLetchie's amendments. Amendments 90 to 92 and 186 seek to address that interaction. Although we believe that it is correct that most people seeking excusal as of right should do so at the earliest opportunity, which is desirable in managing court business from the Scottish Court Service's point of view, we do not believe that it is either fair or practicable to expect all those in the age group 71 or over to be able to comply with that. In consultation with the Scottish Court Service, we have decided that that age group should be able to seek excusal as of right at any time up to any trial diet to which they might eventually be cited. The Scottish Court Service has confirmed that it is ready to make the necessary operational arrangements to allow that to happen. The other amendments in the group are minor, technical amendments, which tidy up the juror provisions. I move amendment 90.

I am interested to hear David McLetchie's remarks that we are catching up on England. I look forward to the day when England catches up with us in relation to short sentences.  Amendment 90 agreed to.  Amendments 91 and 92 moved—[Fergus Ewing]—and agreed to.

Amendment 93 is a minor amendment to ensure that all the alternatives to prosecution are covered within the definition of "ancillary circumstances" contained in paragraph 2 of the new schedule 3 to the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974. It was felt that the current wording would exclude anything that had been done or undergone in pursuance of a work order under the current definition. Amendments 94 and 95 were lodged to correct errors in relation to the order-making powers that are referred to in paragraphs 6(a) and 6(b) of new schedule 3 to the 1974 act. They do not change the policy intention. The amendments ensure that our provisions mirror the existing order-making powers of the Scottish ministers under the 1974 act for spent convictions, but apply them to alternatives to prosecution.  I move amendment 93.  Amendment 93 agreed to.  Amendments 94 and 95 moved—[Fergus Ewing]—and agreed to.

Amendment 81 inserts a new subsection into section 18B of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995, which concerns the retention of prints and samples from children who have been referred to children's hearings. Amendment 81 addresses the particular concern—which, I believe, was shared by the committee—that forensic data should not be retained from children who have been involved in only minor assaults. Section 18B(6) of the 1995 act provides that relevant offences for the purposes of section 18B are such relevant sexual or violent offences as Scottish ministers may prescribe by order. The offences must be taken from the list of relevant violent and relevant sexual offences that is set out in section 19A of the 1995 act. The list is fairly extensive and includes, for example, rape, indecent assault and sodomy, in the case of sexual offences, and murder, assault and abduction, in the case of violent offences. Amendment 81 widens the scope of section 18B(6) of the 1995 act. It provides for an order to be made by Scottish ministers under section  18B(6) to prescribe a relevant violent offence by reference to a particular degree of seriousness rather than by reference simply to the list of offences in section 19A of the 1995 act. Amendment 81 will, for example, allow ministers to prescribe by order that only serious assaults—not all assaults—will be relevant offences and lead to the retention of forensic data that are collected from children. That will allow a more flexible and proportionate approach to be taken to the definition of offences that are carried out by children that can lead to the retention of forensic data. Amendment 16 changes the process by which a sheriff will extend the retention period. Robert Brown lodged an identical amendment at stage 2 and it was rejected. We believe that the arguments that were used against the amendment then apply now. He urges that Scottish ministers should be able to set out grounds, but he does not set out what those should be. He urges that we should consult, but he does not say whom we should consult. We believe that amendment 16 would see powers pass to Scottish ministers from the police and the courts, who are the people with the expertise and ability to consider individual cases, therefore we do not believe that Mr Brown's amendment 16, which was rejected by the committee, should be supported today. I urge Parliament to reject the amendments in the name of Robert Brown. I move amendment 81.

Margaret Curran's amendment 4 is similar to her stage 2 amendment on the topic, and we acknowledge the changes that she made to meet some of the concerns. The amendment does take us a bit further. Unfortunately, she has failed to lodge a workable amendment. We are particularly concerned that, as drafted, amendment 4 could mean some victims emerging fearful or traumatised by having to relive the crime at Parole Board hearings, where they would be in close proximity to the offender. That is clearly not what Margaret Curran wants. She is right that we indicated that we accepted in principle the right of victims to make oral representations to the Parole Board in serious cases, which is why I undertook to put together proposals that would achieve just that. Just to be clear, we did not pledge to lodge amendments to that effect at stage 3, as we recognised that it would not be possible to do that. However, we have already taken steps to improve the victim notification scheme by extending it to victims of those offenders who are sentenced to 18 months or more in prison. We have also formed a working group to consider the practicalities of the matter—and there are some serious practicalities. Bill Aitken has alluded to some, but there are others. At present, representations are made to the Scottish ministers, who can redact sensitive information. That would not be possible under the scheme in amendment 4. Also, solicitors would be excluded, but what would happen if someone who could not speak or did not have a friend or family member who could speak for them needed a solicitor? The procedure in Margaret Curran's amendment 4 would prevent that. We have the support of both David McKenna of Victim Support Scotland and Professor Cameron of the Parole Board for Scotland, both of whom agree that our approach in setting up a working party is the correct way forward. To proceed in haste would perhaps cause us to repent at leisure. Therefore, although we agree with the sentiments behind amendment 4, I respectfully suggest that we take more time to consider the issue and come forward with a workable and effective scheme for victims in Scotland so that they have the right to make oral representations, when appropriate, at Parole Board hearings.

Will John Lamont give way?

I am interested—

Bill Aitken began by talking about friends in his earlier life. I want to ask him about one of his current friends, Kenneth Clarke. I ask Bill Aitken to respond on behalf of the Scottish Conservatives: was Ken Clarke right or wrong?

The debate follows the report from Sheriff Principal Bowen, which, as Nigel Don said, starts with an extremely useful guide for non-solicitors to how the system works. The report is also a good read. It is straightforward and is written in simple terms. More than that, it sets out a series of recommendations that have enabled the debate to be extremely useful, as it has aired most subjects of controversy fairly well.  I welcome the broad consensus and the progress that we are making in the review of sheriff and jury procedure. As members have said, it is important to implement the reforms, to complete the process of reviewing all parts of the criminal justice process. After the summary justice reforms by Sheriff McInnes and Lord Bonomy's review of High Court procedure, the review of sheriff and jury procedure is another piece of the jigsaw. We are extremely grateful to Sheriff Principal Bowen for his report. On Monday, I attended Strathclyde Police headquarters to look at the force's work on CCTV evidence at its digital media intelligence unit. In paragraph 1.1 of his report, Sheriff Principal Bowen says that one reason for the length of and increase in the number of cases is CCTV evidence. I am sure that members who have seen CCTV footage are well aware of its value in providing evidence to help to secure prosecutions, particularly for offences against the person. When I visited Hamilton to view late-night work to tackle crime and antisocial behaviour, I saw a gruesome piece of footage. It showed a gentleman who, after a good night out, was waiting at a bus stop and decided to have a little sleep on the grassy embankment above it. Unfortunately for him, as the CCTV camera recorded all too graphically, while he was asleep he was stabbed repeatedly by two youths. After stabbing him time after time, they came back and had another few stabs—-presumably, just for more pleasure. Rightly, the CCTV evidence led to the conviction of those two individuals. I pay tribute to Assistant Chief Constable Ruaraidh Nicholson, ACC George Hamilton, Detective Sergeant Lorraine Anderson and all their colleagues, who do such excellent work in that regard. CCTV is relevant as a factor in the process and is a great help in securing the objective that many members have described—an early plea. If those who have committed crimes are confronted at an early stage with incontrovertible evidence showing them, on film footage, that they have done so, it makes them somewhat chary of going to a trial, as CCTV cannot expire, die or fail to turn up. Sheriff Principal Bowen makes a series of recommendations to reflect the changed situation. In responding to the debate, I will touch on some of his arguments, starting with the issue of TV links. Stewart Maxwell kicked off discussion of the topic and pointed to the great need for TV links to be used for female prisoners. We will give serious consideration to the points that he made. Members are right to say that we should proceed with care, but we will look with sympathy at the recommendations in paragraphs 9.4 and 9.5. The proposal to establish a working group seems to have merit.  I draw members' attention to the fact that Sheriff Principal Bowen "observed the use of TV links on a visit to Liverpool Crown Court in relation to hearings preliminary to trial." He records that, in the cases that he observed, "The accused's representative was able to use the court link to speak to their client prior to the case calling in court and was offered the opportunity to do so after the court hearing. There was minimal delay in having the accused appear 'on screen'; less indeed than one would often expect where the accused has to be brought from the cells to the dock." Nonetheless, we must consider carefully Bill Aitken's point about whether TV links are sufficient as a medium to allow the accused to respond to material that emerges unexpectedly in the course of a fiscal's address to the court about what sentence might be appropriate. As Stewart Maxwell deftly replied, a working group would look at that issue. The recommendation is useful, and we will take it forward in a sympathetic fashion. Inevitably, given that there are so many recommendations, some have not received a great deal of attention. The report recommends that "The Crown should disclose the initial results of forensic tests to the defence when they receive them, where there is no operational reason to prevent it"; that there needs to be informal dialogue about the performance of new fiscals; that "Greater use should be made of standby arrangements for all witnesses where possible, not just for police officers but also for civilian witnesses"; and that "Greater use should be made of existing measures to address the issue of reluctance of witnesses to attend". That illustrates the comprehensive nature of Sheriff Principal Bowen's recommendations. I turn to the area of most controversy, which Nicol Stephen set out in the most trenchant way. I refer to the 110-day rule, which states that, where the accused in sheriff court solemn cases is in custody, the trial must be commenced within 110 days of the event, so that the accused does not spend longer than 110 days awaiting trial. Although I have no personal sheriff court jury experience, I have some familiar experience, as my mother was involved in one sheriff court jury trial, at a time when the rule was slightly different. At that time, the case had to be concluded within 110 days. There was a happy day for the defendants in that case, who were represented by my mother and one David Smith—as some members will know, David Smith was a distinguished and very interesting sheriff in Kilmarnock sheriff court. The defence agents made an application for release of all three parties  because the Crown had failed to compute that the year was a leap year and had failed to take account of 29 February. Of course, my mother, David Smith and the other defence agent, like most solicitors and advocates, were not numerate at all, but my father was a chartered accountant and was on hand to carry out the mathematical computation. Mr Aitken will remember from his council days that he was able to do that. The defendants therefore walked free. Whether they were not guilty is a matter of some debate.

That is a reasonable point. However, I understand that Sheriff Principal Bowen's view is that extensions to the 110-day period in sheriff court solemn cases are relatively rare in comparison with extensions in the High Court. I do not think that that is a matter of controversy. The period is 140 days in the High Court and 110 days in sheriff court solemn custody cases. Therefore, there is already a difference. One might argue that, if one is in a cell, why should one have a protective period of 110 days simply because one is being tried in a different court, whereas there is a 140-day period for another type of charge? There is a discrepancy. It is important to record that Lord Bonomy described the 80-day rule—that is, the indictment must be served within 80 days of committal for trial—as the "jewel in the crown" of the Scottish criminal justice system, and that he recommended that we adhere to that rule, tight though it is, in meeting the requirements involved. However, it is also important to consider chapter 6.37 of the report. As I understand them, Sheriff Principal Bowen's proposals should be regarded as a package. He recommends that there should be an increase in time to enable business to be dealt with properly, but he goes on to say that balancing the time available for a case and the protection of the accused who has not been convicted "leads to substantial inconvenience to the public and professionals who are drawn into the criminal process. It is not possible to resolve these issues without changing the system."

Sheriff Principal Bowen says: "You cannot pack more and more priority cases into the system and require such cases to be prepared more effectively unless there is a significant increase in resources made available to those organisations involved in the court process. You cannot have it both ways. The alternative is that the system has to adjust." No one would wish to be so unkind as to say that the Liberal Democrats are genetically programmed to want to have things both ways. However, Sheriff Principal Bowen makes it clear that the proposals are a package. If we want the improvements—more time for cases to be disposed of, section 76 procedures to be used more, fewer witnesses to be inconvenienced, fewer police to spend their time hanging around court waiting rooms and court business to be dispatched more efficiently—the case that he has made for changing the existing 110-day rule is compelling. It is plain that we all must consider the matter carefully, but the case has been well made by Sheriff Principal Bowen. In conclusion, I thank all members for their contributions, especially Nigel Don, who at one point gave the impression that he was proposing the consignation to the knacker's yard of the presumption of innocence, thereby destroying his previously impeccable liberal credentials. However, it then appeared that that was a premature judgment and that he was simply advocating that a system of discounts was fair and reasonable. That is a conclusion with which I think we all can agree.

I thank Margaret Mitchell for lodging the motion to enable us to have this debate and to recognise the good work that SAVI undertakes in East Kilbride. I put on record my thanks to the volunteers who are involved in the delivery of the service and congratulate SAVI on the recent launch of its 2010 there for them appeal. I have been interested to learn a little more about the topic from Margaret Mitchell and the other members who have spoken, in particular about SAVI. I understand that it aims to support young victims of sexual abuse and that that support is given in many ways. It offers one-to-one support to victims and their families and operates 24-hour helpline support to them, as Margaret Mitchell and other members have said. It acts as an information point on legal, medical and psychological aspects that may arise for young victims and their families. It also offers access to relaxation and coping techniques and other appropriate therapies for recovery, and information and referral to other services if that is necessary. All members present—I am no exception—have probably been asked, at one time or another, to provide some kind of advice or support to young people who have been the victims of the most appalling crimes of a sexual nature. We all remember most vividly the details of those cases,  such as when a young woman, accompanied perhaps by a mother or relative, comes to us to seek advice. The memory of the pain and suffering experienced by the individuals who have consulted me will never entirely leave me. The difficulties that a young woman who has been raped might face include being afraid to go out of her house or being afraid to go to certain areas where she perceives that she might meet her assailant or the associates of her assailant. In some cases, the victim might have been taunted by associates of her assailant. Low self-esteem is a common and difficult feature. Recovery, particularly from the most serious crime of rape or any other serious sexual assault, is a slow process. Therefore, any organisation that provides support to females who have been affected in that way—although victims are not exclusively female, as young boys obviously can be, and sadly have been, affected by sexual abuse as well—is to be welcomed. Obviously, a large number of organisations and individuals are involved in providing such support. I know that Victim Support Scotland, for example, provides assistance to between 12,000 and 17,000 children a year who have been affected by crime. Of those, 200 to 300 are helped through the victims of youth crime—VOYCE—service, which says that 73 per cent of all victims of assault that it deals with are young people aged 16 or under. A significant number of those young people who receive assistance from Victim Support Scotland have been the victim of assault. Other voluntary organisations, as Mr Aitken and Mr Kerr mentioned, provide services on a one-to-one basis for the victims of the most serious crimes. We applaud the work that is done by such organisations, as well as the work of ChildLine, which provides support of a different variety that is also to be welcomed. One issue that was mentioned in the course of the debate is that of trial times and of delays in court. Like Bill Aitken, I recognise that there are reasons why court cases are taking longer. As it happens, I was reading about that this afternoon in Sheriff Principal Bowen's "Independent Review of Sheriff and Jury Procedure", which we are to debate in the next couple of weeks. He points out that, nowadays, the need to examine evidence from DNA and closed-circuit television and the contents of mobile phones adds to the length of trials. That said, one way in which we as a nation, we in Government and we in this Parliament can help to ensure that more assistance is given to victims, such as those whom SAVI supports, is to ensure that the criminal courts and justice system is organised more effectively. For example, members might be surprised to know that of 6,000  cases that are set to go to trial under the solemn procedure and for which citations have been sent out, only 1,000 of them actually have evidence, so in 5,000 cases citations have been sent out to witnesses who will never be called to give evidence. Plainly, it is not possible—nor would it be appropriate or right, as it would conflict with the presumption of innocence—to try to remove those cases, but I think that one could reduce the number. I mention that because that is one practical way whereby, working together, we might provide more resources and time to help victims of serious crime, in particular children who are victims of sexual abuse. Although those issues are not specifically canvassed in the motion, I wanted to reply to points that have been raised. Hugh O'Donnell suggested that we should consider rolling out SAVI throughout Scotland. The debate has highlighted the importance of ensuring that vulnerable children who have been victims of serious crimes of a sexual nature can receive a service from some source. That is not necessarily an easy task. I have briefly canvassed some of the ways in which such youngsters receive some support, but I am not persuaded—I do not think that any of us could say this hand on heart—that all the youngsters who need such support are necessarily getting it.  There is therefore a problem of unmet need, which we should address. One way to do that would be to learn more about SAVI and its work. It is a relatively new organisation and, no doubt, there will be evaluation, assessment and further communication between it and social work departments. There is a lot more work to be done. The most useful facet of Margaret Mitchell's bringing this debate to the chamber is that she has raised the general issue of how we look after children who have been the victims of such abominable crimes and how we can do so more effectively in future. The debate has allowed us to make a start on some of these difficult issues, and Margaret Mitchell is to be congratulated on providing us with that opportunity. I will close by expressing once again my appreciation for the contribution that SAVI makes to the lives of children and their families in East Kilbride. I wish the organisation every success for the future.  Meeting closed at 17:36.

I believe that naloxone has the potential to save lives. That is why I asked the national forum on drug-related deaths to develop a national protocol and guidelines on naloxone provision. The forum has approved and submitted to the Scottish Government the final protocol and guidelines, along with a report of its investigations. My officials are examining the report's recommendations, which will inform the roll-out of the national naloxone programme. We intend to work with partners in the sector, offering appropriate central resource, to roll out the national supply of naloxone across Scotland.

Anne McLaughlin is right to say that naloxone is a prescription-only medicine. The supply of such medicines is governed by the Medicines Act 1968. The current legal position is that only named patients can be supplied with naloxone, despite an amendment to the 1968 act that allows anyone to administer naloxone to save lives. That said, in the roll-out of naloxone across Scotland, we will provide a national training resource to health boards and alcohol and drug partnerships, so that they can provide training to key workers, as well as the families and friends of those who are at risk. I will seek to ensure that the provision is extended to people who are in charge of hostels and homeless accommodation, where the risks of death may be higher than elsewhere. In the near future, I will raise with the United Kingdom Government the issue of naloxone's status as a prescription-only drug.

In 2008-09, there were 312 disqualifications for convictions for driving while unfit through drink or drugs, which resulted in an average disqualification of 22 months. In the same period, there were 51 disqualifications for convictions for being in charge of a motor vehicle while unfit through drink or drugs. The average disqualification was for 18 months. We do not hold data on how many of those convictions related to drugs.

I am aware of the background case to which Margaret Smith refers. It is plainly an offence to drive while impaired by drugs. If the police believe a driver to be impaired, they can require him or her to submit to a preliminary impairment test. If a driver fails it, he or she will be arrested and taken back to a police station, where blood and urine will be sent away for analysis. Rightly, the police take such matters extremely seriously, but we do not have a device equivalent to the breathalyser that can detect the presence of drugs in the body of the driver of a car. The Home Office is leading work to develop roadside testing devices for drugs that are the equivalent of breathalysers. It is a difficult process because of the plethora of drugs involved. We welcome the Home Office's work and are keen to see it progress. We will deal with the UK Government on the matter in the spirit to which Murdo Fraser referred at the end of the previous debate.

Does Mr Baker acknowledge that, in the vast majority of cases, the staff who work in our bars, pubs and clubs are extremely efficient and effective at preventing people who have had too much to drink from being served?

It is always a pleasure to follow Bill Aitken—particularly on the day after he announced that he intends to retire from the Parliament at the next election. We are not losing Bill yet but, when he is gone, Parliament will be the poorer for his absence. The debate has been interesting and wide ranging and I thank Hugh Henry for providing the opportunity to discuss the subject. Many members of all parties have given excellent examples of incidents of violence being used against individuals who perform a huge variety of roles in society. Cathy Peattie mentioned the MP, Mr Timms, who was the victim of a knife attack at his constituency surgery. We also know of serious assaults on GPs in their surgeries—I remember an incident that involved a lady doctor in Hyndland and another some years back that involved a doctor in Vale of Leven who was exposed to a pointless, gratuitous and vicious attack. Bus drivers are routinely attacked. A former bus driver told me recently that bus drivers in Glasgow were routinely shot at with air-guns, so bullet-proof glass has been used in buses. That is a sad indictment of the small group in society—it is fortunate that it is small—that is prepared to act in that way. In my area of responsibility, I know of the risks to which firefighters are exposed—pointless acts, such as youths throwing projectile stones at fire appliances. Nurses who perform their duty to help people in accident and emergency units—to heal people and to deal with injuries that those people have suffered, perhaps through taking drink or being under the influence of drugs—are exposed to violence. I mention those examples because the range of cases is wide. Surely the starting point for us all is  that everyone is entitled to live their life free of violence. That lies at the heart of the consensus that Robert Brown said exists in the Parliament. I agree entirely with Cathy Peattie that we need to help all workers who are at risk of violence. No one in the chamber disagrees with that general statement. The fundamental questions are how we can tackle the problem and how we can help. To paraphrase a former Prime Minister, we need to be tough on crimes of violence and tough on the causes of crimes of violence. We need to consider legislative and non-legislative measures. Robert Brown developed that argument in his speech, which was especially cogent and coherent, as we might expect. He pointed to the vast range of initiatives that we can take to reduce violence. I will develop that idea. Other than legislation, we can use and are using—and we all support as a Parliament—many ways, methods, programmes and projects to tackle the problem. However, the primary solution—if I can describe it thus—that Hugh Henry has presented is the tool of an aggravated offence that would apply to such crimes against shop workers, in order to protect shop workers, as he put it. I pay tribute to him for his persistent work on the issue. It is plain that he has fought long and hard for such a measure and that he will rightly continue to do so. As the Cabinet Secretary for Justice said, when Hugh Henry introduces his bill, we will scrutinise it extremely carefully and we will seek to work with him on it, as we generally do in relation to such matters. I, too, pay tribute to USDAW for its campaign. In the debate on that campaign that Hugh Henry initiated on 14 April, I undertook to write to USDAW to seek a meeting. I am pleased to say that a meeting with John Hannett, USDAW's general secretary, will take place on 3 June. I will be interested to see what practical measures we can seek to take as a result of that meeting. As the cabinet secretary said, the common law of Scotland has prohibited and criminalised assault as a form of human conduct for centuries—since at least Baron Hume's day. To assault somebody is wrong—it is plainly against the law. Law exists to protect the citizens in a free society from behaviour that is deemed to be unacceptable to the public, which is why it is a common-law assault. The cabinet secretary pointed out that the potential sentence is unlimited. A life sentence for assault could be applied—it would be extremely rare, but it is a potential sentence. The cabinet secretary also said that some very long sentences have been imposed in practice. An assault on a taxi driver led to sentences of six years and of 45 months for the two assailants. They were rightly  very long sentences. It is agreed across the chamber that the common law provides a good framework in which a strong message is sent to everyone in society that assaults are completely unacceptable. Bill Aitken developed the argument that some of us, especially those in the police, fire and ambulance services, face particular risks in our work. He had an interesting exchange with Nigel Don on the issue. Bill Aitken referred to the concept of a hierarchy of victims and Nigel Don responded that treatment of an offence might depend on the circumstances in which the workers were engaged. I remember visiting Castlemilk police station to defend a client on the night of an attempted murder. That was a particularly futile and hapless task, as matters later proved, but the atmosphere in the police station at 10 pm, when the police officers were going out on the beat in Castlemilk, could have been cut with a knife. Plainly, that work involved them exposing themselves to the risk of assault, perhaps every night, as they went about their business. In the Police (Scotland) Act 1967 we recognised, as a particular class of risk, the risk that police constables in Scotland take in their daily work. The Emergency Workers (Scotland) Act 2005 extended that provision to all emergency services, and rightly so. Workers in those services also face people whose behaviour is often in extremis—people who are in a state of crisis. As the cabinet secretary argued, often—perhaps in the majority of cases—such people are either drunk or under the influence of drugs. As a result, they have lost what sense they had in the first place—which, in some cases, may not have been especially great. It was right that we sent a message that assaults on emergency workers are particularly repugnant. John Lamont said that the law should not send a message, but all criminal law sends a message—a moral message that certain behaviour is unacceptable. In that sense, the common law also sends a message that behaviour is unacceptable. However, I accept that we need to take care of the general criticism that Conservative members have made. Given that we recognise that every citizen in Scotland is entitled to live their life free of assault, where do we stop making a particular case for aggravation? That brings me to two fundamental questions. First, does the application of an aggravation to an offence, whether under common law or under statute, lead to a reduction in the number of offences and/or offenders? Robert Brown was the first to ask that question. We need to be clear about the issue. Given that the 2005 act has applied for only a short period, it may be difficult to say as yet whether there is a causal connection.  Even if there appears to be such a connection—and there may well appear to be one—can we attribute any reduction to the fact that the Emergency Workers (Scotland) Bill was passed, creating an aggravated offence, or might it be attributable to other action that has been taken? I will give members one example. From my work in relation to the fire service, I know that in response to the serious incidence of attacks on firefighters, particular action was taken in areas where there was a perceived problem. That action involved firefighters going out to speak to young people in areas where they and, perhaps, the police thought that there was a problem—explaining to youngsters what the job of a firefighter meant and getting through to those boys, so that they learned respect. Work of that sort, which allows young people to see that violence is pointless and wrong, is an effective means of addressing the issue, so it is right that we pursue it. Such steps may have contributed to a reduction in offences of this nature. Secondly, in what way does law constitute protection? I do not think that any other member has made that point specifically, so I hope that I am not asking the wrong question. It could be said that law is simply words on a page. A criminal law is designed to deter and prevent behaviour, but it can be no more than a deterrent—it is not physical protection. Earlier, the cabinet secretary mentioned to me that the shop workers who are at particular risk are those who work in bookies. For obvious reasons, they are at particular risk of armed robbery. No one would argue that, when an armed robber comes into the bookies, the provisions of the 2005 act or any other act of Parliament are uppermost in his mind. In that sense, law provides no protection whatever. That can never be its purpose; it is not a bullet-proof vest or a security guard. The word "protect" means "to keep safe from harm or injury", as defined in the dictionary that I consulted last night. It can be said that the 2005 act protects emergency workers in a limited sense—in so far as it seeks to deter those who are disposed to committing such offences from so doing. That is the kind of issue that we will need to examine closely as the debate moves forward. As Christina McKelvie said, we will also need to look carefully at the statistics, which may be slightly more complex than they appear to be at first sight. There are a huge number of non-legislative measures that are effective in reducing violence. I will canvass some of them briefly. The cabinet secretary alluded to the work of the Scottish Business Crime Centre. I pay particular regard to the role of the retail radio link and closed-circuit  television. In towns and cities in Scotland, retail radios are generally linked to the police office. Each radio has a panic button, which is a real form of protection. The radios allow shops to communicate with one another and provide a form of early warning system. The retail radio link and CCTV are two of the most effective practical methods of addressing the problem. The Scottish Business Crime Centre has also produced a training booklet for staff. Mr Don and Mr Kidd raised the issue of training. It is important that we train staff so that they can familiarise themselves with how to deal with difficult situations. Practical steps can be taken to do that. I note the work of the violence reduction unit and the community initiative to reduce violence, which is reducing significantly the incidence of crimes of violence in Scotland. We were pleased to introduce the initiative, which will continue. I refer also to the cashback for communities scheme, which provides youngsters with positive opportunities, choices and chances. One of the key measures that people want from the Parliament to improve life and society and to tackle antisocial behaviour, especially low-level crime, is provision of more things for young people to do. The cashback scheme helps to do that, although it supplements a huge raft of work by the voluntary sector through bodies such as the scouts. All of those activities help to lead youngsters on to the right way and away from the wrong way—the temptation to get involved in drink, drugs, carrying knives and other activity that leads to crimes of violence being committed. I note the risk of offences being committed by those who are under the influence of drugs. I am pleased that the Parliament supports the drugs strategy, "The Road to Recovery: A New Approach to Tackling Scotland's Drug Problem". Nearly half of prisoners—45 per cent—report that drug use was a problem for them on the outside and more than half say that they were under the influence of drugs at the time of their offence. The problem with people who are misusing drugs is that they tend to commit acquisitive crime—to shoplift—to fuel and feed their habit. Because of that, they pose a particular risk to shop workers.

I did not quite catch all of that, because there was an interjection from a noble member. However, Robert Brown has raised an important point: those who work in public transport, whether it is on the buses or trains and whether it is in Glasgow—Mr Brown's and Mr Kelly's area—or elsewhere in Scotland, are at particular risk. They deal with the public regularly and meet thousands of people every day. The vast majority will be a pleasure to deal with, but those workers face exposure to risk of violence in some situations. Mr Brown is therefore right to raise the point. I am pleased to have taken part in this debate. I commend Hugh Henry for raising it, and we will carefully scrutinise the provisions of his bill once he introduces it. The range of activities in Scotland, whether that is putting 1,000 more police officers on the street, seeing crime at its lowest level in living memory or all the other measures that I have briefly canvassed in this short contribution, mean that we are making an impact.

I congratulate Jim Tolson on bringing forward this excellent debate. The contributions from all members illustrate well the value of effective programmes to divert young people from problematic behaviour of various types. I took the opportunity to read the document by Mr Young—who I believe is here to listen to the debate—entitled "Bluelight—A Comprehensive Programme for Youth and Community Partnership". It was interesting to read the history of the development of the scheme and the approach taken by other countries over the 35 years since it was first devised in Australia. I say to Jim Tolson that I have noted the recommendations and will consider them. We are of course carrying out a great deal of work in this area. I will specifically consider the general issue with ACPOS, because the principal recommendation, as I understand it, is that the police should be in charge of developing the schemes. The debate has been excellent. Jim Tolson and Claire Baker have given some detail about how the programme operates in Fife, its benefits and one or two pointers on how it could be further developed. The Scottish Government is wholly committed to offering young people more choices and chances. Of the minority of young people who get into trouble, four fifths do not get into trouble again  after a visit from the police to them or their parents. That is enough—I suspect that parental discipline kicks in. An appreciation by youngsters that they have perhaps done something daft is also important. We are simply talking about a minority of a minority who are a serious problem in Scotland. It is very important to say that and not to portray the false picture that all young people are somehow a problem. The opposite is the case: most young people in Scotland are a credit to their families, their schools and themselves. However, we need to focus on the minority, and we have done so. That is why, working with people such as Harry McGuigan and Barbara Grant in the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, we have produced "Promoting Positive Outcomes: Working Together to Prevent Antisocial Behaviour in Scotland", the framework for tackling antisocial behaviour, which recognises the key role of diversion. Someone more scholarly might correct me, but I believe that the word "divert" comes from the Latin word for to turn aside. That is what we hope to do with diversion schemes of all types—to turn aside youngsters from the wrong path to the right one. Members have described a number of particular problems. Elizabeth Smith and James Kelly both mentioned drugs, which is one of the most serious problems facing our society today. How much better it is to prevent young people from trying drugs in the first place and to give them the information that they need in order to know that that is a very dangerous path to take. Our new drugs strategy, "The Road to Recovery: A New Approach to Tackling Scotland's Drug Problem", fully recognises that that is important. As far as I can recollect, the most recent available information of young people's behaviour, which comes from the Scottish schools adolescent lifestyle and substance use survey, indicates that although there is a serious problem, which I by no means belittle, the figures show that there is perhaps a 10 per cent reduction in the number of teenagers who are trying drugs and using them regularly. That is by no means good enough. There is much more work to be done and I am delighted that all parties are united behind that. The abuse of alcohol affects more youngsters and causes more types of problematic behaviour, which can cause extreme misery to many vulnerable people, such as elderly people, who tend to be on the receiving end of such behaviour, as we all know from helping constituents. That is why the Government is wholly committed to providing more choices and chances for young people. It is why we have invested £14 million through cashback for communities in a range of projects through, for example, the Scottish Football Association, which is providing football  opportunities; the Scottish Rugby Union, which is providing rugby opportunities; basketballscotland; and YouthLink Scotland. This week, I was very pleased indeed to announce the junction project, which will provide intensive personal development skills for those who are on the cusp of offending. It is perhaps one of the few schemes—if not the only scheme—on which I have advocated that additional taxpayers' money should be spent. I therefore have a personal interest in ensuring that it is successful. I know from work with people such as Elizabeth Smith that members across the chamber share my views about the importance of taking youngsters whom the police identify as likely to cause serious trouble—who might end up in Barlinnie or die early through addiction—and giving them a chance in life to see that a better way exists. That is why the word "junction" is used—the aim is to choose a better path. Several speakers have acknowledged that many different approaches to diversionary work exist. Not all youngsters will participate voluntarily in such activities, no matter how well organised and entertaining they are. A huge variety of activities is offered, from discothèques and parties to fishing expeditions, fun-park trips, father-and-son camps, triathlons and orienteering—I could go on. What about those who do not and will not turn up? We need to reach out to them, and we do so in projects such as street base in Hamilton, whereby youngsters go out to engage and chat with boys of roughly the same age group as them who are drinking Buckfast, saying, "Look—do you know that you can do this or that activity?" The police and the fire service do a huge amount of work. Just yesterday evening, at Fettes police headquarters, I spoke to a special constable who does such work in Craigmillar and who sees many young lives turned around. Just this morning, I spoke to Brian Allaway, Lothian and Borders Fire and Rescue Service's chief fire officer, who pointed to the cool-down crew work that firefighters do. Throughout Scotland, our police, our fire service, our community workers, our voluntary groups, our scouts, our guides and our other groups do huge amounts of voluntary work, as many members have said. That work is rarely reported or heralded and—perhaps because of that—is not sufficiently widely appreciated, but I am sure that it helps youngsters to choose the right path in life. For all that work, we should be truly grateful. At this time of somewhat controversial issues in politics, I am delighted that here in the Scottish Parliament at least, we have had a debate in which every party agrees on the right approach and the right way forward. I thank Jim Tolson for  giving us this valuable opportunity to express cross-party, non-political and non-partisan unity in supporting the aims and objectives of such work.

We are fully supportive of business improvement districts because they enable businesses to work together and have the potential to boost the local economy in these challenging times. We are providing more than £770,000 of funding to the Scottish Business Crime Centre, which is fully involved with the business improvement district's aim of making Kirkcaldy safe and welcoming by reducing antisocial behaviour and retail crime. The SBCC is providing advice and support in Kirkcaldy to help with the implementation of a whole series of excellent initiatives, including retail radio link, best bar none, safer parking areas, taxi marshals and the safer areas scheme. The SBCC provides such advice throughout Scotland, keeping very many towns safe.

As I mentioned, we have provided £770,000 to the SBCC. Funding to deal with antisocial behaviour comes in part from local authorities. I pay tribute to the community safety partnership in Fife, which I have visited. As the member knows, I have visited Kirkcaldy to see the very good work that goes on in her constituency and which she rightly supports. I am keen to work with all partners to ensure that the necessary funding is continued, which—with the support of more than 500 local businesses—will allow all those successful initiatives in Kirkcaldy to continue, thereby further driving down crime and antisocial behaviour and making Kirkcaldy the safe and welcoming place that we know it to be.

The Scottish Government is working towards a Scotland that embraces diversity and is a place where people of all backgrounds, irrespective of their race, faith, belief and place of birth, feel respected and have a sense of belonging. We support work that helps to tackle and prevent racism in all its guises through investing in Scottish police forces to put more police officers on our streets and in our communities. We are also providing more than £9 million of funding between 2008 and 2011 to organisations that aim to tackle racist attitudes and improve the lives of minority ethnic communities in Scotland, including refugees, asylum seekers, migrant workers and Gypsies/Travellers.

I agree that the figures that the member cites are worrying, although I point out that the figure for 2006-07 was higher still than the figure for last year to which he alluded. Dumfries and Galloway Constabulary says that the rise is in keeping with its expectations, following increased proactivity in the area. The police force's work to widen accessibility and confidence includes improved third-party reporting and close working with multicultural associations. We have assisted with funding of local citizens advice bureaux. I make the serious point that the statistics do not record every racist incident that takes place in Scotland, because not all incidents are reported to the police. An increase in police proactivity in this area is bound to lead to more prosecutions. I am delighted to share with members the glad news that we have delivered on our promise of 1,000 extra police officers on the streets in Scotland. As at 31 December 2009, there were 17,273 police officers in Scotland, who take seriously their duty to tackle racially motivated crime.

Bill Aitken started well, but he tailed off rather badly. The incidence of racist crime is a very serious matter. The Scottish picture is slightly different, in that the number of incidents has decreased for the second year in a row—modestly, but significantly.  The Crown Office takes an extremely serious attitude to all crimes involving prejudice. These are extremely serious matters, which I am sure command a cross-party consensus in the Parliament.

Police funding in Scotland is at a record level. In 2010-11, we are increasing the police grant by 3.1 per cent, although we face the imposition on Scotland by the United Kingdom Government of a £400 million cut in planned expenditure. In addition, we are meeting the full costs of the recruitment, training and salaries of 1,000 extra officers. The Scottish Government will fight for Scotland's interests in any future UK budget settlement and will continue to work to ensure that the resources allocated to us are used in the best interests of the people of Scotland, which includes keeping our streets safe.

We have no plans to make changes at senior levels across Scottish forces. Our commitment to front-line policing is absolutely clear and our record speaks for itself. The most recent figures show that there are 17,273 police officers in Scotland, which is 1,039 more than there were at March 2007. We are working closely with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, chief constables and police board conveners to ensure that our forces work as efficiently as possible so that front-line police numbers can be maintained.

The number of new drug treatment interventions that services offer, including substitute prescribing and residential rehabilitation, is currently monitored using the drug treatment waiting times information framework. To reduce waiting times and ensure that people can access treatment when they need it, we have introduced a national health improvement, efficiency, access and treatment target. Under that target, by March 2013, 90 per cent of people who need help with  their drugs problem will wait no longer than three weeks for treatment. We are also introducing a new data collection system, which will be in place by April 2011 and will allow us to track the treatment of individuals moving towards recovery.

I appreciate Nanette Milne's interest in the topic. The drugs strategy, "The Road to Recovery: A New Approach to Tackling Scotland's Drug Problem", to which all parties in the Parliament agreed, recognises that there are many different routes to the road to recovery, depending on the needs of each individual. We recognise that residential rehabilitation is one of those routes and that it works for some people. Equally, many other types of treatment and support work for other people. I am very pleased to be visiting, on a ministerial engagement on Monday, Castle Craig hospital, which is one of the establishments that provide important residential support. I look forward to visiting Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire ADPs in June to learn more about their record in Nanette Milne's area, which includes the stupendous effort of reducing from 500 the number of people waiting for assessment in 2008 to three in the most recent quarter. Many congratulations are due to everyone who has worked to achieve that stupendous improvement in performance.

I thank all members for their contributions, which have been extremely useful—at times thoughtful, perceptive and coming at the issue from a large number of different perspectives. As our response to the committee clearly demonstrated, we have not only listened to the committee but responded positively to most of the points that it made, many of which have been repeated in the debate. As Mr Maxwell mentioned, it seems unreasonable that the citizens advice bureaux should not be able directly to employ solicitors. A removal of that restriction would seem to be sensible and easy to effect, and I hope that it will be done at stage 2. The committee recommended an enhanced role for the Lord President. We have given that recommendation careful consideration, and we agree with the committee and the arguments that it adduced to that end. That change, too, will be brought forward. At the very outset, I indicated to the committee that it is imperative that the new alternative business structures should be subject to the protection of clients in exactly the same way as the principle exists at present with regard to both negligence and fraud. So far as I recollect, I made it clear in my stage 1 evidence that it will be necessary therefore to introduce provisions at stage 2 for a compensation fund, so that clients of the new licensed providers receive protection against fraud. That protection, which a number of members rightly raised, will be introduced at stage 2.  Section 35—on the step-in powers of ministers to act as regulator in the event of default of approved regulators for whatever reason—was intended only ever to be a last resort, and amendments to make that clear will be lodged. Mr Maxwell mentioned sanctions on outside investors, as I think did Labour members. The argument is well made that there should be sanctions that can be taken on individual outside investors, and that issue will be the subject of amendments at stage 2. In addition, I have decided that, although I have been told by the Scottish Government's legal experts that it is not strictly necessary, because it is already implicit in the terms of section 2—in subsections (c) and (e), from memory, which could, of course, be at fault—it should be said explicitly in the bill that those who are working under the new licence providers business structure will be subject to the same duties of confidentiality that are owed by solicitors to clients in traditional solicitors' practice. Making that clear will ensure that there is no doubt that we are aiming for the highest ethical standards to be provided by everyone who engages in alternative business structures. That is the type of business that we envisage being done, and that is the type of approach that we will require to be taken. Nigel Don talked about the terms of sections 1 and 2. Those are the first and second sections of the bill because of the importance that we attach to their provisions. Section 1 sets out the regulatory objectives "supporting the constitutional principle of the rule of law", protecting and promoting "the interests of consumers" and "the public interest generally" and promoting "access to justice", which Labour members have, rightly, highlighted as a key objective. Section 2 sets out professional principles, which all solicitors hold dear, such as acting "with independence and integrity" and "in the best interests of their clients". In my response to the debate, I hope that I have indicated that we have listened to all members and that we have responded to their points. In most cases, we are responding to the points by doing exactly what has been asked of us. Richard Baker quite fairly raised a point about claims management companies. We have no fixed position on the matter, and we understand the case the Richard Baker outlines. I welcome the opportunity to discuss the matter with Richard Baker, and I think that that would be useful, even in advance of stage 2. We are aware of concerns relating to claims management companies, but we are not aware of much evidence relating to malpractice in Scotland.  We know of about four or five complaints about such companies, but we do not know whether they can be substantiated. At my request, officials have made inquiries of the OFT, trading standards officers, Citizens Advice Scotland and the former Scottish Consumer Council, but we have not detected a huge amount of evidence. If Mr Baker has evidence, we would like to see it. It might be that this bill is not the correct vehicle for addressing the matter, and I do not know whether an amendment on the subject would be competent—that is for Parliament to decide, not me. Nonetheless, we wish to engage with Richard Baker on the issue and respond to those concerns. In case of doubt, as I said in my opening remarks, I have had useful discussions with the profession. I was determined so to do when I took over responsibility for the handling in Parliament of the bill. I have had, I think, 11 meetings with various interested parties, including several representatives of the legal profession, the Scottish Law Agents Society, the Law Society, MacRoberts and individual solicitors. Even before the referendum, I had sought further meetings and will continue to seek to have them. I am to meet representatives of individual firms and will have a further meeting with SLAS. Like all members who have spoken, I think that it would be preferable if we could secure broad support in the profession for our proposals. That is what I aspire to, but I will not predict at this stage whether it is achievable—suffice it to say that, for whatever reason, the attempts that have been made in that regard have so far not been successful. I echo the sentiment, expressed by speakers from across the chamber, that those in the Law Society who have been involved in the bill have carried a huge burden over the past year and have faced a difficult time—I think that Mr Brown referred to it as a torrid time. I pay tribute to Ian Smart, who will soon demit office as president of the Law Society and who, I think, is present in the gallery today. Ian has worked tirelessly to support the interests of the legal profession and the public in relation to the bill and on many other matters. A sole practitioner, Ian clearly has the wellbeing of all solicitors at heart, and I have no doubt that, in his remaining time as president, he will continue to work hard on their behalf. I thank him for his extremely constructive contribution over the past few months. I commend the principles of the bill to Parliament.

I am delighted to open the debate on the general principles of the Legal Services (Scotland) Bill. At the heart of the bill is the removal of current restrictions on how solicitors can organise their businesses. The bill will allow solicitors to form partnerships with non-solicitors, to create businesses that offer a range of legal and non-legal services and to seek investment from outside the profession. The bill will also introduce a robust regulatory regime to govern those new entities. However, the bill is enabling rather than prescriptive, so traditional business models will remain an option. No solicitor's practice in Scotland will be forced to choose an alternative business structure. Let me spell out some of the opportunities that the bill will create. First, it will open up opportunities for the larger legal firms, which is excellent news. We are all for that. The reality is that the partnership model restricts such firms' options to grow and compete in the international business market. The multidisciplinary practice is an attractive model for firms that wish to bring a range of services under one umbrella. I believe that the bill will encourage firms to remain Scottish rather than choose to be regulated in England. The provisions will also allow such firms to bring their office managers, accountants and paralegals into the partnership. They will have the opportunity to seek to join other professionals so that they might continue to be viable in challenging economic conditions. In December, the Law Society of Scotland, through its estimable president, Ian Smart, gave the committee an excellent example of the opportunities that the bill might provide. He said that a business could offer "a land acquisition service that scouted out land for clients. The business would have a land agent, a surveyor and a solicitor to deliver a seamless service that involved identifying and valuing the ground, negotiating the price and acquiring the ground. That would all be done by one partnership of different professionals."—[ Official Report, Justice Committee , 15 December 2009; c 2479.] Contrary to what some people have claimed, the bill offers possibilities to smaller and medium-sized  solicitor firms to bring others into the partnership and to join with others so that they might continue to be viable and competitive in challenging economic conditions. The bill has been supported by business experts and the Scottish law forum, which explicitly endorsed the ABS model as being good for business. I have given just a few examples—members will no doubt come up with their own. The bill will create an environment in which we will see economic growth, opportunities, more jobs being created, more business being done in Scotland, more business being done by legal firms in Scotland, and more business being done by Scottish legal firms furth of Scotland. It will be a particular benefit in years to come—it will certainly be a huge benefit in the medium to long term—to young Scots and young lawyers, as more work will be created, there will be more business for them to do and there will, therefore, be more opportunities for jobs. I hope that everyone will join me in endorsing the view that the bill is an outstanding opportunity for people in the legal profession in Scotland to avail themselves of new business frameworks that will permit them to grow their businesses and create jobs and opportunities for fellow Scots.

I will address that matter specifically later. I will say now simply that the experience abroad in another jurisdiction—although that jurisdiction is not identical to ours—is extremely encouraging. Similar frameworks were created in Australia 10 years ago, and there were predictions of doom at that time. In particular, there were predictions that small businesses would go to the wall. We have received authoritative statements and evidence from Australia—albeit that the evidence is not a thorough analysis of exactly what is happening there right now—that nothing could be further from the truth. Experience there has shown that small firms have benefited from the opportunities that were created 10 years ago. The doomsayers have been proved wrong. I will address that matter further later on. The bill will not set up a super-regulator quango in Scotland that is equivalent to the Legal Services Board in England and Wales. By not doing so, we will save tens of millions of pounds. Despite understandable fears about the proposals, I have no doubt that they will result in necessary change  that will benefit the legal profession, the consumer and the wider Scottish economy. I welcome the Justice Committee's comments in its stage 1 report and its support for the general principles of the bill. The committee suggested that a number of points be considered further. I accept the vast majority of those points, and in my formal response to the report, I set out our plans to address them. I am pleased that there has been much debate about the proposals in the legal profession in recent months. However, many of the arguments that have been put forward by those who oppose the bill have been misinformed, exaggerated or downright misleading. Many opponents of the bill whom I have met and with whom useful discussions have taken place have raised legitimate and reasonable concerns, but the rather lurid accusations that have been made by a few people risk turning a constructive discussion about the future of the legal profession in Scotland into an unedifying stramash. I would like to take a few minutes to refute some of the more outlandish claims that have been made about the bill. First, the bill will not destroy the independence of the legal profession in Scotland, nor will it endanger Scots law. All of us, regardless of party, support a strong and independent Scottish legal profession. That is set out in the regulatory objectives in section 1 of the bill, to which the Scottish ministers are bound. Secondly, the bill will not give the Scottish Government control of the Law Society of Scotland—we have quite enough to do. Provisions to give the Scottish ministers powers in relation to lay members of the council of the Law Society were always seen as a last resort. They would never have allowed the Scottish Government to control who was a member of the council. However, after further discussions with the Law Society, I have decided to lodge an amendment to delete those regulation-making powers at stage 2 because they are not necessary, given the assurances that we have received from the Law Society. Thirdly, the bill will not allow criminals to take over law firms. The fit-to-own tests in the bill are robust. Regulators will have wide powers to reject people whose "probity and character" suggest that they are unfit to own a firm that provides legal services. The relevant provision takes account of the "associations" of applicants. The bill proposes an extremely strong system of safeguards, and we are not aware of any comparable legislation in this country that offers more protection. Furthermore, we are, following constructive suggestions from the Justice Committee, preparing additional sanctions that can be used to disqualify individual investors from the new licensed providers.  Other suggestions that have been made by people who are in possession of overdeveloped powers of imagination are that the bill will give the Scottish Government control over the legal profession, that the recent referendum on ABS was rigged by the Law Society and that drug barons will be able to use licensed providers to launder money. I could go on. Although I appreciate the depth of feeling that debate on the bill has provoked, those suggestions have been unhelpful. The profession has now voted in favour of ABS twice, albeit by a narrow margin in its referendum involving the whole of the solicitors branch of the profession in April, and has voted against it once. Although I am sure that it will continue to discuss the issue—we remain open to discussing any concerns—I think that we must also move forward. The bill was designed primarily to open up the legal services market in Scotland. It certainly presents significant opportunities for the legal profession, but we should not overlook the benefits to the consumer and, indeed, to the wider economy. Consumer groups have come under criticism for being unable to give definitive proof that ABSs will provide consumer benefits, but that is understandably hard to do, given that the entities in question do not yet exist and that experience in other jurisdictions is relatively limited.

My reference to saving tens of millions of pounds is based on the fact that the cost of the Legal Services Board is, as I understand it, circa £4 million to £5 million per annum. In Scotland, we would not have required a quango of that size, so that level of cost would probably not have been incurred. However, even if the cost had been only half that—a couple of million pounds a year—running such a quango would have cost tens of millions of pounds over the years. I am extremely proud of the fact that my officials have developed a proposal that will cost the taxpayer a tiny fraction of that. In fact, I am absolutely delighted to introduce a proposal that will provide a uniquely Scottish solution by applying to a problem our traditional assets of thrift  and common sense, so that instead of setting up a new quango that is not required, we are simply setting up a robust regulatory regime, the cost of which we have estimated, as Mr Kelly said, to be less than £100,000. I know that that figure has been criticised, but neither ICAS nor the Law Society has offered an alternative figure. Until we know how many regulators there will be, it is simply not possible to state with any certainty what the cost will be, although I am delighted that a significantly more economical solution is to be provided in Scotland than has been provided south of the border, where a different route has been chosen. Consumer groups can speak from years of experience of monitoring the introduction of more competition into restricted markets. Increased competition generally results in increased choice, lower costs and the development of more consumer-focused business models. Austin Lafferty, my former colleague at the University of Glasgow, recently opined that he does not think that solicitors who are doing a good job have anything to fear and that if they are doing a good job, they can stand up to any competition. He said that if they are providing a quality service, their clients will come back to them, they will trust them and they will continue to give them their business. There is no reason to doubt that there will be significant benefits for the consumer, which is also a good thing. As Labour members will no doubt be aware, Bridget Prentice repeatedly stressed the consumer benefits that were driving the Legal Services Bill during its passage through Westminster. She said: "Consumers today want their legal services delivered the same way other services are: they want a high quality, cheaper and more personalised service to suit their individual needs and one that is easy to access". In addition, Lord Neuberger, the Master of the Rolls in England and Wales, predicted just this month that increased competition as a result of the Legal Services Act 2007 would lower the costs of litigation and lead to the development of new business models. I understand the fears about such increased competition, particularly in the current economic climate, but I have confidence in the ability of Scottish firms to innovate and to thrive under the opportunities that will be provided through the bill. We must not overlook the dangers to the Scottish economy of not passing the bill. The four largest law firms have already threatened to move to London if the bill fails to take advantage of the opportunities that are offered by the Legal Services Act 2007. We cannot afford to lose firms to England. The long-term sustainability of the Scottish legal profession will be threatened if Scottish firms are not able to operate on a level  playing field. The biggest danger to the profession and to Scots law is in doing nothing. Of course, the bill does not only make provision for alternative business structures: it also includes statutory codification of the framework for regulation of the Faculty of Advocates, provisions to allow non-lawyers to apply for confirmation rights, and provisions that will enable the Scottish Legal Aid Board to monitor the accessibility of legal services, which last point will further strengthen access to justice. We have already substantially increased the fee rates that are payable to solicitors for civil legal aid as well as making it available to potentially one million more Scots. Furthermore, at stage 2, we intend to lodge an amendment to allow citizens advice bureaux to employ solicitors.

I just have two paragraphs to go, Presiding Officer. We also plan to lodge other amendments, including provisions relating to McKenzie friends and regulation of non-solicitor will writers. I have been encouraged by good cross-party support on those and on all issues in the bill, which I appreciate and welcome, and which I am sure will continue today. In conclusion, we need to ensure that the Scottish legal profession remains competitive, and that it is free to develop innovative and flexible new business models that are to the benefit of consumers, the profession and the nation. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Legal Services (Scotland) Bill.

I thank Nigel Don for proposing this interesting debate, which has allowed us to reflect on the impact that the Scottish reformation has had, at home and abroad, from the perspective of its 450th anniversary. I welcome to the chamber the moderator of the Church of Scotland, the Right Rev Bill Hewitt; the moderator designate, the Rev John Christie; and the principal clerk to the general assembly, the Very Rev Dr Finlay Macdonald, who is standing down this year after 14 years of dedicated service. We are grateful that they have come to witness this evening's debate.  The debate has been extremely interesting, with diverse contributions—intellectual, learned, informative, diverting, colourful and sometimes, to me at least, unexpected, not to say far from predictable. It has illustrated the benefits that some members have touched upon and which we celebrate perhaps as a result of the reformation 450 years ago. As Dave Thompson argued, there is no doubt that the reformation has helped to shape the character of Scotland and its people to this day. It is not overstating the case to say that the roots of educational change came from an appreciation of democracy and literacy that developed from the Scottish reformation—a theme on which both Dr Alasdair Allan and Murdo Fraser touched. Education is at the heart of so much that we all wish to achieve as a Parliament and as a nation. Through education, we develop our understanding of the world and our understanding of and passion for culture and the arts, are inspired to undertake scientific research and engineering, and are enabled to imbue our young people with the social responsibility that prepares them for life. Most important—and at its most fundamental—education teaches our young people how to read. Reading opens the mind to new ideas, philosophies and beliefs, and allows us to broaden our minds, to understand the minds of others and to see ourselves as others see us. In that way, we develop our appreciation of difference and individuality, and learn better to value the world that we share. At our core as humans, we are, or should be, thinking beings, and those who led the Scottish reformation seemed to understand that implicitly. Nigel Don chose to focus his remarks on a colourful history of the Bible. The reformers wanted everyone to be able to read so that they could read the Bible, and they recognised that basic education was required to allow people to do that, which was why they set themselves the goal of establishing a school in every parish in the land. A century and a half after the reformation, most parishes, particularly in lowland Scotland, had a school, and the establishment of parish schools led to general respect for learning in Scottish society and an appreciation of the value of learning that, although obvious now, would not have been obvious then. Although, in the beginning, attending school was neither compulsory nor free of charge, that basic education system eventually led to Scottish society being more comfortable with matters of the mind. Although the kirk initially desired that everyone should have an education so that they could read the Bible, once someone could read they could read anything. It is worth noting that, from the early 1700s, Scotland had the highest levels of literacy in the world.  However, I argue that the reformation's biggest impact on Scottish society was in laying the foundation stones on which the enlightenment was built almost a century later. Through that, Scotland made a huge contribution to developing the ideas that formed the modern world. Christopher Harvie referred to next year's celebration of the tercentenary of David Hume. With the passing of the Education Act 1696 by the old Scots Parliament—1696 is a busy year for legal scholars, because a huge variety of bills was passed then—Scotland became the first nation on earth to provide universal public education. While Scots invented things as varied and valuable as penicillin, the fax machine and even the bicycle, universal education is the greatest of them all. We in modern Scotland can truly be said to be children of the enlightenment. We welcome all cultures and faiths, and celebrate the contribution that all faiths and philosophical beliefs make to our society. Scotland is indeed a diverse and inclusive society that is built on equality and justice. We aspire to those values. I welcome Michael McMahon's remarks about the willing participation of the Catholic church in this year's events to mark the reformation. I would like to relieve members of their suspense on the issue that Michael McMahon and Murdo Fraser—Scotland's answer to the Chuckle brothers in this debate—invited me to talk about, which is the Scottish Government's position on marking the reformation. We are pleased to be able to do so by working with the kirk to hold an event to mark and celebrate the reformation and to remember, as Alasdair Allan mentioned, the benefits that it brought. We are proud and pleased to do so, and details will be announced in due course. I am pleased to say that other Christian denominations will be involved, and, we hope, other faiths, which will reflect the diverse and inclusive Scotland to which we all aspire. I conclude by taking this opportunity to wish the kirk well as it looks forward to its 450th meeting this year. I am looking forward to attending this year's general assembly. I am aware that throughout the year the Church of Scotland will hold some impressive events to mark the anniversary of the reformation. For example, there will be a special commemorative session of the general assembly, which will make good use of the reformation psalms and include readings from the records of the Parliament of Scotland of August 1560 and the records of the first general assembly, which was held in 1560. That event will allow an opportunity to debate the influence of the reformation on Scottish life and culture. There will also be lectures by Dr Douglas Galbraith on the reformation and worship and by Professor Ian Hazlett on the Scots confession. Both those events will provide  opportunities to consider the lasting impact of the Scottish reformation. I pass on my best wishes to all the other churches and denominations—whether in the Western Isles or elsewhere in Scotland—that look to the 1560 reformation as their origin and will, no doubt, hold their own events to commemorate this important anniversary. If anyone is in any doubt about the impact that the reformation and enlightenment have had on the world, we need look no further for external corroboration than the words of Sir Winston Churchill, who said: "Of all the small nations of this earth, perhaps only the ancient Greeks surpass the Scots in their contribution to mankind."   Meeting closed at 17:51.

The Scottish Government is asking the court to clarify the responsibilities of public bodies under the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002. That is consistent with the Scottish Government's support for the proper functioning of freedom of information in Scotland and is an appropriate use of public money.

I have no knowledge of the bizarre exchange or the ministerial visit to which Elaine Murray refers. However, I can say that the Scottish Government has dealt with more than 1,600 requests in 2009, and in most cases we provided some or all of the information that was requested. Less than 5 per cent of our decisions on requests are appealed, and we rejected only a very small proportion of requests as invalid. Therefore, we have a strong record on freedom of information. We recognise the principles and are putting them into practice.  The court action, which is of course sub judice, will have the advantage of clarifying the law in an area in which there are some uncertainties and may therefore bring about savings in future in the conduct of meeting our duties under the freedom of information legislation.

I thank Hugh Henry for providing us with the opportunity to debate these extremely serious issues, and I thank members from all parties who have taken part in the debate. The motion is extremely wide and covers a number of areas. I will do my best to focus on the key issues. As many members have said, violence is never acceptable. The person who commits a violent act—whether it is an act of physical violence or verbal abuse—is primarily responsible for his or her actions. It is important to start from that principle. It is particularly concerning when the violence is directed at those who are simply doing their job, on pretty low wages in many cases, to provide a service courteously to the public. We are taking significant steps across society as a whole to tackle violence, abuse and antisocial behaviour, and significant investments of taxpayers' money have been made in policing and community safety. We have record numbers of police officers on our streets, and the level of recorded crime is at its lowest since 1980, with the level of violent crime at its lowest since 1986. However, to ensure that our partners in the police, local government and the business community have the very best tools with which to tackle the issues, we are also investing significantly in new initiatives such as the violence reduction unit and in such bodies as the Scottish Business Crime Centre, to which I will return, as I believe that  some of its measures are relevant to the subject and to members' speeches. I welcome the powerful contribution that USDAW's freedom from fear campaign has made in highlighting the issue over several years and in providing support and advice to those who are affected. Since its launch in 2002, the campaign has done much for people in the sector, along with the annual respect for shop workers event, which took place in November. I advise Bill Wilson that I shall write to USDAW seeking a meeting to find out more about the campaign and the specific policy measures that USDAW believes might now be implemented to deliver what all members want to see. I will also hear its perspective on the issue. We are clear about the impact of violence, abuse and antisocial behaviour in the retail sector. Some people have said that it is victimless crime, but it is patently not so—they could not be more wrong. Whenever there is a robbery, when someone is physically or verbally abused, or when a business goes to the wall due to crime, shoplifting or theft, there is also the cost of that, the hassle that that produces and the bureaucracy that is involved in putting things right, reporting the crime to the police, making the insurance claims and sorting out all the mess afterwards. The crime is therefore not victimless. In her intervention on Hugh Henry, Margo MacDonald was right to point out that we must also look at what causes people to behave in that unacceptable way. We all recognise that, as Margo MacDonald and Richard Baker said, many people who behave in such a way may be under the influence of drugs and/or alcohol. That is no excuse, but it is important that we tackle those issues and help people to recover from their drug addiction. That is why, since the year began, I have meet recovering drug addicts in alcohol and drug partnerships in Kilmarnock, Hamilton, Inverclyde, Dumbarton, Glasgow and—this week—Irvine. Some of those drug users who are in recovery—in some cases, they have been in recovery for a couple of years—have told me, "Two years ago, when I was on the drugs, I would be out shoplifting now." We all recognise that strategies such as the road to recovery—which, I am delighted to say, all parties support—must be implemented effectively. That will prevent the indefensible and pointless acts of violence and shoplifting that often take place to feed a drugs habit.

Margo MacDonald makes an important point about the importance of educating young people so that they behave with respect and do not display violent behaviour. We all have a role to educate people—all of us here are leaders who give a lead in our communities. I am sure that USDAW has a role to play as well. When I meet its representatives, I will pursue Margo MacDonald's point and refer to her intervention as proof of the importance of that factor. The Scottish Business Crime Centre has received around £770,000 of investment over the past three years and has provided excellent support. I want to touch on some of those practical measures, as members have asked about what has been done of late. The centre oversees the operation of the retailers against crime programme that operates in 20 towns and cities, which enables intelligence to be gathered by and shared between more than 600 stores nationally, which is invaluable. It is piloting the safer retail award in five areas throughout Scotland. The award, which is similar to the best bar none award, is aimed at ensuring best practice in the sale of age-restricted products. The centre's safer areas scheme use retail radio networks to share information between shops. Further, the centre is working with the centre for healthy working lives to co-ordinate the Scottish betting industry working group that is specifically examining the difficulties that are faced by workers in that sector, which Bill Wilson mentioned. We believe that test purchasing is an important and valuable initiative. As Bill Wilson said, it is intelligence based and is designed to expose the illegal activity that is undertaken by a small minority of rogue retailers. Test purchasing is effective, well planned and vital, and we want it to continue. The motion refers to the need to work in partnership to develop strategies on underage sales. I am pleased to say that there already is an excellent partnership between the Government, the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland, the Scottish Grocers Federation, the Society of Chief Officers of Trading Standards in Scotland and Young Scot. An example of the results of that partnership is the £50,000 that we have invested in the SBCC to promote the use of the Young Scot proof-of-age card. I am not sure that many of us here would have our age questioned. I am looking at Richard Baker, who I suppose must be the youngest member present by some way, but I think that it is safe to say that we are all over 25. Nevertheless, the issue that many members have raised is important. In investing £50,000 in the Young Scot proof-of-age  card, I am conscious that it is effective, and considerably cheaper than the UK Government's identity card scheme. This has been an important debate on an important issue. The Scottish Government is committed to providing direct support and encouragement to those who seek to tackle retail crime. I am indebted to Mr Henry and to every member who has taken part in this debate. I believe that all the sentiments that have been expressed are worthy, and that we are united on these matters. I hope, therefore, that the work that will take place will serve to reduce the unacceptable levels of violence and abuse towards shop workers in Scotland.   Meeting closed at 17:54.

I last met Steven Torrie, chief fire officer of Central Scotland Fire and Rescue Service, on 21 September 2009. Steven retires shortly, and I am sure that many members will wish to join me in thanking him for his commitment and professionalism during his three years as chief fire officer in Central, and for his 35 years as a firefighter. I will be meeting the new chief fire officer for Central, Kenny Taylor, on 29 March.

My colleague is correct to state that the two appliances that were bought by Central Scotland Fire and Rescue Service have not met operational standards since they were purchased in 2005. The Central service is still considering options to resolve the situation, including redesigning or scrapping the vehicles. Decisions on how to proceed are for Central Scotland Fire and Rescue Service, not the Scottish Government.  Audit Scotland has recently reviewed the processes that have been deployed by services throughout Scotland in purchasing combined aerial rescue pumps—or CARPs. It concluded: "subject to some initial difficulties, most services where the appliances are now fully operational report that they are fit for purpose and that they are delivering expected benefits". If Mr Matheson or others have further representations to make about individual appliances, I will of course be happy to give them full and due consideration.

I have no specific date arranged to meet Brian Sweeney, the chief officer of Strathclyde Fire and Rescue. However, I expect to meet him within the next few weeks—I hope that the meeting will take place. I think Margaret Mitchell said that the statement to which she referred was a new statement. It was indeed issued recently, but its content, as I understand it, essentially restates the principle of how the fire and rescue service operates and how health and safety operates within it. I emphasise the role that common sense plays in the context of carrying out rescues, where clear command and control structures are required. I will certainly bear those issues in mind. I indeed met the member recently to discuss these issues, and I am always happy to consider any specific issue that members may have in this regard.

I met Glasgow City Council on 3 March and 9 March to discuss parades in the city. No discussions have been held with Strathclyde Police Authority, but the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland was involved in the meeting on 9 March, as was the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, North Lanarkshire Council and the Scottish Trades Union Congress. I met the Orange order on 16 March and am due to meet Cairde na h'Eireann in April. The meetings have been valuable in establishing dialogue about the economic and social impact of parades, particularly in the west of Scotland. There is general agreement that people need to work together to ensure that parades do not have a negative impact on communities.

Yes, I am happy to give Bill Butler an assurance that I will continue to work with everyone to seek to achieve the objective of reducing the impact of marches and parades on  our country. That impact is felt by communities and in city centres, with disruption to both business and personal activity, and is most obviously borne by the police. As Mr Butler stated, last year the burden on the police was substantial—the figure that I have is £1.7 million—and in 2008-09 more than 1,000 events took nearly 50,000 police hours. Those 50,000 police hours could have been devoted to policing other activities in other areas in other ways. I want to develop the matter on a cross-party basis and I give this undertaking to all members: after I have finished the round of meetings to which I referred, which might take a couple of months, I will seek to have informal meetings with parties across the chamber to try to establish and maintain a cross-party, non-partisan approach to achieving the objective of reducing the impact of marches and parades on Scotland.

Through the national community safety strategic group, the Scottish Government regularly discusses challenges and opportunities faced by the community safety sector with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, the Society of Local Authority Chief Executives and Senior Managers and other partners. We make information and support available to local partners to help them in setting strategic priorities, including those set out in "Promoting Positive Outcomes: Working Together to Prevent Antisocial Behaviour in Scotland", the national antisocial behaviour review. We also offer direct support by funding national community safety organisations and the safer communities and safer streets programmes to tackle issues that are important to our communities.

The member will have more up-to-date information than I have about the activities in that area, and I must confess that I have not had the opportunity to make a study of Mr Whitton's election literature—

And I have no plans so to do. What I can say—and I hope that members will take this matter seriously—is that the setting and resourcing of local priorities are and must be a matter for local authorities. I recently discussed challenges and opportunities in community safety with Jim Neill, the national community safety adviser, and I asked him to look into the issues  and to report back to me. Community planning encourages partners to work together for the good of their communities, and I hope that members will agree that serving the best interests of communities must be our priority.

This has been an extremely useful debate, with excellent contributions from members  of all parties, and from the independent member, Margo MacDonald, who has kept many other speakers on their intellectual toes, so to speak. When the Cabinet Secretary for Justice began the debate, he emphasised that a rule against double jeopardy is an essential feature of a fair society. The state should never have unfettered freedom repeatedly to prosecute individuals for the same act. It was useful to start the debate by canvassing that principle. That was the approach that the Scottish Law Commission took, as we would expect, when it analysed the issue in its report. The commission started off by asking whether we need double jeopardy at all. Is there a case for scrapping the rule altogether? We feel that there is not such a case, although it is always sensible to challenge one's own views and beliefs, is it not? The Scottish Law Commission set out three reasons why, in its view, it is essential to have a rule against double jeopardy. First, it is a fundamental recognition of the finality of criminal proceedings. We do not want a criminal justice system in which the same matters are tried again and again. We want a criminal justice system in which our citizens have confidence, and where we get it right in the vast majority of cases. We are all confident that that is indeed the case, given the excellent quality of those involved in the system in every way. Secondly, the rule has an important function in expressing the limits of the power of the state vis-à-vis the private citizen. The plight of a citizen facing a criminal trial is one of the citizen against the state. It is public law. It is a matter of the state deciding that an individual's conduct has led to their facing a criminal trial. For the individual, there can be few more serious experiences in life than facing the power of the state under those circumstances. That is why we have legal aid, rules of procedure and the independence of the Government from the judicial system. Thirdly, the rule against double jeopardy affords protection from the anxiety and humiliation that repeated trials would undoubtedly cause accused persons. I think that it was Cathie Craigie who alluded to the fact that we have had a rule against double jeopardy for around eight centuries. That is indeed the position that the Scottish Law Commission canvasses. It states that the rule was recognised by judges by the 13th or 14th century. Cathie Craigie is absolutely correct about that. If I may, I will quote Baron Hume. I do not often get the opportunity, but it is a great pleasure to do so; in my humble opinion, he is not quoted frequently enough in the Parliament. If we fast- forward to the 18th century, we note that Baron Hume stated the following: "The prime benefit of a sentence of absolvitor is, that the pannel"— that is, the accused— "can never again be challenged or called in question, or made to thole an assize (as our phrase for it is) on the matter or charge that has been tried. The ground of which maxim lies in this obvious and humane consideration, that a person is substantially punished, in being twice reduced to so anxious and humiliating a condition, and standing twice in jeopardy of his life, fame or person." In Baron Hume's day, people would literally be standing in the dock in jeopardy of their life. I must say, Baron Hume excepted, there are one or two judges who were around at that time before whom I would not have been too keen to stand in the dock, charged on any matter.

Indeed. I might deserve such a fate in the opinion of some members. The principle of double jeopardy is well established, but it is in need of reform and the Scottish Law Commission has clearly recognised the need for clarity on its operation. Although there are some exceedingly difficult questions on double jeopardy that we have explored during the debate, there are others that we have not explored in detail, such as those that arise when one charge is introduced and a slightly different charge is introduced later. There are some complex issues of principle and practice that we need to get right. Therefore, I very much welcome the tone of the debate and the speeches by members of all parties, which I believe recognise that we must proceed with care and study the issues extremely carefully. Double jeopardy is an important safeguard, but it is in need of reform. We are exceedingly grateful to the Scottish Law Commission for its work, which has enabled us to prepare the consultation paper, in which there are 10 questions and which restates the 36 recommendations from the SLC's report. I now seek to reply, as best I can in the time that I have, to some of the points that members have made. I think that it was Margo MacDonald who raised the general issue of whether exceptions to the double jeopardy rule because of a confession, a tainted trial or other new evidence should be restricted to the most serious crimes—murder, rape and so on. The SLC does not suggest restricting any exception for post-acquittal confessions or tainted trials to a list of specific offences. The reason for that was set out by Dr Ian McKee. If a trial is tainted, that means that the convicted person, if you like, nobbled a juror—in other words, bribed them to deliver a certain  verdict. In such cases, there has not been single jeopardy, because there has not been a proper trial. The trial has been perverted, so there has been no double jeopardy. It is fair to acknowledge that. Similarly—I do not think that this point has been advanced in the debate—when someone who has been tried and acquitted subsequently confesses, clearly and without duress, to having committed the crime of which they were acquitted, that person waives the protection of the double jeopardy principle. I do not think that it can be said that a person who freely confesses their guilt faces a double jeopardy scenario—they simply face the consequences of having acknowledged their crime. That is an underlying distinction that I wanted to make to Margo MacDonald.

I am no expert in the law of time bar, but my understanding is that, by and large, it is a concept that is more applicable in civil law than it is in criminal law. Where it applies, it applies to the time limits for bringing prosecutions, whereby accused people who are in custody must be brought to trial within a certain period; I believe that the 110-day rule has been amended. I do not believe that there is a law of proscription in cases of murder, for example, so I do not believe that time barring is a problem but, plainly, I am not expert in the field. We will look at that issue. There has been much discussion of cases in which new evidence arises. Initially, that discussion focused on the Liberal Democrat amendment, which says that new evidence exceptions to the double jeopardy rule should be restricted to cases of murder and rape. I warmly welcome the indication by the Liberal Democrats that they intend to withdraw their amendment, a decision that they were perhaps influenced to take by what has been said in the debate. That is a welcome development in a Parliament in which we want to pursue matters by way of reasoned argument, instead of always sticking to the party line, which I have not always done, as members may know—although that was in former days, of course. It might help members if I refer to part 5 of the Scottish Law Commission's report, in which the commission noted: "One respondent suggested that there should be no limit upon which offences might be retried, the matter being one which could safely be left to the discretion of the Lord Advocate." Bill Aitken might have made such a suggestion today.  The commission went on to ask the question that we have been addressing today: how do we define "most serious cases"? The commission noted: "On one view, the only principled point at which to draw a line is between murder ... and other offences." The Government is not sure that that way of approaching the question will bring the right answer. The debate has demonstrated that there is a view that we need to look beyond murder and rape to many other very serious offences. Of course, the crime of genocide, by definition, involves murder. Stewart Maxwell mentioned a number of serious offences, including sexual offences against children, which I think that society acknowledges to be extremely serious. If we were to take steps to have a modern system of double jeopardy law, so that we could bring people to trial when new evidence emerged, such as DNA evidence, it would surely be perverse to exclude from the operation of the relaxed rule sexual offences, in relation to which it is most likely that DNA evidence could demonstrate guilt in a way that was not possible before scientific advances were made. Such new evidence might be able to deliver justice for victims of serious sexual offences. Nigel Don made a thoughtful speech. We will consider his arguments carefully. The SLC acknowledged that it is difficult to form a test, as we acknowledged in paragraph 7.6 of our consultation paper. We would welcome further debate on the matter. Many members talked about the risks of a second trial being prejudiced by publicity. That is a reasonable point, which we address in chapter 8 of the consultation paper. The SLC recommended that the High Court should have wide discretion to decide whether a retrial would be in the interests of justice. It also recommended that the courts "should have power to make an order limiting publication of reports". I do not think that members mentioned that recommendation. Such a power could be used to provide the safeguards that many members thought might be appropriate. Neither I nor the cabinet secretary has mentioned individual cases, as some members have done. It is not that we do not want to do that, but doing so would not be prudent or consistent with our ministerial roles. There was consensus in the debate, which Mr McLetchie did his best to disturb when he brought a whiff of political partisanship to the debate by castigating just about everyone except the Conservatives for not addressing the issue before now. I hope that he does not mind my having the temerity to point out that the Conservatives had a  small opportunity to address the matter between 1979 and 1997, with the help of such previously disguised liberals as Nicholas Fairbairn, Michael Forsyth or perhaps Albert McQuarrie, through a private member's bill. The Conservatives did not address the matter. However, the Scottish Government looks forward and not back, as members know. I am delighted that in arguing that we need a new rule on double jeopardy, in the interests of justice, we have the support of members of all parties. On that consensual—as always—note, I am happy to close.

Given that Mr McLetchie is making so much of this, can he explain why action was not taken in the 18 years that the Conservatives were in government under Mrs Thatcher and others?

The debate has clearly demonstrated that all of us, in all parties, are wholly committed to the objective of tackling and disrupting serious organised crime, of jailing the Mr Bigs and of stripping them of their assets. Those objectives are entirely shared across the Parliament, and later in my speech I will describe some of the work that I believe is contributing to success in meeting them. In the time that is available, I will respond to some of the points that members have made in the course of this interesting debate. Many members spoke about the importance of boosting asset recovery. Robert Brown asked how much money has been recovered. My information is that under the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 more than £27 million has already been recovered from organised criminals. It is salutary to think of the view that Gordon Meldrum has expressed on many occasions: that the serious organised criminals—the Mr Bigs—should of course go to jail with severe sentences. That is self-evidently true, and we all agree on that. However, it is not going to jail and doing the time that those Mr Bigs worry about. They worry about having their assets stripped from them. Although we must ensure that they do, indeed, go to jail for a long time, we should bear it in mind that the real prize is to strip them of their assets. To that end, the cabinet secretary outlined some specific, concrete and good measures in his opening speech—measures that have not, as far as I have seen, really attracted any criticism, per se. We have allocated £1.2 million to the Crown Office over three years, and specialist staff have been recruited. We have provided £500,000 to Lothian and Borders Police, Strathclyde Police and Tayside Police to finance financial investigators, and that has been match-funded. The work that is required to strip the Mr Bigs of their assets is not the work of the politician. It is not, if I may say so—I am not saying that I am a particular culprit—about framing windy rhetoric. It is part of the task of forensic precision in analysis of financial records; going back through many years of records such as the bank accounts, property affairs and title deeds of the Mr Bigs. That task has to be carried out in painstaking detail, which is why the actions that the cabinet secretary is taking have been welcomed on all sides of the chamber. Many members raised the next point. I am pleased to respond to the question, "What else are we doing?" by saying that we plan to extend the list of criminal lifestyle offences under the 2002 act and to reduce the criminal benefit amount from £5,000 to £1,000. Furthermore, the cabinet  secretary has written to the Home Secretary to seek his agreement to make—in order to help boost asset recovery—a number of legislative changes that fall within reserved competence. Robert Brown raised a number of points about human trafficking, which was also mentioned by Elaine Smith, Richard Baker and a number of other members. The cabinet secretary indicated in a written answer on 24 November last year: "During Pentameter 2, a police-led operation aimed at disrupting trafficking for sexual exploitation which ran between October 2007 and March 2008, there were a total of 35 arrests made ... there were 22 prosecutions, resulting in 18 convictions for offences including trading in prostitution".— [ Official Report, Written Answers , 24 November 2009; S3W-28989.]  Robert Brown said that there have been no convictions for the specific offence of human trafficking. Plainly, it is for the Lord Advocate and procurators fiscal to decide on the offences and what charges to bring. The decision by the appropriate parties—not by Government, but by the independent law officers—was to bring charges in relation to prostitution and immigration offences. I am sure that that was the right decision and it has led to convictions being sustained. The issue is a concern to all parties: we are wholly united in our horror and abhorrence of the vile crimes of human trafficking and we will do everything that we can in that respect. We are grateful for Bill Aitken's positive suggestion to engage HM Revenue and Customs in our work. I am pleased to report that, prior to that suggestion being kindly proffered, we had already done that. Richard Baker raised points about the joint inspection report into asset recovery. I am pleased to say that we accept recommendation 1, which is why there on 30 March will be a conference that will bring together 200 practitioners. We also accept recommendation 2—in fact, we already had a strategy. Recommendation 3 is done and recommendation 4 is also agreed to. Elaine Smith raised points about the Gartcosh crime campus. We recognise that the issue is extremely serious and Elaine Smith is right to raise it as the constituency member, although I hope that the issue transcends party politics. It is absolutely clear that we are committed to the principles that members throughout the Parliament have espoused. The site was not developed prior to our taking office, but it is being developed now. We expect the first agency to move into the campus in 2012, with full occupancy by mid 2013. That takes account of the fact that some agencies do not wish to move into the campus until after the Olympic games in 2012. That is a partial response to the points that Elaine Smith raised.  Hugh Henry rightly praised the choices for life project and asked whether it has been evaluated. Bill Wilson and John Lamont also rightly mentioned the problem of drugs. We want to deter young people from taking drugs and we are united in that. I wholly share Hugh Henry's view that the choices for life programme is entirely excellent. I attended a choices for life event in my constituency in Inverness, along with 1,000 primary 6 and 7 children. It was an extremely embarrassing moment for me, as I had to participate in some public dancing activity, which is not really my métier. However, six weeks later, in a Nairn primary school, I found that pupils who had attended even remembered the names of the people in the play that charted the fall of children who became involved in drug taking, as well as the point of the play. We must think carefully about evaluation, but the Scottish schools adolescent lifestyle and substance use survey—SALSUS—figures show that the number of young people taking drugs is reducing, although slightly and not by enough. That is good work that we all wish to be built on, and I appreciate the support of Hugh Henry in that. We must reduce the demand for drugs and counterfeit goods. I would never wish to disappoint Christopher Harvie or Bill Wilson, but we have no plans to legalise drugs and we do not plan to legalise cannabis.

No, I will not. I will not be the minister who explains to parents whose children have died after having taken drugs that we are planning to legalise them. We will consider carefully pilot projects throughout the land. I praise the work of the police and the SCDEA throughout Scotland. [ Interruption .]

We should consider the success of the police and the SCDEA in combating cannabis cultivation. More than 111,000 cannabis plants, with a value of £34 million, have been seized. Consider the success of operation lockdown in Glasgow, which resulted in the arrest of 146 individuals, including four of the principals, as well as recovery of drugs with a street value of £8.8 million. Further, an unconnected murder in the Strathclyde area was detected as a result of that inquiry, which was designed to focus on drugs. Consider the success of operation Lochnagar in Grampian, in which 155 arrests were made under the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 and there were 48 main targets. I had the pleasure of seeing a presentation on operation focus in  Lothian and Borders, which involved hundreds of people in dawn raids on drug dealers' homes. Hundreds of people knew about it, but not one word leaked out to the criminals who were arrested on that day. The operations that I have mentioned are among the most successful police operations in the history of Scotland. I hope that those members who have asked today about the effectiveness of our efforts will acknowledge the excellent work that is done by those who bring law and order to our country. We are mightily grateful to every one of them for their efforts.

We certainly agree with the recommendation on mainstreaming the proceeds of crime, which is why there will be a conference on 30 March that will bring together 200 practitioners. However, does Richard Baker agree that the cabinet secretary's announcement of the provision of £1.7 million is exactly the right move to tackle Vidouri-type cases, as 19 new financial investigators will be available to the police service to do that work?

The final report detailing the analysis of the consultation responses was submitted to my officials last week. I intend that the analysis of the consultation responses will be published on the Scottish Government website in March. We will then consider what steps to take next.

I am aware of the interest that the member and MSPs from across the chamber have taken in this matter. I know that most MSPs have, on behalf of their constituents, raised concerns about the issue with me and, I suspect, with a number of my predecessors. For that reason, and given that there have been 617 responses to the consultation—the analysis of which we have only recently received—it would be imprudent of us to rule in or out any particular solutions. Instead, we should publish the analysis, consider it carefully and decide how best to proceed—if possible, with as much input from across the political spectrum as can be mustered.

I am grateful to Bill Aitken for giving way, and for the way in which he makes his point. Does he accept that there is at least a tension between the wish that we all have to provide those extra services and the countervailing pressure of more people being predicted to go to prison, with the consequent need to build more prisons? It is expected that we will need to be able to house an additional 1,500 prisoners unless we change tack on penal policy in this country.

Porterfield prison in Inverness formerly took female prisoners. One reason why that ceased is the general overcrowding of prisons. Does Richard Baker agree that the fact that overcrowding is now such a huge problem makes it far more difficult to cater for female prisoners and to provide all prisoners with the extra services that the Equal Opportunities Committee highlights, such as speech and language therapy, an issue on which I met—

—a number of the key players yesterday.

Last week, I wrote to the Home Office to stress the importance of finding a solution to this problem as quickly as possible. I am of the view that these synthetic cathinones can be as harmful as any other illicit drug and should therefore fall under the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 as soon as possible. We are to fund the provision of training materials for alcohol and drug partnerships and have also expanded our know the score drug awareness campaign to include many of these so-called legal highs, including mephedrone, and to make advice on drugs and their risks available through our helpline and website.

The local member has highlighted the problem in Dundee, where, as reports in November 2009 indicated, five young people needed treatment after using so-called bubbles. All recovered, but two had to be hospitalised. Research by the University of Liverpool reported a number of possible adverse and serious health effects. That is why I wrote to the Home Office last week to express my concern on behalf of the Scottish Government. We believe that such legal highs should be added to the list of illegal drugs. The sooner that that happens, the better.

Of course we recognise and support the excellent work done by police forces throughout Scotland. Arguably, they have had greater success in tackling drugs in the past 12 months than they have had at any other stage in the history of policing in Scotland, not least in Grampian, where they have carried out massively successful operations. We continue to support the police and the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency in taking tough and effective action.

I thank most sincerely the Local Government and Communities Committee, ably convened by Duncan McNeil, for its work in considering the bill, which was not without some  controversy. I also thank the Subordinate Legislation Committee, the Finance Committee and everyone involved in the debt action forum and the repossessions group, who gave their time freely and willingly. Finally, I thank the officials working for Mr Neil and me in both directorates, including the Accountant in Bankruptcy and her predecessor, for showing a commitment to their work for the ministers whom they support that was beyond the call of duty. At times of economic hardship, people look to their Government for practical solutions. We believe that the bill that we will pass today offers just that. It is important to remember why the bill is so important and whom it is intended to help. Increasing numbers of people in Scotland are struggling with debt and facing the prospect of homelessness. We have been warned of further financial strain in the years ahead, with unemployment and interest rates expected to rise. Indeed, the most recent figures show a rise in unemployment in Scotland of 9,000 for the period September to November 2009. That is likely to put many more homeowners in the most serious financial difficulty, which they may have been able to avoid only temporarily due to reduced home loan costs. Undoubtedly the most traumatic impact of debt is the harm that is caused to families, especially children, because of the stress and anxiety arising from the threat to the family home. That has been acknowledged by many members, including Mary Mulligan and Cathy Jamieson. We entirely support those sentiments and share the views that have been expressed. In my former life as a solicitor I had some experience of trying to help people stay in their homes and avoid unnecessary eviction during times of hardship. We must not underestimate the impact of the recession on Scots who are struggling to make ends meet. As I have made clear throughout the passage of the bill, the Government agrees with the principle that those who can, should pay their debts. We entirely agree with that statement as it was expounded by Mr McLetchie. We also believe that the rights of creditors must be balanced with humane debt solutions that are proportionate to the impact of debt on families and the wider community. The impact of debt on individuals can be most severe. It can exacerbate problems and can lead to addiction, the breaking up of families, depression and have all sorts of horrendous consequences that all members will be aware of from seeking to assist their constituents. The Home Owner and Debtor Protection (Scotland) Bill offers those people more help and I am delighted that it is likely to receive cross-party, indeed all-party, support today.  The bill widens access to the debt relief of bankruptcy. That is not a first choice, however—it is not like picking a bag of sweeties from a supermarket—it is a last resort, and a serious step. It is not something that people enter into lightly or are advised to enter into lightly. That said, as representatives of citizens advice bureaux in particular have emphasised, section 9 will provide to a large number of people an option that is presently denied to them. Those people are stuck. They are in limbo. They do not have access to debt relief. The bill will change that, and I am very pleased that that measure will be supported. Section 10 involved some controversy. I thank all the stakeholders with whom I worked on the matter: those who supported the measure, such as CABx and Money Advice Scotland; and those who had reservations about it, such as the representatives of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in Scotland with whom we engaged thoroughly and consistently, and whom I met just last week to discuss how to take these matters forward. We will continue to engage with those organisations in that work. We have listened to stakeholders throughout the process, and we have responded to the views that committee members expressed. I was pleased and gratified that the Local Government and Communities Committee responded in kind by accepting at stage 2 that we had a case—a strong case, I believe—and almost all the committee's members supported section 10. I am in no doubt that the Home Owner and Debtor Protection (Scotland) Bill will prevent unnecessary eviction, that it will provide new debt solutions for many families throughout Scotland and that, with the contributions that have been made in the Parliament, it will be a worthy addition to the statute book. In the stage 1 debate I was compared to Bob the Builder and was asked, "Can you fix it?" My response then was: "Yes, we can and, yes, we will."—[ Official Report , 17 December 2009; c 22400.] Today I can say with confidence: yes we have. I urge members to support the bill.

Amendment 1 is a technical one that will make a minor clarification for the operation of the amended section 40 of the Bankruptcy (Scotland) Act 1985 in relation to trust deeds. Section 11 of the bill will amend section 40 of the 1985 act so that its protections, which currently apply to sequestrations, are extended to apply to trust deeds. Section 11 ensures that a trustee under a trust deed must, when wishing to sell the family home, seek the relevant consent or authority of the sheriff, just as a trustee in sequestration must do so. The section will also ensure that the sheriff must take into account the same factors with trust deeds as he must in sequestrations. The term "family home" is defined in section 40(4) of the 1985 act as meaning property in which there was an interest at a defined "relevant date". Amendment 1 adapts the "relevant date"  definition to include reference to trust deeds. Without the amendment, the definition of "relevant date" in the 1985 act would make no reference to trust deeds. The amendment avoids any uncertainty by clarifying in the 1985 act that, for the purposes of trust deeds under section 40, a debtor's family home is a home in which he had an interest the day before his trust deed was granted. I move amendment 1.  Amendment 1 agreed to.

I have asked the national forum on drug-related deaths to develop a national protocol and guidelines on naloxone provision. A short-life working group has been established to take forward that work under the leadership of Carole Hunter, who is lead pharmacist for Glasgow addiction services. The working group aims to have the draft protocol presented for consideration at the next full forum meeting, on 3 February 2010. I will consider the matter further once the forum has delivered the protocol and any recommendations for roll-out.

Anne McLaughlin has made exactly the right point. Naloxone is used to reverse the effects of opiate overdoses; therefore, we believe that it has the potential to save lives. The member is also correct to say that, for obvious reasons, those who may be subject to overdoses are often not in a position to administer naloxone to themselves to save their life. Under the Medicines Act 1968, no one but individual patients in receipt of a prescription is allowed to administer injectable prescription-only medicines, but there is support for extending the existing schemes. We very much want to consider that matter to try to find a way to save lives where possible.

I entirely agree with Dr Richard Simpson. We wish to deal with the matter as he specifically suggests. We believe that naloxone has the potential to save lives, which is why I have asked the national forum on drug-related deaths to work on a national protocol. It is important to ensure that prisoners who have been released are given high priority. The statistics show that they are at very high risk of death, perhaps as a result of taking drugs that are much stronger than those that they have been accustomed to during their incarceration. I thank members of all parties for their support for the drugs strategy, which is now being implemented. The work that we are discussing is a key supplement to that work.

This has been a very useful and wide-ranging debate in which many interesting points have been made across the chamber. I thank the CFOA and the FBU for their useful briefings, on which members have drawn. I see members of the FBU in the public gallery, and I thank them for their attendance. I think that, further back, I also see the convener of Lothian and Borders fire and rescue board and the chief fire officer of Lothian and Borders Fire and Rescue Service, and I thank them for their input. I know that Paddy Tomkins joined Lothian and Borders water rescue teams for a demonstration on the River Tweed. He speaks highly of that in his review. On the spring tour that I undertook last year, I met Lothian and Borders water rescue teams, and I also had the opportunity to see a water rescue training exercise in action on the River Nith in Dumfries. I thank David Wynne and his firefighters for that work. The debate has been consensual. We acknowledge that the review led by Paddy Tomkins was independent. The report confirms that Scotland has robust water rescue arrangements and protocols in place, but we cannot be complacent, because there is much more work to be done. The report acknowledges that there is no need to change existing legislation—I will come on to address that—and it makes 15 recommendations to strengthen our partnership arrangements and to ensure an effective and proportionate response capability across Scotland. I listened carefully to all members' comments on the recommendations, which were broadly welcomed. The starting point is to set up, as I already stated we will do, a water rescue working group to take all the issues forward. I want to respond first to Elaine Smith's closely argued and thorough speech, which was made on behalf of the FBU. I am delighted to confirm to her that I think that it is important that the FBU is represented on the working group. As long as I have been a minister, I have argued that it is essential that we hear from workforce representatives, because they often do the job at first hand. Were we not to hear directly from them or have their involvement on important national groups such as the water rescue working group, we would miss that expertise and make a mistake. Workforce representatives will be on the working group. Obviously, I have not yet had advice about the composition of that group, but it seems  sensible that we take as a starting point the composition of the advisory group that assisted Paddy Tomkins, the broad membership of which is set out on page 1 of the report. It is important that all members of the fire family including the chiefs, workforce representatives and the conveners have their voices heard when we consider matters for which they are responsible. Some members referred to the comparison between mountain rescue and water rescue. Paddy Tomkins was struck by—and quotes in his report—a remark that was made by one of the mountain rescue team members to whom he spoke: "The mountains are perfectly safe as long as you remember how dangerous they are." We heard relevant evidence from many members today. Liam McArthur recounted his escape from death in his kayak on Loch Lomond. We are grateful that he did not depart before he arrived here, as it were. We heard from Nigel Don a rather long description, I thought, about the temperature of water, but it was nonetheless an interesting one. It underscored the fact that those who end up immersed in our lochs and rivers face death in a matter of minutes and not hours. One can be a casualty in the Lairig Ghru, for example, and survive for several hours, but the challenge in acute water rescue situations is such that, as Jamie McGrigor argued, an immediate response is essential. Speed is of the essence. That differentiates water rescue from mountain rescue.

That is an important point. As the member raises it, I take the opportunity to say that many members mentioned the general issue of and the recommendations about the need to advise and educate the public and improve public awareness of the risks of water. Recommendation 14 specifically covers that. The safe Tay initiative, which is covered on page 40 of the report, was remarked on, but by a strange omission no one touched on the section on public notices on page 42. No doubt that will happen in the next debate. Plainly, all members agree that there is a lack of general appreciation among many members of the public of just how dangerous immersion in our lochs and rivers is and how likely it is that those who accidentally end up there will not survive. That is a serious and sobering thought.  I want to respond to Peter Peacock, who made a typically cogent and closely argued speech including seven or eight specific requests for me to respond—he was rightly putting the minister on the spot. I am pleased that, even before this afternoon's debate, ACPOS and CFOA had already met to decide how to take forward the responsibilities for carrying out acute water rescue and flood rescue. They are developing a memorandum of understanding, which will cover the response to emergency calls. As Paddy Tomkins describes in his report, that is already carried out in an exemplary fashion. He pays tribute to the telephone operators in emergency services throughout Scotland and to those who are responsible for the control and tasking of water rescue assets.

I also refer Peter Peacock to pages 28, 34 and 35 of the report, which make it clear why Paddy Tomkins reached the conclusions that he did about the lack of a need to legislate on the matter. He recognises that the existing statutory arrangement appears to be working well but suggests, as many members have pointed out, that we should be aiming for better practical co-ordination and for clarification not only of specific roles, which is what is happening between ACPOS and CFOA, but of the role of the strategic co-ordinating groups. I thank members for their speeches. We have already learned a lot from them but will certainly study them closely.

I agree with most of what the member said. It might be useful to say at this point, because both he and John Farquhar Munro have mentioned the Loch Awe incident, which sadly led to loss of life, that the matter remains under the consideration of the procurator fiscal at Oban, who will report to the Crown Office in due course for the consideration of Crown counsel. Until such time as that work is completed, it would not be possible or appropriate for us—even if we wished to—to respond to any questions on the matter.

This is a welcome opportunity for Parliament to debate the findings and recommendations presented by Paddy Tomkins in his "Independent Review of Open Water and Flood Rescue in Scotland". Over recent weeks, we have experienced some of the worst winter weather for 30 years. The Scottish Government and our partners have been working together to deal with the snow and to ensure that we were prepared for potential flooding as the thaw set in. I put on record Scottish Government ministers' thanks to all those who worked so hard to keep our services functioning and our communities safe. I am particularly heartened that many of the lessons from the flooding in the north-east and elsewhere during 2009 were applied in the past few weeks. This weather is a reminder of the wider climate and flood prevention issues that we debated recently in the chamber and which are being progressed under the leadership of my environment colleagues. Progress is being made. The Scottish Government was the first United Kingdom Administration to introduce into law the European Commission floods directive. We are supporting record levels of investment in flood protection by local authorities. We are providing funding for projects that are aimed at improving flood forecasting and warning, such as a joint forecasting study with the Met Office, the Scottish Environment Protection Agency's north-east Scotland flood warning scheme and a new national warning dissemination system. We are also providing funding to fire and rescue services for specialist resilience equipment and training—an issue that is raised in the Labour Party's amendment, which we are happy to support—and we are working with the Convention  of Scottish Local Authorities to review arrangements under the Bellwin scheme. Taken together, those activities demonstrate the Scottish Government's commitment to tackling these real threats to our communities. However, this debate is about the procedures and capabilities for the rescue of people from flooding and open water. Indeed, it is important that we recognise that such capability will always be needed because, in Scotland, we have more than 27,000 lochs, almost 12,000km of coastal water and more than 120,000km of rivers and streams, each of which presents a potential risk to those who use them. We also have 90 per cent of the standing volume of fresh water in the island of Great Britain. The danger of inland water has been brought into focus by such tragic events as the loss of four fishermen on Loch Awe, the death of a man seeking to save his dog from the fast-moving River Garnock and the death of a teenager in a water-filled quarry in Kirkliston. In Scotland, an average of 40 people lose their lives every year in inland waters alone. That number would be higher were it not for the skill and bravery of water rescue teams. When those responders raised with me their concerns about the clarity of existing arrangements, I had no hesitation in commissioning Paddy Tomkins, the former head of Her Majesty's inspectorate of constabulary for Scotland, to undertake a comprehensive review. I am very grateful to Mr Tomkins and to those from the rescue community who assisted him in producing a valuable and wide-ranging document, whose findings the Scottish Government welcomes. He was the right person to lead the review, as it required someone with extensive operational experience to understand the procedures and challenges in this highly specialised field. I requested that the review consider four main subjects: current resources and capabilities; the need for any change to operational arrangements; the need for any change in the law; and the level of public awareness of the risks that are associated with open water. I am pleased that the review concludes that neither new legislation nor wholesale change in current statutory arrangements is required. I share that view. Mr Tomkins said: "It is clear that Scotland already has a highly skilled and experienced water rescue capability. While the current multi-agency approach is robust, more can be done to ensure that the skills and resources of frontline responders ... are utilised in the most effective way".

I plan to tackle that issue in a little more detail, but since I gather that I am not too bound by time restrictions, I will answer now. Members will understand that, in law, the police have the primary responsibility in Scotland to deal with emergency situations. That applies to flood and acute water rescue. However, in general, the fire and rescue services have the operational capacity, the ability and the trained and equipped members to undertake the operational duties. Of course, the operational duties involved in rescuing an individual are often accompanied by various other activities. In flooding, emergency relief aid often needs to be administered and traffic control might be needed. In flood or acute water rescue, a death might need to be investigated—it might be regarded as suspicious. The police might need to mark out and protect a scene in order to conduct investigations. I have mentioned some circumstances in which it is plain that the police would be the appropriate emergency service to have the operational duty to perform such functions. However, we recognise that, by and large, it is the fire and rescue service—more specifically, firefighters—that does an excellent job in undertaking such work. In an operational capacity, it is generally firefighters who do the rescuing. In the same way, although the police have overall responsibility for mountain rescue activity, in general it is mountain rescue teams with the assistance of the Royal Air Force and occasionally others that rescue individuals. That is our broad approach; I will say more about that later. Paddy Tomkins makes a series of 15 recommendations on how all the bodies that have a role in water rescue can further improve the collective response to flood and water rescue. I will concentrate on progress that has been made already and on our current areas of focus. First, I acknowledge the review's commitment to existing multi-agency arrangements. I share the view that the arrangements are robust, with the police maintaining statutory responsibility for the overall co-ordination of responses, leaving those with the appropriate training, skills and resources to focus on the rescue itself. I find that my written speech pretty much matches what I said, at Mr Brown's invitation, in my extempore remarks.  That multi-agency approach is vital. Our overall water rescue capability relies extensively on the commitment of voluntary rescue teams such as those from the Red Cross and the Royal National Lifeboat Institution, and Scottish mountain rescue teams, without whom our capability would be diminished. That collective response is an essential element of our on-going capability. I support the closer integration and involvement of voluntary groups, with their local knowledge and specialist skills, in such a team-type framework. I was encouraged to hear that representatives of the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland and the CFOA have already taken the initiative and are working together to clarify further their operational roles, responsibilities and procedures through the development of a new memorandum of understanding. That proactive and professional engagement underpins our existing legislative provisions and ensures that they remain fit for purpose. I believe that each of the recommendations should be carefully considered and acted on in order to strengthen our overall approach. We are already considering responses from key stakeholders. Today's debate will help to inform our thinking further. As an indication of my commitment, I will shortly establish a dedicated water rescue working group under the auspices of the resilience advisory board for Scotland. With representatives from national and local government, the blue-light services and the voluntary sector, the working group will be tasked with co-ordinating our response to the review's recommendations and providing me with quarterly updates. I am pleased that the review highlights the key role that the strategic co-ordinating groups must play in developing many of the recommendations. The SCGs are critical to establishing a consistent Scotland-wide capability and a clearer understanding of the available resources. In support of that work, the on-going review of our "Preparing Scotland" guidance will develop further the doctrine, lessons learned and guidance around water rescue. Progress has been made in the development of a UK-wide civil protection lexicon, which will be the main vehicle for establishing greater consistency in the terminology that is used in the field of water rescue. I expect it to be actively developed over the coming months. The Scottish Government is committed to delivering the recommendations in the review. I believe that progress is being made. However, I stress that both the review and the future of Scotland's water rescue capability have to be considered in a much wider context. If we could  eliminate all risk and make Scotland completely safe without reducing our quality of life, that would be exceptional. The reality is that that is neither achievable nor desirable in a democracy in which there are competing demands for public funding and a huge diversity of activities that people undertake. Our commitment to water rescue must therefore be proportionate. It must be considered against other risks to public safety and the sheer scale of Scotland's geography. That view is shared by Paddy Tomkins, who said: "The professional responders I spoke with were firmly of the view that with over 27,000 lochs it would be simply unreasonable to expect that an emergency response will always be available. That is why I recommend a programme of education to ensure the public are aware of the potential dangers and take personal responsibility for their use of inland water".

Yes, they certainly do. Anyone who enters our lochs faces such hazards. The member makes a fair point that, no doubt, he will develop in his speech. Governments can set out their agendas and related national frameworks, but personal safety is the responsibility of each and every one of us, as individuals. A person who falls into cold water, even if they are a strong swimmer, is faced with many dangers. In many circumstances, survival should be reckoned in minutes rather than hours. In this country, the water temperature seldom increases enough to be wholly safe, a fact that many members of the public perhaps underestimate. A programme of public education must be a cornerstone of any water rescue strategy. We will look at the options for working with our partners to deliver that essential work. The Scottish Government welcomes the findings of Mr Tomkins's review, which confirms that Scotland's communities are already well served by a robust water rescue capability but highlights measures and informed recommendations that can further improve effectiveness. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the findings of Paddy Tomkins' Independent Review of Open Water and Flood Rescue in Scotland , which examined the arrangements and protocols for inland water rescue in Scotland, and believes that the report's recommendations should be carefully considered and acted on in order to strengthen multi-agency arrangements and ensure that an effective and proportionate response capability exists across Scotland.

The "Report on Succession" recommends  significant reforms to the law. I provided an initial response in July. Subsequently, in answer to a parliamentary question from Ian McKee, I confirmed that I had also met the commission's chairman. The Scottish Government is now having a dialogue with and consulting stakeholders to inform the way forward. Plans for legislation will be finalised in the light of that work, taking account of all relevant perspectives.

Rob Gibson is entirely correct to say that the current law rests on the Succession (Scotland) Act 1964, which, although it has served Scotland well, now needs considerable updating. We hope to take that forward through consultation, and in that regard I am delighted that the Justice Committee has responded positively to my suggestion of meeting the commission informally to discuss the report. Given the complexity of the issues, not least the recommendation to abolish the distinction between heritable and movable property—something, indeed, that Rob Gibson raised in his member's bill in 2006—the widest consultation should be carried out to ensure that we maintain a consensual approach. With that in mind, it is more likely than not that legislation will emerge only after the end of this parliamentary session.

I am sure that the convener of the Justice Committee bears up well under the heavy burdens that rest on his shoulders. I entirely agree with his sentiment that there be a degree of urgency. However, given the range of issues involved, the nature of the SLC's specific recommendations and issues arising from the different family background that the member correctly referred to, we advocate an approach based on the maxim "Festina lente".

When I visited South Ayrshire in April 2008, I saw the excellent work being taken forward by the community planning partnership to engage communities in tackling crime and antisocial behaviour. I fully support the area's problem-solving approach and want to promote it nationally. Indeed, that is why in October last year I launched the safer communities programme, which provides direct support to community safety partnerships, local authorities and others to tackle issues that are important to our communities.

First of all, we recognise the dramatic drop in reports of antisocial behaviour and youth disorder in South Ayrshire. Secondly, we have supported South Ayrshire—and, indeed, other parts of Scotland—with the partnership approach that we advocated in our safer streets programme. Finally, I recall from my visit to South Ayrshire and discussions with local elected councillors and council leaders that one of the most successful measures was the use of effective youth diversion schemes. Where possible, we want to divert young people from crime before there is any question of their going to jail or facing stronger sentences. We will be advocating that approach and, I hope, bringing forward measures to increase the use of effective youth diversion programmes in our country.

It is essential that local authorities play their full part, and I am confident that that is exactly what they are doing. I chair the national community safety strategic group, which includes representatives of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. I pay tribute to Councillor Harry McGuigan of COSLA who, with  me, produced the approach that we have adopted to antisocial behaviour and took what I hope is a non-partisan approach to developing the various strands and policies that have, I believe, been deployed effectively throughout Scotland, as Mr Kelly knows.

I have thoroughly enjoyed what has been a most interesting debate. First, I pay tribute to all members on the Local Government and Communities Committee, which is ably convened by Duncan McNeil. His presentation of the various arguments was entirely consistent with the committee's report. I also thank the committee clerks, who are also present this afternoon. I am sorry only that, as far as MSPs are concerned, the debate has been a relatively sparsely attended affair, for some reason that is completely incomprehensible to me. I am prepared to take on the chin all the criticisms and comparisons that have been bandied around the chamber and I will, in so far as I can in the lengthy time that appears to be available to me, address the arguments that members have made. Although the committee made very serious criticism about consultation, particularly with regard to part 2, I welcome its acknowledgement of the bill's necessity. As various members including Bob Doris said, it is good that Parliament recognises that the measures are essential. They will give people in Scotland considerable help in avoiding unnecessary eviction and in dealing with the difficult debt situations that they might face. I note that, as well as the criticism of part 2, there seemed to be among some members a parallel competition to claim greatest credit for the bill. I think that we can all take the credit in that respect. I will start off by briefly addressing one or two points that were raised on part 1 of the bill, then I will focus the main part of my speech on part 2. As  was briefly mentioned earlier, a report was published today by Advice UK, Citizens Advice and Shelter on repossession court actions in England. It found that in one third of the cases in England, advisers considered that the lender had not complied with the pre-action protocol, and that in only six out of 101 such cases had the courts applied sanctions for non-compliance. It is fair to say that that entirely supports the line that our bill will provide greater protection in Scotland by making lender compliance and court scrutiny of that compliance a legal requirement. That is in contrast with the procedure in England, where there is no such substantive legal effect. My experience as a solicitor was often to try to forestall evictions where possible—it is not always possible. I am making no general smear when I say that I often found that it was difficult to get answers from banks and building societies, especially in cases where things have started to go wrong. That experience has been entirely borne out by my subsequent 10 years as an MSP, during which constituents have frequently come to my surgeries to say that they have been to the local branch of their bank or building society, explained that someone in the household has lost their job and that they want to try to reduce their mortgage payment so that they can cope and avoid the worry that they might face eviction action, but have not been able to find out who makes such decisions in the organisation. In other words, it is very difficult to get to someone who has sufficient power and seniority to make decision about cases. The bill will require all secured lenders, other than for involuntary surrender, to go to court to show methodically that they have complied with the requirements on them. That will provide a significant protection to many people in Scotland, and one that is not, I respectfully submit, in place in England. There is common ground, particularly between the Labour Party and the Liberal Democrats, that this is a worthy and sensible step. It is the right measure, and it is absolutely necessary to help people, especially during the recession, who find, having lost their job—in many cases through no fault of their own—that they might also face the loss of their home. I never wish to misquote Mr McLetchie, because I am sure that I will be corrected instantly. However, he seemed to cast doubt on the utility and worth of the bill. If he did so, I have to respectfully disagree, and I do not think that the rest of Parliament will be with him. Patricia Ferguson and Mary Mulligan mentioned court costs. We have looked at the issue pretty carefully and the Scottish Court Service, as members would expect, has considered it in great detail. We are satisfied that the courts will be able  to cope with the additional burden. It is fair to say that no one can state with certainty what the number of additional cases will be, but Alex Neil and I are satisfied that the courts are well placed to deal with such cases—of course, they deal with them at the moment. We are satisfied on that score. I turn now to part 2 of the bill. I believe that it is absolutely essential for us to help our citizens to meet the problems that some of them will face because of the recession. Why is that? There are specific problems for which there is no legislative solution at present. We set up the debt action forum, and I attended and chaired five of its seven meetings between January and May this year. We set the forum a specific remit in writing, entitled "Terms of Reference And Outline Brief: Debt Action Forum"—I have a copy of it here. I cannot read it all, but it states that "debt solutions would require primary legislation in order to: Allow access to bankruptcy for an at-risk group with negative equity, who currently are effectively precluded from seeking bankruptcy because they have title in heritage". Why is that factually correct? It is because we currently have the low-income, low-asset route, which provides a mechanism by which people can get debt relief through sequestration. The criteria are that one must not earn in excess of the minimum wage, one cannot have assets in excess of £1,000, and one cannot be a homeowner. When LILA was introduced by this Administration, following the cross-party approach to the implementation of the 2001 act, many thousands of LILA cases came forward, as Mr Whitton said. I will come to his comments on that later. The Citizens Advice Bureau and Money Advice Scotland said that they cleared filing cabinets of cases. Each of those cases was an individual person or family in Scotland who was waiting for debt relief measures. However, what about the people who have a house, earn more than the minimum wage or have assets of more than £1,000? Currently, they may be able to access the debt relief measure of protected trust deeds, but they will not be able to do so unless the fees of protected trust deeds, which process is carried out entirely by the insolvency profession, can be met. In other words, if someone does not have the money, they cannot get into a trust deed or sequestration unless they are apparently insolvent or being pursued by a creditor. By and large, creditors will probably not pursue matters to that stage, because they will probably take the view that one cannot get blood out of a stone or that there is no point in throwing good money after bad. That is the view that they take, and it is a view that I am sure the solicitors  among us will remember clients taking. It is a prudent decision to take. That situation, however, still leaves people in limbo and unable to get debt relief, a trust deed or sequestration. Is that right? Mr McLetchie may think that it is not, but I was not sure whether that was the point that he was making from his protracted story involving Mr Brown and so on. I think the situation it is not right, because I do not think that people should be denied access to debt relief. Indeed, the law of Scotland has recognised for centuries that there should be access to debt relief measures. It should be said—I hope that all of us would agree with this, and it certainly needs to be said in a debate about sequestration and bankruptcy—that we are a nation who like to pay our debts and think that debts should be paid. I suspect that all of us will take that approach. Indeed, if we did not do that as a society, we would be in an even worse situation than we are. Debt law therefore needs to provide methods to help people pay off debts in an organised way. That is why, with cross-party support, the debt administration scheme was developed. That is also why we decided that, to encourage more people to take up the scheme, because the numbers of people who were doing so were disappointingly low, we would freeze interest and charges, which has led to increased use of that remedy. Some people, however, are just not able to pay off their debts, or it may be that it would take them the rest of their lives to do so. I hope that we would all recognise that, in such cases, particularly in the many cases in which people have lost a job through no fault of their own, they should not be denied access to debt relief. The debt action forum recognised, having had in its remit the objective to discuss and consider the matter, that that is a gap that we need to fill. When the forum completed its deliberations, it was certainly the case, as some members argued—particularly Mr Whitton—that there was not total unanimity on the forum on all matters. However, I do not think that one might expect there to be total unanimity on an issue such as this. Be that as it may, when the debt action forum concluded its work, there was recognition that there is a group of people who are in limbo. They do not have access to sequestration, they do not have access to a trust deed and cannot afford the fees of insolvency practitioners. They are therefore stuck. What is the plight of such people? I met at a surgery of mine in Nairn one such person, who had debts of about £80,000 and owned a home but did not have enough income to be able to pay a contribution. They were receiving debt letters all the time, with all the pressure and anxiety that that causes. Such a family might be able to take up the  opportunity that section 9 will afford to apply for a certificate for sequestration and therefore get debt relief. I stress that section 9 derived from the debt action forum's remit and deliberations. A mechanism was then devised by a committee of experts, including Professor George Gretton.

Yes—we will lodge amendments that will ensure that in cases in which insolvency practitioners have started off, but been unable to complete, a protected trust deed, the insolvency practitioners will be able to carry that work through to sequestration. We will also lodge amendments that will make it clear that our aim is not to remove work from insolvency practitioners, nor is it to build a vast empire for the Accountant in Bankruptcy. I think that the amendments will largely satisfy Mr McLetchie, although time will tell. I am pleased to give him that assurance. Section 10 also arose from the remit of the debt action forum, which all members of the forum received at the outset. That remit included the suggested debt solution to "Allow a debtor's family home (subject to creditor consent) to be excluded from a protected trust deed". As Mr Neil said, the process is being driven by creditors. ICAS has put forward an alternative proposal, which would allow exemption of family homes up to a certain value. As I said in committee, we think that the proposal has drawbacks. The British Bankers Association has said that there should be a more flexible mechanism—namely, I think, the one that we proposed in the bill. I will explain why I think that section 10 should be supported. First, it will allow far greater flexibility. Secondly, it will allow the family home to be dealt with at the beginning rather than at the end of a trust deed. I am not criticising the work of insolvency practitioners, many of whom do that anyway, but the bill will focus minds and allow the matter to be dealt with at the beginning. Thirdly, section 10 will allow the administration of a trust deed to be done at lesser expense, and through a process that will be easier to manage and less complicated, because the house will be dealt with at the beginning. The approach provides an opportunity for, and not a challenge to, insolvency practitioners. It will also bring the position in Scotland into line with the position in England,  where, as paragraph 44 of the policy memorandum states: "Individual voluntary arrangements ... allow debtors to exclude assets from arrangements with the agreement of their creditors." Section 10 is necessary and is entirely connected with the aim of preventing unnecessary evictions, which is the bill's fundamental purpose. I have now spoken for a considerable time.

Some members may feel that it is too long.

I am conscious that we are moving towards Christmas. I have been compared to Bob the Builder in this debate and have been asked, "Can you fix it?" The answer is "Yes, we can and, yes, we will."

The Scottish Government is committed to tackling antisocial behaviour through our antisocial behaviour framework, "Promoting Positive Outcomes". On Tuesday this week, I visited the Scottish Borders to see how its community safety agencies are putting that framework into practice using central funding, including safer streets funding to tackle alcohol-related violence and disorder and cashback for communities to provide activities for young people. I am sure that the member will join me in congratulating Scottish Borders Council, Lothian and Borders Police and local partners on their continued efforts to make communities in the Scottish Borders safer and stronger.

I certainly agree with the member that much good work is being done in the Scottish Borders. I pay tribute to Councillor Alex Nicol, the deputy leader and chair of the community safety partnership, along with Chief Superintendent Graham Sinclair, Chief Inspector Paula Clark, and Douglas Scott, the team leader for tackling antisocial behaviour. The key to the success that they are having is that they work together in an integrated fashion. The practitioners use ASBOs, as they are able to choose to do, but they and others acknowledge that although ASBOs provide temporary respite, they do not tackle the root causes of behaviour. The member made a point about six-month sentences. Someone who, on conviction, is sentenced to six months in jail, spends an average period in jail post-conviction of less than one month. I am afraid that I do not regard that as an effective disposal. I entirely disagree with the position that the member has taken, for the reasons that we gave during the recent parliamentary debate on this topic.

No. Individuals who seek to use the courts to protect their rights have access to legal aid where appropriate, and this Government has made financial eligibility for legal aid significantly more generous. Nevertheless, we have invited the Court of Session Rules Council to consider whether there would be any merit in further provision in rules of court regarding protective costs orders to control the level of exposure to costs in appropriate cases.

Patrick Harvie mentions the anxiety that people who pursue environmental matters may feel about going to court. I point out to him that many individuals who raise other matters may have exactly the same anxieties. I assume that he is not suggesting that, in contrast to the position of all other litigants, there should be a special rule to indemnify actions that relate to the environment from any possible liability that would fall from losing the action. Mr Harvie will be aware that Lord Gill covered protective costs orders in chapter 12 of the "Report of the Scottish Civil Courts Review". Lord Gill makes a case for such orders, which will be considered in the round with the other matters that he raised.

I thank the Justice Committee for the work that it has undertaken on what is a substantial bill with, as we heard during the wide-ranging debate, a large number of measures, many of which, I think it is reasonable to say, have been welcomed by members across the chamber. The bill's effect on charities was raised by Karen Gillon and, I think, by John Lamont and Mr Kelly. We will consider extremely carefully the arguments that were presented by members across the chamber. The point of having such debates is so that the Government can pay heed to issues, particularly when they are raised in a non-partisan, non-political way. We will reflect carefully on the arguments and report, as is appropriate, to the Justice Committee. I will comment first on some of the bill's less controversial measures and move into the shark-infested waters towards the end of my speech. I will move towards a crescendo, as it were. I think that we all believe that extreme pornography is particularly vile and offensive, and that we will all support the measures that Sandra White talked about. She has rightly campaigned on that subject for many years. Mr McLetchie rightly mentioned the extreme problem of domestic violence and the continuing stain on our nation of men who batter their wives—and the serious, complex and difficult issue of how, as a society, we deal with that. Of the 5,029 convictions with a domestic abuse aggravation in 2007-08, about 80 per cent involved common assault or breach of the peace, with very few resulting in custody. I am sure that Mr McLetchie will know well that the circumstances of those cases are hugely divergent. Plainly, the courts have taken a very stiff view and imposed serious and long sentences in the relatively small number of cases where a charge of serious assault or attempted murder was brought. However, we will reflect seriously on the detailed arguments that Mr McLetchie and others made.  Bill Wilson talked about his proposals for equity fines and how we deal with crimes that are committed from behind the corporate shield. Karen Gillon has long campaigned on an extremely serious incident that led to deaths in her constituency. I recently spoke on the issue, having had the pleasure of being invited to speak to a Scottish Trades Union Congress audience. I pay tribute to the work that Karen Gillon, Bill Wilson and others do in this field. It is, as they know only too well, a reserved issue, which we would prefer not to be the case. That fact has made consideration of the issue difficult. The cabinet secretary has offered to work with Mr Wilson and other members on proposals to ensure that courts have information about a company's financial position to help determine sentencing. Bill Wilson alluded to one positive development that we should recognise and praise, which is the Crown Office's appointment of a dedicated prosecutor who now leads a group of individuals dealing with health and safety offences. That will make a huge difference in practice to how such cases are pursued. Reference was also made to various of the slightly more technical aspects of the bill concerning disclosure. My understanding—I am by no means an expert—is that the position on disclosure requires to be clearly stated. The issue is complex, so it is not possible to make the provisions as simple as we might like. Nonetheless, on that matter and on all others on which we are trying to achieve a corpus of law that is clear, coherent and effective, the Government is happy to continue to work with the Justice Committee to achieve the best possible result. The same point applies to defence statements, which several members referred to during the debate. Ted Brocklebank raised, quite rightly, the issue of mobile phones in prisons. It is certainly the case—I know, because I did it—that the prison rules were changed to make introducing a mobile phone into a prison contrary to the rules. As Ted Brocklebank and other members who have visited prisons will know, prison officers do excellent, painstaking and detailed work day and daily to prevent the importation of drugs into our prisons. When I saw the videos showing drugs being passed from one individual to another I did not notice what was happening in any of those instances, but the prison officers, through their professionalism, detected those incidents and prevented the importation of drugs on those occasions. The ban on the use of mobile phones, coupled with the new offences that will be introduced by the bill, will take the tough action that I believe is supported by members of all parties in the Parliament.

I had not finished responding to the specific points that Ted Brocklebank raised. I was about to say—in closing the debate, I have a duty to try my best to respond, in so far as is possible, to members who made specific points or recommendations—that work on a signal blocking device is being progressed by the Scottish Government, together with the SPS, the Ministry of Justice national offender management service and the Home Office scientific development branch to try to identify a viable solution to what Ted Brocklebank conceded is a difficult and complex problem. That is so not least because we do not want to block the mobile phone signals of people who live in Saughton outside the prison walls nor of those who live near our other prisons, which happen to be mostly in residential areas. I am sure that people who live on Inverness's Culduthel Road near Porterfield prison would like to continue to enjoy chatting among themselves of an afternoon about activities in the Scottish Parliament—

—however unlikely that may seem. We take the matter of mobile phones in prison very seriously, in a way that I think Ted Brocklebank would approve of. We must also think about the safety and security of prison officers, who must be able to continue to use effective methods of communication. We will continue to ensure that they can do precisely that. The more controversial aspects of the bill have certainly enlivened today's proceedings. Our priority must be to keep the public safe. We must reduce the damage that crime does to victims and communities. That requires us to respond decisively and effectively when confronted by serious, violent crime, but it also requires us to use the best available evidence to work harder and to be smarter in challenging and changing offenders and in tackling the underlying social and cultural factors that so often drive offending and reoffending. I believe that our current uses of imprisonment make that extremely difficult. "Scotland's prisons hold too many prisoners on short sentences where there is no real expectation of being able to punish, rehabilitate or deter." Those words are, of course, not mine. Members will have recognised from the unusual succinctness and fluency of that passage that they are the words of Henry McLeish—they come from the foreword to the Scottish Prisons Commission  report of 1 July 2008. That is the approach that we have pursued.

I can give Johann Lamont the answer that she seeks and can explain exactly why we are taking that approach. We are doing so because we believe that it is the right approach. Unless we take it, we will not tackle the problem of crime and reoffending in this country. I spell out that we are taking that approach because we learn not, as Mr Kelly said, from academics, but from people who should know—people such as Chief Constable David Strang—that it is the right approach. In his evidence to the Justice Committee, he said: "We want a shift in the general approach to one that recognises that putting people in prison for a short time and then allowing them out unsupervised simply does not address the crime problems that Scotland faces. In principle, there should be a presumption against short sentences."—[ Official Report , Justice Committee , 26 May 2009; c 1931.] We do not learn from academics, but from people such as Professor Alec Spencer, who has been governor at Peterhead, Glenochil and Saughton prisons, occupations that are probably as unacademic in their daily duties as any that I can conceive. What did that non-academic have to say? He said: "I think that the use of short-term and very short-term sentences is complete eye-wash. It has no effect at all on reducing crime." As a man who has governed three prisons, he should know, should he not?

I ask Bill Aitken to let me finish—there is more of that quote, as he will be pleased to hear. Professor Spencer went on to say: "We know from research from around the world that where prison is used on its own—in general, short-term sentences involve only prison—crime increases by between 1 and 3 per cent."—[ Official Report , Justice Committee , 19 May 2009; c 1891.]

I am reliably informed that that is a Swedish policy, and it is the Conservative party that has championed various aspects of Swedish penal policy. While we are at it, and while we have a full chamber, I am sure that members would want to be updated on one of the Conservatives' policies that they are unusually coy about expounding in detail. They think that we need more prisons and that we should use disused hospitals throughout Scotland to house our prisoners. Members may think that the walls of hospitals are gey thin and that they were designed not to keep people securely in prison but to divide wards in hospitals and are therefore fundamentally unsuitable for conversion into prison use. How is the great disused hospital hunt going? How many such hospitals have the Conservatives found? Where are they? How much will it cost to convert the disused hospitals that Annabel Goldie says exist all over the country to house the thousands upon thousands of additional prisoners who will end up in jail, who might include me?

I will finish on a consensual note.

We all deplore organised crime. I do not think that Mario Puzo—the author of the novel "The Godfather" in 1969—has ever been quoted in the Parliament before. He said: "A lawyer with his briefcase can steal more than a thousand men with guns." We want to ensure that there are no covert consiglieres in Scotland helping organised criminals. We will stamp that out through our measures on organised crime. I thank members for their generous support.

I agree with much of what Ted Brocklebank says about mobile phones, but I assume that he is aware that, on 11 December last year, measures were taken to render illegal the use of mobile phones in Scottish prisons. I know, because I announced them at Saughton.

I am delighted to make this statement on the Government's strategy for tackling sectarianism, which is an issue of concern for everyone in the chamber. For too long, sectarianism has plagued the lives of too many. We must eradicate it once and for all. In the past, sectarianism was the elephant in the room; we did not want to face up to the bigotry in some of our communities. In 2004, the previous Administration called time on sectarianism. It was time for communities, organisations and individuals to face up to sectarianism and to challenge it. The Government acknowledges the work of Jack McConnell and his Administration in taking that bold step to tackle sectarianism. There is no doubt that progress has been made. Sectarianism is not as prominent as it was when I grew up, but it is still part of the backdrop to Scottish life. Our strategy is based on funding key projects and bringing together co-ordinated partnerships of organisations to deliver a spectrum of work in communities, the workplace and the courts. We are funding Nil by Mouth to tackle sectarianism in the workplace and to deliver a project supported by the Scottish Trades Union Congress; sense over sectarianism to work in communities; and Show Racism the Red Card to develop work to tackle sectarianism. Last December I launched the anti-sectarianism education resource that we funded YouthLink Scotland to develop. The Iona Community adapted that resource for inmates at Polmont young offenders institution. When I visited Polmont, I was so impressed that I asked the Iona Community to work in partnership with us to look at developing the resource for adult prisons. By working in partnership, we can eradicate duplication of effort and ensure that our work is co-ordinated, focused and effective. The working group on racial and religious intolerance brings together the voluntary sector and non-governmental organisations. The football banning orders monitoring group, which I chair, brings together the football banning order manager, the Crown Office, the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland and the Scottish Football Association to ensure that banning orders are  used effectively. The promoting citizenship through football partnership, which is chaired by SFA chief executive Gordon Smith, brings together the Scottish Government, sportscotland, the SFA, the Scottish Premier League, the Scottish Football League and ACPOS to look at how football can help to tackle societal problems, including sectarianism. Although football is sometimes where sectarianism raises its ugly head, it also provides a vital lead in getting the anti-sectarian message across. Clubs at all levels are engaged with their communities. I am grateful to them for the work they do, including through the old firm alliance anti-sectarian education programme. Alongside that good work, we have penalties in place for individuals who indulge in sectarian behaviour. Football banning orders deny bigots who indulge in abusive behaviour access to football matches. The FBO monitoring group is tasked with ensuring that those orders are used effectively. We will press for a banning order to be sought on every occasion that sectarian abuse, violence or disorder occurs. The Solicitor General for Scotland has confirmed that a Crown Office circular has been issued to ensure that deputes are proactive in bringing the possibility of a banning order to the attention of sheriffs. I am sure that all of us welcome that move. As banning orders have been in place for three years, it is time for us to take stock to ensure that we are doing everything that we can to tackle the violence and abusive behaviour that sometimes mar our national sport. I will, therefore, ask the monitoring group to carry out an evaluation and to report in winter 2010. Scotland has many marches and parades every year. Although the vast majority of them pass without incident, a minority can be the cause of public disorder and other forms of antisocial behaviour. The right to public assembly is fundamental, but the communities through which marches pass also have rights. Since the 2006 statement on tackling abusive behaviour at marches and parades, the number of marches has changed little. I call on the organisers to consider the impact and disruption that marches can cause. I will invite the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, ACPOS and the STUC to work with me to look at the 2006 statement again to see how it can be used at a local level to ensure that all parties are working together for the good of all communities. Education is another area that we continue to drive forward, and I am delighted that Learning and Teaching Scotland will refresh the "sectarianism: don't give it don't take it" resource to ensure that it is fully aligned with the new  curriculum. I commend that resource to all schools. I have seen the great work that is being done through art, drama and poetry to embed in young people the message that sectarianism has no place in Scotland. Many projects have been the basis on which schools have been twinned, and I have been impressed by the creativity and drive of the teachers who have developed such initiatives. Our strategy is to work in partnership with people at the coalface. Working together, we will co-ordinate and maximise our efforts through our partnership groups; ensure that resources are up to date and fit for purpose; and ensure that the penalties for sectarian behaviour are used appropriately, and that we take action when they are not. Sectarianism has blighted Scotland for too long. It will take a co-ordinated and concerted effort to achieve what we all want: a Scotland where sectarianism is unknown, and a Scotland that recognises and celebrates the fact that being one Scotland of many cultures and faiths makes us a better and stronger nation.

I welcome the support of James Kelly and his party for the work that we are seeking to do. Before I made my statement, I was pleased to meet the former First Minister, Jack McConnell, as well as Bill Butler, Bill Aitken, Mike Pringle and Robert Brown, to seek to build and continue the cross-party approach that I believe is  fundamental to tackling the issue. I am pleased that James Kelly recognises the key importance of working with young people. It will be difficult for any politician, any Government, any Opposition or any law to reach out and change the attitudes of a small core of individuals who are aged around 40 to 60. Changing some people's bigoted views might frankly be beyond the reach of any of us, no matter how persistent our efforts. However, I believe that, by focusing our efforts largely on the next generations of Scottish people, we will eliminate sectarianism and bigotry from our land. I am pleased that that approach is welcomed by James Kelly. Today, I have announced a number of the principled measures that we are taking—I hope with the support of all parties. We will build on those measures and continue to work with all parties in developing and fostering our strategy to tackle the issue. I am pleased to be meeting a wide range of individuals on 23 November, as we unite to tackle the bigoted views of a few people in Scotland. I pay particular tribute to the work of Baillie Gordon Matheson, of Glasgow City Council, and I look forward to working with his successor.

Bill Aitken made a good point. That is precisely why I announced today that there will be a thorough evaluation of the use of football banning orders. I will answer Bill Aitken's question specifically. From my reading of the charging section that sets out the grounds for seeking a football banning order, I understand that they encompass behaviour not just at a football ground but outwith the ground, for example in a pub or club. A subsection of the charging section specifically provides that behaviour of a sectarian nature that takes place in a pub before or after a football game can lead to a football banning order. The test is whether a football-related offence took place, and such offences are defined in fairly wide terms. There are therefore powers, but we will carry out an evaluation to ensure that they are sufficient. I am conscious that football banning orders might not have been used in a sufficient number of cases, in particular in comparison with the approach south of the border. That, too, is why I announced that there will be a thoroughgoing evaluation of such matters. I look forward to working with other parties in taking that work forward.

The Government is concerned to tackle bigoted behaviour of all varieties, whether it is racist, homophobic or sectarian. It could not  be said that there is any doubt about that. I emphasise that, as part of our overall strategy, we will work with the Iona Community, as James Kelly—rightly—urges us to. I had the pleasure of seeing its work at Polmont young offenders institution. The organisation has submitted a proposal to develop and deliver an anti-sectarianism education programme to adult offenders. We are discussing that and considering the feasibility of a pilot project. We recognise the Iona Community's good work in seeking to rehabilitate people who express sectarian views. We also recognise—I do not think that this has ever been reported or mentioned—that when a football banning order is granted, it can be lifted if the person who is banned recants and expresses sorrow and regret for his behaviour. Therefore, provision for rehabilitation is built into the law on football banning orders. The evaluation that I announced will consider that in particular.

We will certainly do that. The Solicitor General takes an extremely serious attitude to the matter. As I mentioned, he has issued guidance to all advocate deputes so that they are aware of the issue. Some members might have read of the case of Walls, which arose from a football match between Rangers and Kilmarnock in Kilmarnock. In that case, a two-year banning order was imposed on someone who sang extracts from the famine song and whom stewards repeatedly told to cease and desist. His appeal failed; that is a clear precedent. I understand from the Solicitor General that that precedent has been put on the website of every fiscal and every fiscal's office in the land. It is plain that a strong attitude is being taken, but much more needs to be done. Perhaps more football banning orders could have been sought in Scotland. That is one reason why I decided, as I announced today, to launch a full evaluation of the effectiveness of the measure. No punishment can more fit the crime of acting in an abusive and foul-mouthed way on the football terraces than a football banning order. That is an effective deterrent that hits people  where it hurts, because they want to return to watch their team. Using FBOs will directly help us to eradicate sectarianism. If they are used appropriately and more effectively, they will see us turn the corner and achieve greater success in tackling the bigoted behaviour that continues in this country.

I share Bill Butler's view that education is key. That is why I was pleased to launch the resource that I described, which is routinely used and which I commend to everyone who is interested in this area of work. It is also why I have worked with many people, including Bill Butler and many of his party colleagues, in attending many different programmes to tackle sectarianism in which schoolchildren take part. The children put forward their views about why it is wrong to discriminate against somebody because of the community that they come from, the football shirt they wear or the football team they support. I entirely agree with Bill Butler in that respect. I have attended schools that have relationships with other local schools that are perhaps associated with a different faith. Decisions on twinning arrangements depend on local circumstances and are entirely a matter for local authorities, in consultation with their communities, the parents of the children involved and church representatives. I think that we all want to see schools coming together. Equally, however, we do not want to force change from the centre or to force relationships on individual schools. Such relationships are at their best where they have grown organically through partnerships, often involving headteachers coming together and usually after consultation with the parents.

As I said, we provide a range of funding to assist various efforts to tackle sectarianism. The sense over sectarianism project has received £412,500 over three years to run anti-sectarianism projects in the Glasgow area. Nil by Mouth has been provided with £118,000 over two years to deliver a project that promotes equality and tackling sectarianism in the workplace. Show Racism the Red Card has received £290,000 over two years to continue its anti-racism work. Plainly, not all that work is directly used to educate children. However, the work that is done in schools throughout the land plays a huge part. We acknowledge that contribution by schools and local authorities.

I have already explained in response to a previous question that we are committed to work that seeks to rehabilitate those who express bigoted views. We are supporting the Iona Community and work in prisons. We have also highlighted the provision in the charging section that recognises the possibility of the early lifting of a football banning order. I cannot think of anything that would demonstrate success more than a football supporter on whom a banning order was imposed recanting publicly. That might have a bigger impact than any elected politician disavowing and deprecating such behaviour, and it might be more persuasive in convincing the hard core who  remain on some terraces not to indulge in such utterly unacceptable behaviour. I did not say that efforts to tackle sectarianism began in 2004, which seems to be the premise of the initial question from the former First Minister. I recognise that members from all parties have attacked sectarianism, espoused policies to achieve that aim and worked together. I will not become involved in any political attack on any individual or party, because I believe that partisan politics should not be involved in the issue. Indeed, in my statement, I paid tribute to the work of the former First Minister, as I did when I met him to discuss the approach that we would take to the statement. We should be in no doubt whatever that this Government takes sectarianism and bigoted behaviour extremely seriously. That is why I am on my feet today making a statement, that is why I am happy to attend the function on Monday evening and that is why I will continue to work with all parties in taking forward our strategy on tackling antisocial behaviour. In my statement, I set out clearly the principles that underlie our approach. Those principles have largely had the support of members who have asked questions.

We are continuing, and have continued, our interfaith work—I have attended a great many functions to do that—and we work with people from many faiths, churches and groups throughout Scotland. On the member's question about specific individuals and groups in parts of Scotland—he seems to be making a sedentary interruption, which I cannot hear—I would be happy to correspond with him. If he wishes to give me the details, I will certainly look into them and answer any specific matter that he cares to raise with me.

Provided that we have the express support of all those whom we have invited to attend, I am happy to release the names of those who attend any particular event. There is no great secret about the event. We all want to tackle sectarianism in our land. The event will be led by me—it was never intended that it would be led by the First Minister—and those attending include the STUC, ACPOS, YouthLink Scotland, the Iona Community, the SFA, the SPL and the SFL. I remind Cathy Jamieson that the very first event that the First Minister chose to hold was one to thank for their campaigning effort people such as the former First Minister, his predecessor, who are tackling sectarianism in Scotland. I do not think that there can be any doubt about the commitment of the present First Minister, or indeed that of the most recent First Minister or of any future First Minister of our country, to tackling the problem. It is somewhat remiss to raise the matter as though it were some kind of issue, when the First Minister has made it clear that he is four-square against bigotry in our country, as are all the rest of us.

We are happy to work with any and all organisations that wish to play a part. I acknowledge the existence of a wide range of views. I mentioned a number of organisations simply because I was invited to list some of the principal invitees to the event that I referred to, and I hope that it will be agreed that they represent many, if not most, of the major players that one would expect to be involved in such an event.

It has, indeed, been an extremely useful and positive debate. It has also been one in which we have had some revelations about the narrow escapes of John Farquhar Munro and Bill Aitken from domestic fires. I am pleased to hear that an alliance of the good Lord and Celia Munro secured John Farquhar Munro's continued presence with us. My good friend is very welcome, and we thank both the parties involved. I am pleased to hear that the good Lord is looking over Bill Aitken as well—I was not aware that that was the case, but we have been put right. There are 8,082 firefighters in Scotland, of whom 4,477 are whole time, 3,013 are retained duty system firefighters and 492 are volunteers. Let us remember the role that retained and volunteer firefighters play. There are nearly 400 fire stations and 800 emergency response vehicles. The fire service, to which £331 million of public money is devoted, has attended 112,000 incidents over the past year. A great deal of effort is put into training our firefighters, principally at the national college in Gullane, where 390 firefighters have undertaken basic training since 2007. Over the same period, 800 fire and rescue personnel have attended specialist training. The Scottish Government invests £6 million annually in training. In the past year, 49,703 home fire safety visits have been made in Scotland and 95,000 other community fire safety activities have been carried out. The record of the work that goes into protecting our communities is huge and impressive. Like all other members, I pay tribute to all those involved, especially the firefighters on the front line who provide services that keep us safe and offer reassurance to our people. I will deal with as many of the points that have been made in the debate as possible. I begin by giving Richard Baker an assurance that is not in my script—in fact, I do not have a script. I assure him that I will report back to Parliament on how we make progress on the issues that the report identifies. In addition to today's debate, we recently had a debate about the fire and rescue framework. Next month, we will, I hope, have an opportunity to debate Paddy Tomkins's report on water safety. It is my intention that the ministerial advisory group, which is due to have its next meeting in February, will consider all those issues. That timescale seems to be appropriate, although we have not reached a decision on that. I am happy to engage with spokespeople from all parties and all MSPs on the issues, which go way beyond party politics. One issue that has been raised in the debate is reduced ignition propensity cigarettes. Paragraph 5.49 of Brian Sweeney's report says:  "it is possible that up to 36 lives could have been saved had Reduced Ignition Propensity cigarettes been mandatory ... since 2005." That underscores the point that has been made by members of all parties, which I detect has cross-parliamentary support: that we should have safe cigarettes in Scotland as soon as possible. Margaret Smith graciously acknowledged and many other members alluded to the fact that Stewart Maxwell has campaigned on such issues for many years. In an articulate and comprehensive fashion, he gave us estimates for the number of lives that have been saved in New York, Vermont and other places where standards are in place, and he quoted from politicians who suggest that the tobacco companies are able to tackle the problem but must be forced to do so. That is unfortunate, but I suspect that it is the reality of the matter. The issue has been raised by members from all parties, including Labour members. I reassure Mr Maxwell and all other members that the Scottish Government believes that RIP cigarettes should be introduced. I have been assured that that is also the UK Government's view. I wanted first to gauge the Parliament's feelings in this debate, but I will now write to Shahid Malik, my counterpart in the UK Government, to seek a meeting with him on how best we can take the matter forward. We should do so as swiftly as possible. There is no reason why we in Scotland cannot lead the way, no reason why we cannot work in co-operation with and with the full support of the UK Government, and no reason why lives should not be saved in Scotland and south of the border. The second main issue that was raised throughout the debate was sprinklers and smoke alarms. The issue is covered in the report, to which I now return. Brian Sweeney made the key point that currently it costs around £3,000 per household to install a sprinkler system. That huge cost is the root of the problem that has been identified. Plainly, we are unable to spend £3,000 per house; so far as I have noticed, that kind of money is generally available only to banks. However, the sprinkler challenge has been issued and will be taken up. It is a technical matter on which the UK Government has done work. We are committed to analysing all the research that has been conducted both in the UK and abroad to determine whether a low-cost sprinkler system could be economically and technically viable. Reference has been made to particular types of properties. Mike Matheson concentrated on that issue in his speech, and it was touched on by Margaret Smith and other members. Sprinkler systems are already a mandatory requirement for specific new properties such as care homes, sheltered housing and high-rise flats. I inform  Margaret Smith that, from April 2010, the provision of fire detection equipment in new-build properties will be extended to the provision of an additional smoke alarm in the principal habitable room and a heat detector in the kitchen. I was reading from a script there, to ensure that I got it right.

It is difficult to see how one could refuse such an invitation. However, the member should raise the issues first with Strathclyde fire and rescue service. Karen Gillon highlighted the work of fire boards, which exist to provide democratic accountability and scrutiny of the work that fire services do. Firefighters need to and do continuously train and develop their skills. The use of computers is a perfectly acceptable approach to supporting skill development and competency. I am happy to pursue the issues further with Margaret Mitchell, either in the way that she described or by other means. We value the contributions that we have received from the FBU, many of the points that it makes, the forthright representation that it provides and the help that it gives to the Scottish Government. A number of chief fire officers—I could not identify all of them—are at the back of the public gallery; I thought that the collective noun might be a sprinkling of chief fire officers. I thank them for the work that they have done. In particular, I thank the team who produced the report: Paul Stewart, John McGarvey, Cathy Barlow and Kirsty Bosley. Of course, I also thank Brian Sweeney for bringing forward the report, which has enabled this highly positive debate to take place.

It might be helpful to John Lamont and to any members who are concerned about the B and B regulations to hear that we will issue in the next few weeks a consultation paper that will include the details of a new proposed set of guidance, which will be far less onerous and—I believe—far more appropriate to the level of risk in respect of B and B premises, and which will, therefore, I hope be welcomed by other members and the public.

The Scottish Government requested this afternoon's debate in order to give Parliament an opportunity to discuss how we can further reduce fires by working in partnership with local government and the fire and rescue services, and to discuss the recommendations in the "Scotland Together" report. Although the debate takes place against a long-term decline in the number of fire deaths, Scotland regrettably continues to have the highest number of recorded fire deaths per million population in the United Kingdom. Much of the long-term improvement could be due to improved fire safety education as well as to technological advances and legislative changes. In 2007, 43 people died and 1,530 were injured in dwelling fires. That was the second-lowest number of deaths for 10 years. The number of primary fires has fallen by 9 per cent year on year, but more needs to be done. It is particularly worrying that the majority of deaths occurred in homes in which smoke alarms were absent or had failed. That can and should be addressed through education and free home safety visits. The Scottish Government has directly supported that valuable service through its don't give fire a home campaign, but it is the fire and rescue services that spearhead the drive to make our homes safer. The Fire (Scotland) Act 2005 placed on the fire and rescue services a new statutory duty to promote fire safety and put prevention on an equal platform with intervention. Prevention is now well embedded in every fire and rescue service and in every firefighter, and it forms an integral part of their training. Home safety visits are the cornerstone of preventive work. Every visit provides invaluable advice and real preventive measures for individuals and their families—I have attended visits and seen that at first hand. The visits form part of a wider approach as each service develops its own activity aligned to local needs. I stress "local needs" because it is only right that fire and rescue services approach their duties in line with the specific risks that are identified in their areas. However, more should be done to ensure that every member of the fire and rescue services can play a part in achieving more visits and raising fire safety awareness.  To better understand how we could improve our poor record on fires, I commissioned, with our colleagues in the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, a study into the root causes of such incidents in Scotland. The report "Scotland Together", which was launched last week, was compiled by a study team that was led by Chief Officer Brian Sweeney. It is a wide-ranging review that makes no less than 37 recommendations. One of the report's key platforms, partnership working, is plainly essential, because no single agency can achieve progress on its own. Colleagues in other areas, such as health and housing, are already working effectively together; I hope that that approach can be extended to include the fire services. After all, we need to work together to develop strategies, share information, work on implementation and think about how action in one area might have consequences elsewhere. Government rightly sets the overall agenda, but we work in partnership with all manner of agencies in the public, private and voluntary sectors and we want these agencies to embrace the partnership ethos even more. That said, safety is as much the responsibility of every individual as it is that of the state, so I will return to personal responsibility. The Scottish Government will now fully consider each of the 37 recommendations with a view to working with all partners to progress the report's objectives. Today, however, I will focus on two of the primary objectives that were highlighted last week by the study team. The main contributing factor in the 131 deaths that were analysed in the study was smoking materials, which led to a staggering 40 per cent of all deaths. Although the Government is committed to reducing the health impacts of smoking, it would be unrealistic to introduce controls that stopped people smoking in their own homes, but we can take steps to reduce the fire risk that is posed by cigarettes. As some members are aware, a certain type of cigarette—perhaps unfortunately known as RIP, or reduced ignition propensity, cigarettes—self-extinguishes when not smoked. Such cigarettes are already mandatory in some states in the United States, Canada and Australia, and there have been calls for their introduction in Scotland. However, because the matter is reserved, we cannot currently legislate for that in isolation. Moreover, we need to take account of the fact that there is no European Union standard for such cigarettes. However, work on producing a standard is under way and is expected to conclude by mid-2010. I am writing to Shahid Malik, Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State in the Department for Communities and Local  Government, to request that legislation be expedited as soon as the EU standard is agreed. The second primary objective that I want to highlight is the proposal for a safer Scotland unit. The report acknowledges that, although progress has been made, there is a clear need for public, private and voluntary bodies to work more effectively together. We must all work smarter to better utilise current knowledge, skills and resources. In view of the report's finding that almost a third of recorded dwelling fires occur in the most deprived areas, it is essential that we focus on and prioritise the most vulnerable people in our society, so fire and rescue services must work closely with social services, housing and health services to target better the individuals who are most at risk. The study suggests that that work would be most effectively coordinated by the formation of a safer Scotland unit. Chief Officer Sweeney and I believe that the report does not seek to establish a new quango, with the panoply of issues and costs that would be associated with such a move. It is only right that we do not go down that route; instead, I am reviewing the range of existing activities within Scottish Government and its partners in order to improve the safety of those who are most at risk, and I want to move forward with work that has already been started on a more effective multi-agency approach to fire safety. By bringing together senior officials across a range of portfolios and drawing on expertise from local government, emergency services and other partners, I would make the safety agenda accountable directly to ministers and ensure that the resource that is available for fire safety is focused where it should be, which is on direct preventive action. Although I have in the limited time available been able to cover only a relatively small part of the report, I should point out that its very breadth points to how we can achieve our shared outcome of fewer fire deaths. In addition, I want the fire and rescue services to look closely at the most effective approach to community fire safety. For example, they clearly need to improve collaboration, share best practice and better align statistical evidence. Audit Scotland has already identified the need for more evidence-based working. That is particularly important as we face unprecedented budgetary challenges. I am pleased that Chief Officer Brian Sweeney has indicated that the majority of his proposals can be delivered with no additional funding. The fire and rescue services receive more than £300 million a year to meet their obligations, including their statutory role in relation to fire safety. I am also pleased that the report sets a  context for that investment rather than a wish list for future funding. That is a pragmatic approach that recognises that there are competing demands for funding in a challenging economic climate. Our aim must be to provide education, information and structures to enable people to act responsibly and to look out for their own safety and that of their neighbours, especially the most vulnerable people in our society. Individuals who are unable to help themselves must be a priority for our resources and activity. All partners will play a crucial role. The skills, knowledge and resources already exist; "Scotland Together" highlights the fact that we must use them to work smarter and more cohesively. I am committed to ensuring that, where practicable, the objectives in Chief Officer Sweeney's report will be taken forward and given full Government support. I move, That the Parliament notes the Scottish Government's commitment to working in partnership with local government and the fire and rescue services to reduce fires and fire deaths in Scotland and that recommendations in the Scotland Together community fire safety study will contribute to a continued partnership approach to fire prevention.

In March this year, the Scottish Government, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland and other key national partners joined together to launch a new framework for tackling antisocial behaviour. That framework confirms our collective determination to put prevention and effective intervention at the heart of our approach. On 26 October 2009, I visited the Fife equally well project in Kirkcaldy, which is an excellent example of how to put the approach into practice, specifically in tackling and preventing alcohol and drug-related antisocial behaviour. I am sure that the member will join me in congratulating Fife Constabulary, NHS Fife, Fife Council and local voluntary sector partners on their continued efforts to make communities in Fife safer.

I thank Mr Park for his offer. If he wishes to put to me the specific examples from which he has reached his conclusion, I would be more than happy to consider how to take matters forward. In the absence of knowledge of specific examples, it would be unwise for me to offer any conclusions. Finally, it is entirely a matter for local authorities whether to pursue the powers conferred by the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004. They are entirely free to do so if they wish, but we will not impose on any local authority the way to ensure community safety in their part of Scotland.

CCTV can play a significant role in the prevention, detection and prosecution of crime. The Scottish Government is providing record levels of funding to local government and the police service in Scotland to allow them to respond positively to local needs such as the extension of CCTV provision. We will shortly publish the strategic report on improving the efficiency and effectiveness of public space CCTV in Scotland, which will help local agencies to make better decisions on the use of CCTV.

I appreciate and share Ken Macintosh's concern and his belief that CCTV can play an extremely useful role. Indeed, the Solicitor General for Scotland has just advised me that CCTV evidence helped to secure a conviction in a  recent vile, racially motivated murder. I think that we are all agreed on the use of CCTV. I am also aware of the funding initiative to which Ken Macintosh referred. As he will recall, I explained in my reply to a question by Stewart Maxwell on 18 December 2007 that that fund was set up after the events of 11 September 2001 and that it had been fully utilised. I understand that the issues continue to be under consideration. The Scottish Council of Jewish Communities is taking matters forward. I am pleased to tell the member, if he does not already know, that the First Minister is meeting the director of the Scottish Council of Jewish Communities, Ephraim Borowski, on 24 November to discuss various incidents of concern about defiling gravestones and other absolutely unacceptable behaviour. I am quite sure that the matters that the member raises will form part of the discussion between Ephraim Borowski and the First Minister.

I am extremely encouraged by the consensual tone of this afternoon's proceedings, and I am sure that that will not go unnoticed in Parliament house. This Parliament is at its best when it is acting and debating in this way. The  same tone was present during the previous civil justice debate, which was led by Cathy Jamieson back in 2006. Before I turn to today's debate, it might be helpful to recap some of the calls that were made in the 2006 debate and what has happened since. Margaret Mitchell called for an arbitration bill—yesterday, we had stage 2 consideration of such a bill. Mike Pringle called for an increase to small claims limits—a fourfold increase was effected within six months of our taking office, thanks to the consensual approach that was adopted under the avuncular convenership of Bill Aitken in the Justice Committee. Today, Nigel Don has raised a point that is perhaps not in Lord Gill's report, about increasing further the privative limits in small claims and summary cause actions from £3,000 and £5,000 to a higher level—I think that the limit is £10,000 in England. In the 2006 debate, Christine Grahame and many other members called for increased financial support for advice centres—earlier this year, we announced an additional £3 million of new funding. Mary Mulligan and Jeremy Purvis called for a broadening of access to civil legal aid, and many members have rightly stressed the importance of access to justice in today's debate. We have broadened access to civil legal aid. Now, nearly three quarters of households are potentially eligible, compared with 43 per cent—I am assured—before the changes were made. I understand from officials that applications for civil legal aid over the past six months were up by one third—33 per cent—compared with the same period last year. In 2006, John Swinney called for implementation at last of sections 25 and 29 of the Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) (Scotland) Act 1990, on rights of audience—that has now been done. Bill Aitken, the defence lawyers' friend, called for increased legal aid rates for solicitors—we have made those changes, too. I hope that we can make further progress, acting together. Scotland's senior judiciary are recommending that course of action to us in the interests of justice and of the nation, with radical changes to the way in which the civil justice system operates. I guess that I should follow Gavin Brown's declaration by saying that I am on the roll of solicitors, although I fear that my practising days are long over. I absolutely recognise the picture that Lord Gill has painted of our civil justice system. I recognise it as a system that—sadly, and all too often—is characterised by delay, worry and expense. As Lord Gill opined in the second paragraph of his  introduction to the report, "Reform is long overdue." Lord Gill also said: "An efficient civil justice system is vital to the Scottish economy. It is also vital to the survival of Scots law as an independent legal system." If it is the case, as Gavin Brown argued, that some major commercial operators in Scotland find the experience of litigating so dreadful, appalling, expensive and slow that they choose never to litigate here again, we cannot expect our legal system to have the right to survive for ever and in perpetuity. No one owes us—or our lawyers—a living. Our civil justice system must not operate for the convenience of lawyers, judges and insurance companies; it must operate for the client, the customer and the citizen. Some members will instinctively and rapidly agree with some of Lord Gill's recommendations, whether they are for the decluttering of the Court of Session; judicial continuity through docketing—having a single sheriff see a case through to its end rather than having several sheriffs consider the same case, which causes disruption; specialised courts, which many members mentioned; multiparty actions, which Shirley-Anne Somerville talked about in a balanced way; simplified procedures in the lower courts; or the ability of party litigants to call on McKenzie friends. Each of those recommendations and many others will find advocates, who might be impatient for change. I was encouraged that all members acknowledged that we must consider such matters extremely carefully. We will do so. As the cabinet secretary said, we have made the offer—and it has been accepted, thereby constituting a verbal contract, to which we will doubtless be held—to meet spokespeople from each party and individual members who have significant contributions to make. We will do so because we want to progress the issue in the consensual manner that has characterised the debate. The Scottish Law Commission recommended in 2000 that a procedure for multiparty actions be taken forward, but the Court of Session declined to do so and concluded that current sisting—postponing—mechanisms seemed to work well and had dealt well with multiple actions such as Piper Alpha. Lord Gill's recommendation will no doubt give cause for the court to think again, as will developments that are likely in relation to forthcoming UK Government proposals on consumer protection in financial services. I think that I am right in saying that Lord Gill said that if multiparty actions had been possible, the handling of the slopping-out cases might have been easier and less expensive—I think that the cabinet secretary said in a statement earlier this year that there were 5,000 such cases. That is not to say  that each claim cost hugely more than would have been the case if there had been multiparty actions. However, the cases might have been handled more speedily, as Shirley-Anne Somerville said. Several members mentioned McKenzie friends. I am sure that David Whitton, who concentrated on the issue, knows from reading the Gill report that consultation responses on the issue were mixed. The Lord Justice Clerk has recommended that a supporter should be entitled to address the court, with the permission of the court, as is currently allowed in summary cause and small claims procedures in the sheriff court. Cathie Craigie was concerned that we should not rush change and that the Parliament should be involved, and Paul Martin asked whether we will discuss with stakeholders how we go forward. We have an open approach, as members know, and we will engage with stakeholders as required. However, it is important to place on record the fact that, before the report was produced, there were 200 consultation responses. In other words, there has already been the most substantial and thorough consultation. It would be duplication to start that process again, although I do not think that anyone advocates that that is how we should proceed. Ross Finnie talked almost exclusively about the Aarhus convention. I ask that he acknowledge that there are different legal views on the topic. We do not accept that the Scottish rules are not compliant with the Aarhus convention or the EU public participation directive. However, ministers have already raised with the rules council the potential for better application, specifically consideration of the use of protective cost orders. I expect that Ross Finnie, who is no doubt familiar with the extracts from the 700-page report, may favour the Australian model of proceeding. No doubt time will reveal all.

David Whitton is right that the recommendation is that McKenzie friends should play a role in Court of Session actions. However, my understanding—my recollection of reading that part of the report—is that there is the caveat that it  should be at the discretion of the judge who is handling the case to ensure that McKenzie friends are used appropriately for each case. It is not an easy matter to be a McKenzie friend and, particularly if the case is complex, there could be issues with the appropriateness of using one. I think that Lord Gill also states that, in family actions, it may not always be appropriate for a family member to act as a McKenzie friend because of the potential conflicts of interest. Many members devoted their speeches to discussing the risk of denying justice to individuals. Cathie Craigie commented on that. Perhaps a suggestion crept in that there would somehow be a conflict between, on the one hand, adopting the recommendations of Lord Gill's report that seek to bring about greater efficiency, to reduce delay and to control costs and, on the other hand, ensuring continued access to justice. I do not believe that that conflict exists in the way that it appeared to be presented. In fact, the opposite is the case. I submit that the system that we have at the moment causes huge, inordinate and unreasonable delay. That is precisely the point that Lord Gill makes. If one reads the chapter on inner house court procedure and the research by Dr Rachel Wadia, one sees that the estimates by QCs—and other advocates, presumably—of the length of time that it takes to conduct inner house court proceedings are so wildly out that, to be frank, the percentage success that they had in estimating how long it would take to argue cases before the inner house was lower than one would expect if one went into a bookie's and selected a horse at random from any race of the day. I hope that all members agree that that does not seem a satisfactory way to conduct a legal system. Justice delayed is justice denied and, for far too many people in Scotland, that has been the case. I express the Government's grateful thanks to Lord Gill for the massive oeuvre that he has provided. Although we have had many weighty tomes provided to us over the years, I cannot recall any case in which we owe such a debt of gratitude. Thanks are also due to his three colleagues on the board:  Lord McEwan, Sheriff Principal James Taylor and Sheriff Mhairi Stephen. I am confident that the report will help us to deliver a modern, fairer and far more effective civil justice system in Scotland.

No specific and detailed written proposals for law reform of the act have yet been put to us. We are, of course, happy to consider any such specific proposals. We met the member and some proprietors yesterday to discuss land maintenance companies and I have a meeting with a land maintenance company next week. The Government will continue to monitor the issue closely.

I am aware from the member's representations that those whom she represents and others have obtained an opinion from an advocate that suggests that various provisions of the relevant legislation could provide a remedy with regard to dismissing a manager and do provide mechanisms for a majority of proprietors to act in various ways. Those provisions have not yet been tested in the courts, but we believe that they may well provide a remedy. We have yet to be convinced of the practicalities of alternatives. The member refers to Consumer Focus Scotland. We are keeping in close contact with it and it has agreed in principle to take forward the Office of Fair Trading recommendation to support a group of owners to test the law in relation to  landowning maintenance companies. That indication is welcome and we will be in continued contact with Consumer Focus Scotland. We hope that a test case will examine some of the issues, which, as the member says, are of concern to a great many people throughout Scotland.

I congratulate Dave Thompson on securing the debate and on allowing us to have such a debate this evening. I also thank all members who have taken part in the debate. As Dave Thompson and other members have done, I congratulate the Scottish Bible Society on reaching its bicentenary, which is a significant landmark. I fully endorse its key messages of peace, hope, love and transformation to societies with which we share the world. We have all learned from the Bible at an early age the importance of meeting—in an open and inclusive way—the needs of people who are disadvantaged, whether they are poor or in ill health, and whether they are living in despair or are depressed. We cherish those values. Such support underlies the work that all of us seek to do, even though we sometimes come at it from rather different perspectives. I think that I have been cast in the role of a sinner by Murdo Fraser—which is probably not the first time that has happened over the past 10 years, as members might recall. Dave Thompson mentioned sayings that first appeared in the Bible that have become famous; he spoke about casting pearls before swine. Given that I am addressing the Presiding Officer, she might think that it is more a case of a swine addressing a pearl. I am cognisant of another quotation—from Matthew chapter 19, verse 30,  which many of us might want to ponder as we approach all sorts of elections: "But many who are first will be last, and the last first." I prefer the latter part of that extract. To be serious, I want to praise the work of the Scottish Bible Society. Members have alluded to various aspects of its work. Andrew Welsh mentioned that it has worked in China for many years. I think it is correct to say that Andrew Welsh is a speaker of Mandarin; he is also modest. He will know about the role that the society has played in China. In 1987, the Amity Foundation and the United Bible Societies opened a large printing press in Nanjing that was capable of printing 12 million copies of the Bible per annum. Donations from Scotland have supported that work and kept the cost of the Bible for poor rural Chinese people—such people often work for 50p a day—to a minimum. The long history of connections between Scotland and Africa—in particular Malawi—has been referred to. I know that Karen Gillon, as a result of direct experience, has taken a close interest in Malawi and has visited there at least once. I know of her evident care about the conditions in which people in that country live, and I know about the contribution that she has made, as she will appreciate. For many years, Scottish printers who have been linked to the Scottish Bible Society have produced scriptures for the Sahara and Nigeria. Bibles have been sent to Malawi for almost a century. In response to HIV/AIDS, the Bible societies in Africa have formulated literature and imaginative teaching material for sufferers, carers, contacts and those who are at risk. That literature and material has found an enthusiastic response well beyond the religious community. Borneo has not been mentioned. I have been assured that Scottish printers have developed useful and unusual skills: New Testaments for hot and humid Borneo required humidity-resistant paper and cloth, anti-cockroach glue for their spines, wrapping in tarred paper to withstand motorised-canoe transit up jungle rivers, and packets sized to fit local backpacks for onward carriage. No one can argue that we are not a practical people. As well as taking Bibles to people abroad who do not have them, the SBS works to persuade people at home who have easier access to Bibles to read them. I think that Andrew Welsh mentioned that its Edinburgh headquarters contains the SBS Bibleworld exhibition, which I recommend to all members. I think Karen Gillon mentioned the SBS partnering with the Bible Society of Brazil to convert a bus for the north-east of the country to provide assistance, including on-the-spot medical  and dental treatment. That is surely an excellent example of the positive action that Scots are taking throughout the world to help those who are more disadvantaged than we are. In our own country, we should not, of course, tolerate any form of religious intolerance, regardless of whom it is perpetrated against. The one Scotland campaign continues to send a clear message on that front. It is also reasonable to say that we are leading the way in many respects in our interfaith work in bringing together people across churches and various faiths. However, there is always more work to do. In conclusion, we cannot afford to lose our aspiration to be a welcoming, cohesive, inclusive and diverse society. We must stand together as a nation—as one Scotland—to make a better future for all people in our society. By working together, and perhaps by putting into practice some of the tenets that we learn of in the Bible, we can continue to build a fair, diverse, competitive and prosperous Scotland of which we can all be proud.  Meeting closed at 17:29.

The Scottish Prison Service is committed to reducing the harm that is caused by substance misuse. Security measures are in place to reduce the supply of illegal drugs into prisons. Treatment, care and support to prisoners recovering from drug use are provided through services that are broadly equivalent to those that are available in the community.

The mobile tracing machines that were purchased by the SPS have been deployed in Edinburgh prison and Shotts prison, but they are a national resource. They are being used with considerable success. I praise prison officers throughout the prison estate for the excellent work that they carry out in that field. At the Craiginches prison in Aberdeen to which the member referred, there have been 45 drugs  seizures between April and August this year, 400 cell searches and 15 area searches. A thorough and effective approach is taken towards security measures in prisons by our prison officers. I commend them for their efforts.

Before I address the debate, it is with regret that I advise members that I have become aware during the debate that, yesterday evening, a 27-year-old woman died after a fire broke out at a block of flats in Dumfries. The emergency services evacuated residents from the block of six flats but, sadly, one young female lost her life. That is a reminder of the importance of the topics that we have been debating today and the role that our firefighters carry out in putting their lives at risk so that they may save others. The debate has been excellent. I start off with a collective thank you to all members who have made positive and considered contributions. We will learn from the debate. This has been a good and timely opportunity to have a wide-ranging discussion about our fire service. I am immensely pleased about the tone of the debate, the positive nature of the contributions from members of all parties and the fact that many  members have taken the opportunity to devote their contributions to specific topics, developing their arguments in a considered way. That will be invaluable for us as we proceed. I will address some of the remarks that my colleague Paul Martin made. My overall response is that the framework document is a process, not a conclusion. We are willing to discuss, reconsider and revise it as necessary. It is an excellent start, if I may say so, and has been agreed with all the stakeholders involved. In almost every case, I have a good working relationship with those stakeholders. Across the parties, it is virtually free of any party-political considerations, which is absolutely right. Many members have made much comment on the briefing material that the FBU provided, the advice and assistance that the union has given and the time that it has spent describing to members of all parties its views on the important matters in the framework. I have met the FBU regularly and will continue to do so. I pay tribute to the way in which it and the Retained Firefighters Union represent their members with determination, vigilance, persistence and a prose style that is, if I may say so, utterly devoid of ambiguity. I will address in turn some of the main issues that were raised. First, I will consider training. In light of recent events, nothing is more important than ensuring that the training regime is adequate and fit for purpose. The framework recognises that point at page 7 and paragraph 7.1.2. The upskilling of our whole-time and retained firefighters is most essential. The Scottish Government is entirely committed to continually developing their skills and is investing more than £6 million annually in core and specialist training. A training needs analysis has been commissioned to confirm actual need against planned and existing capacity and, thereafter, determine a strategy for investment and collaboration on the development of facilities locally and at the fire college in Gullane. Many members mentioned those issues. I think that Cathie Craigie mentioned the national college at Gullane. As an early decision, I was pleased to dismiss a proposal to merge it with Tulliallan, which all members would have dismissed had they been in my shoes. It was a particularly silly proposal that seemed to show a blatant ignorance of the different training needs and disciplines of our fire and police services and, indeed, the different traditions that Tulliallan and Gullane have. In Gullane, we have an excellent national training facility that provides a solid grounding for those who enter the fire service. There are many elements to training. At a meeting last month, the FBU raised real fire  training with me. We take that very seriously. Carbonaceous burn units are one way of providing a realistic simulation of fires and they are used by a number of services. Fife Fire and Rescue Service has recently purchased a new unit. I know that because I was there when it was launched and I saw just how fierce the heat is. When the firefighters emerged from the unit, they all did so shaking their hands because, even with full protection, the heat—which is several hundred degrees centigrade—is so ferociously intense that it provides a real fire experience, which is important. The Scottish Fire Services College in Gullane has recently reached agreement with BAA to use its facility at Edinburgh airport. The frequency of attendance at live fire exercises varies throughout Scotland. One service achieves a target of exercises twice a year for every firefighter while, at the other end, an ambition to experience live fire training once every three years is not achieved. I mentioned that because, as I said, there are areas in which we face challenges. That matter is without doubt—I am being candid about this—one of those. That is why, following my discussions with the FBU last month, I have signalled that I intend to pursue the matter when I meet chief fire officers fairly shortly. I hope that I will have the support of all members in so doing.

That is certainly one of the issues that we will discuss. I think that Cathie Craigie acknowledged in her speech that training needs differ across Scotland. One of the places that I had the pleasure of visiting was North Ronaldsay. It takes about a day to get from there to Inverness. If the training is not in Inverness and the firefighters have to go to Gullane, that might take another day. It can take several days, particularly in the Highlands and Islands but also in Dumfries and Galloway or parts of Strathclyde, to undertake training. There are huge pressures on the local fire boards to fund training, particularly in rural areas, and there are different circumstances in those areas. However, as various members said, there must be sufficient and adequate training in the various functions that our firefighters carry out on our behalf.

If I may, I would like to move on, because I want to address many other members' points. Of particular importance is the core function of tackling real fires. I say to Angela Constance that Lothian and Borders Fire and Rescue Service's proposal to build a training centre at Newbridge is ultimately a matter for the service; it has the decision-making power. The Scottish Government has provided significant financial support for the creation of a new Strathclyde Fire and Rescue training facility outside Glasgow. The facility's strategic location will ensure that it is accessible and available for use by other services as well as Strathclyde Fire and Rescue. We have made it clear to LBFRS that, given that that is the case and given the location of Gullane within the LBFRS area, we do not see how the Scottish Government could justify providing central funding to support the Newbridge proposal. Various members, notably Peter Peacock and Jamie McGrigor, mentioned water rescue. The challenges in carrying out water rescue in flooding and in moving water are immense. There are few things more dangerous than someone deciding to enter into a river where the water is moving swiftly, as it often does. Sadly, over the summer months, there were a number of fatalities in our rivers—those who decided, understandably but foolishly, to jump into a river to try to rescue a pet and lost their lives. That is an extremely serious issue. Because of that and because of representations from chiefs such as David Wynne, the FBU and other stakeholders, we decided not only that we needed to have a review but that it had to be headed up by someone who had the most distinguished record and great experience. I was pleased to hear Jamie McGrigor recount some of the work that Paddy Tomkins has already done. I am due to meet Paddy shortly and expect his report to be submitted to me in or around November. It will be a key piece of work and, if the Parliament wishes to debate it after it has been published and perhaps after we have had an opportunity to consider it, it will be entirely appropriate that we do so, given the speeches that a number of members have made today. A number of members also focused on governance. Bill Butler and Elaine Smith devoted substantial parts of their speeches to that issue. The fundamental basis for the way in which we work with our stakeholders is partnership. As a former solicitor—who, it should be said, was for most of the period in partnership with members of my family—I know that partnership can be a febrile, fissile and volatile business format, in which partners can disagree. There has to be a  mechanism by which views can be discussed and thrashed out, and a decision reached. I am confident that the current arrangements are working reasonably well. All stakeholders are represented on the ministerial advisory group, which I chair. A point that I do not think has been made in the debate is that one of the benefits of the framework document is that, for the first time, it sets out with absolute clarity the respective roles and responsibilities of me, local government, the unions, the chiefs and all the stakeholders; as well as, on page 9, the governance that is provided by the MAG. Although it is not a statutory body, the MAG has the potential to develop further. I indicated to Paul Martin that I have an open mind on the issue. I have also indicated to the chiefs, to COSLA, to the Scottish fire conveners forum and to the trade unions that if there is a suggestion for how we can further improve the MAG, I am perfectly willing to consider it. How MAG performs its business has changed since I took the helm. It will now meet the expectation that there will be three meetings a year. The format of sub-committees has been slightly simplified. We have an entirely open mind about how to meet people. However, it is wrong to put too much emphasis on governance. A structure in itself is not a solution. The problems that we have are problems that we face irrespective of what structure we have. That said, I very much look forward to hearing from members, and perhaps party spokespeople, about how we can take our work forward. I am always happy to meet party spokespeople to discuss any issue regarding the fire service.

I would need to consider that carefully. Plainly, we are under considerable financial pressures. In large part, our local government partners are responsible for delivering those services, and we work with them constantly to ensure that, as far as possible, all decisions involve a joint partnership approach. However, I do not dismiss the point, which we would need to consider extremely carefully. A number of members, including Christina McKelvie, Jamie Hepburn and Stewart Maxwell, raised the important issue of inspection. I can inform members that the Scottish fire and rescue advisory unit has carried out an extensive review of operational service delivery in 2008-09. The results are to be shared with chief officers, and a report is to be provided to me imminently. The unit will revisit all services in the final quarter of this year to review process. Further, the Fire (Scotland) Act 2005 gives me statutory powers to  direct the head of the SFRAU to inquire into matters detailed in the act, should I require to do so. Various specific issues were raised in the debate. Stewart Maxwell made a cogent, coherent argument for reduced ignition propensity cigarettes. I suspect that that is an issue to which we will return—and rightly so. I very much hope that we can work positively with the UK, and perhaps the European Union, to make progress on that issue. The figures that Mr Maxwell quoted in relation to the reduction in the number of deaths in New York and Vermont speak for themselves. Although it is an idea whose time has perhaps come, there will need to be careful discussions before the Scottish Government can come to a view. I look forward to meeting Mr Maxwell fairly soon to pursue those matters. As I have mentioned, earlier in the year I had the pleasure of visiting our eight fire services and seeing for myself the excellent work that they do. I met firefighters and discussed their work with them. There is a pictorial record of those visits, including a number of photographs of me meeting firefighters and clad in a firefighter's uniform. Hello! magazine it is not. With those words, I commend all members and their contributions to the debate.

Is the member aware that I have an excellent relationship with Mr Raeburn from his party?

It might be useful to make it clear that the Government has an entirely open mind in respect of governance issues. We appreciate and have discussed with the FBU its perspective. We are happy to consider how that can be further developed while we work in partnership with stakeholders in local government.

The Scottish Government requested this debate to give the Parliament an opportunity to discuss our continued commitment to ensuring that Scotland has an efficient and effective fire and rescue service during the period of public consultation on a new fire and rescue framework. Before proceeding, I will take this opportunity to note on the floor of the chamber the tragic death of firefighter Ewan Williamson while he was attending the incident at the Balmoral bar in Edinburgh on Sunday 12 July. That sad event was a salient reminder of the debt that each of us owes to front-line firefighters. It is also a reminder of why all the partners who are involved in the fire service must work together to ensure that firefighters and the public have a service that is fit for purpose. As you will appreciate, Presiding Officer, the incident is still the subject of a police investigation, so it is neither appropriate nor possible for me to discuss any issues in relation to it today. I am aware of the public support for the bravery and commitment of firefighters to be formally recognised. Whereas the awarding of the Queen's gallantry medal is a decision for other bodies, I and the Scottish Government support an appropriate form of lasting recognition. I ask members to join me in extending our condolences to Ewan's family and to his colleagues. In October 2005, the previous Administration published the first "Fire and Rescue Framework for Scotland", as required by the Fire (Scotland) Act 2005. That framework set out a new vision for Scotland's fire and rescue services and placed expectations on the service and on the Government. It reflected the historic shift of putting fire prevention on a par with intervention, and it  gave individual services more freedom to manage their local risks. A huge amount has been achieved in the past four years, and it would be impossible to mention everything, but I would like to pay particular tribute to the commitment of everybody who works in Scotland's fire service and of all others who support them in the cause of making our communities safer. We have seen the commitment of our firefighters throughout Scotland in recent days, particularly in the parts of Moray that have been affected by the most serious recent flooding. Here are just some of the highlights of what has been achieved over the past four years. Integrated risk management planning has been introduced, and so has a new £37 million firelink communications system. A community fire safety regime has been introduced. There are now additional duties in relation to road traffic incidents and flooding, with an enforcement role for commercial fire safety. More than £25 million has been invested in resilience capability to enable the services to deal with the consequences of terrorism and extreme weather—and that capability has been formalised. We moved quickly to resolve uncertainty for staff and fire and rescue services about the number of control rooms in Scotland, and we moved to address anomalies around firefighter ill-health retirement. Today, I am pleased to announce to Parliament an additional £6 million of funding to support the backdating to 2006 of firefighter pension commutations. Earlier this year, I visited each fire and rescue service in Scotland, because I wanted to see for myself how much the service had changed. I saw some excellent examples of innovation, investment and collaborative working. In Tayside I saw investment in information technology systems, and in Dumfries and Galloway I visited a shared maintenance facility. Strathclyde Fire and Rescue is working on a state-of-the-art training centre in collaboration with the Scottish Government; Fife Fire and Rescue Service is a key part of a strong community planning partnership, which includes youth engagement; Central Scotland Fire and Rescue Service has established strong collaborative working with the Scottish Ambulance Service—and I could go on. Most importantly, the key indicators are generally heading in the right direction. The number of primary fires is continuing to fall, as are the long-term trends in fire fatalities and injuries. A great deal still needs to be done. In spite of the long-term downward trend, Scotland continues to have the unenviable record of having more fire-related deaths per million population than any other part of the United Kingdom. Too many Scottish businesses and homes are devastated by fire, which brings personal tragedy as well as  economic damage. The fire and rescue services need to stay focused on reducing the figures. Audit Scotland and others have highlighted key areas of concern, which need to be addressed. For example, the removal of national standards of fire cover in 2005 and their replacement with the integrated risk management plan—the IRMP—has been helpful, but concerns are being raised regarding the disbandment of the Scottish Central Fire Brigades Advisory Council and the perceived lack of consistency in the way in which IRMP is applied across Scotland. We want to see local solutions to local risks, but we do not want a postcode lottery in fire cover. We need to address unnecessary duplication in non-front-line areas, such as human resources, training facilities and IT systems. I am sure that none of us wants scarce resources to be diverted away from the front line unless it is strictly necessary. There is no point in doing something eight times if desired results can be achieved by collaboration. More could be done by fire and rescue services and their police and ambulance colleagues to encourage collaborative working. That could help to reduce costs while sharing knowledge, infrastructure and capabilities. More needs to be done to exploit the enormous potential of the 3,600 retained duty service and volunteer staff and to ensure that those personnel are trained effectively and deployed more creatively. The biggest challenge over the next few years will be financial. Our fire and rescue services cost some 30 per cent more per head of population than their equivalents in England. Some of that difference can plainly be justified by our geography and other factors, but we are now facing public expenditure cuts on a scale that has not been experienced for decades. All areas of the public sector will have less money to spend, not just next year but probably for several years to come. Fire and rescue services will be competing within the local government settlement with services such as housing and education, and local government generally will be competing with health. The need for further efficiency across the services is inescapable, but I would urge those who will have to decide how to make those efficiencies to do so with care. As I have already said, I and many others believe that there is scope to make significant savings while protecting the front line. I do not want to get diverted at this point into speculation about the structure of the service in the future. I am well aware that many people have questioned whether having eight services is too many. As far as the Scottish Government is concerned, that is a second-order question; the main priority is to ensure that the desired outcomes can be delivered in a manner that is consistent with best value. If a structure or a  process gets in the way of the desired outcomes, it should be regarded as expendable—it cannot become an end in itself. There are opportunities. Against the background that I have set out, the Scottish Government—working with our partners in local government, particularly colleagues in the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities—believes that a new fire and rescue framework represents an opportunity to give the fire and rescue services a new vision and direction for the future. The "Draft Fire and Rescue Framework for Scotland 2009", which was published for consultation in June, reflected constructive discussions over many months among the Scottish Government, local government and unions. I am delighted that the draft was endorsed by all stakeholders. It sets out our collective expectations of the services and the outcomes that we want to be achieved. I commend our collective desire for "A Scotland which is free of all preventable fire-related deaths, injuries and damage." That is at the heart of what we are all about. The draft framework sets out the roles and responsibilities of all the key players. We all need to be clear about what we are doing to help to deliver the desired outcomes. Most of the delivery is the responsibility of local government, but the Scottish Government plays an important role in developing and setting national standards and in running national facilities for the benefit of local government, such as the new firelink radio system and the Scottish Fire Services College in Gullane. Of course, I am ultimately accountable to the Parliament for the performance of the services and their contribution to national resilience. That is why members will see that a common theme runs through the new draft framework: partnership. It is also why we have placed the ministerial advisory group, which is our principal forum for matters of strategic importance, at the heart of the new arrangements. The group, which I chair, provides an opportunity for all stakeholders to be involved in regular dialogue about progress towards desired outcomes. The draft sets out plans for specific projects that will help to flesh out the principles. I will touch on four areas of activity in which we are making progress. First, since the introduction of the first framework we have moved our focus from rescue and firefighting to a more risk-based approach. We have supported such risk reduction through the introduction of integrated risk management plans, which are underpinned by a focus on the protection of people rather than property. IRMP has allowed individual fire and rescue services more effectively and efficiently to allocate resources to meet specific risks.  Although the approach has worked well, it is only right that after three years we should review it, to ensure that it will continue to meet its objectives and that there has not been too great a shift away from national standards.

During the past three years there has been an increase of 12 per cent in revenue funding, which I think that we all welcome. I assure the member that cost cutting will not be the aim of the review of IRMP, which we have just initiated, and I hope that all members will contribute to the review. As Minister for Community Safety, I want to convey the Scottish Government's recognition of the important community safety work that is undertaken by the 9,000 people who are employed in Scotland's fire and rescue services. During the past year alone, the services have registered almost 50,000 home fire safety visits. However, much more needs to be done. As part of our commitment to reducing fires and fire deaths, I have asked Brian Sweeney to report on what more can be done to reduce such instances. His report will be published shortly, and I look forward to hearing what he has to say. In the Scottish Fire Services College we have an enviable national approach to the workforce. The Scottish Government's commitment is represented by a £6 million annual investment in core and specialist training. Following initial training, the development and maintenance of a firefighter's skills is managed by the FRS, which, at a watch or station manager level, is best placed to monitor and address the training needs of firefighters. As is outlined in the new framework, we are assessing the training needs analysis that is submitted by each FRS. In partnership with COSLA and the services, we will agree future training—including realistic fire training—strategies for all firefighters in Scotland. I focus for a moment on our retained, volunteer and community support firefighters. Some 3,600 individuals serve our rural and island communities and many other parts of Scotland. They crew 75 per cent of all fire appliances in Scotland, and they attended 34,000 incidents last year alone. Without them we would not have an effective fire service in many of our rural and island communities. I pay tribute to them. Our commitment to the retained service was highlighted when we worked with colleagues in Westminster to defeat proposed changes to the European working time directive. That legislative issue highlighted why we must continue to work with partners to deliver fire cover that is designed to meet local risks and is flexible  enough to ensure that we are ready to meet challenges, wherever they arise. The draft framework underlines our commitment to working in partnership with local government. Our firefighters are among the best in the world. They serve the people of Scotland with skill and professionalism, they display a tremendous enthusiasm for their work, and they help many youngsters to develop and grow in confidence. The new framework is designed to ensure that our fire and rescue services focus on what they are best placed to deliver: reducing risk, responding effectively to incidents, supporting national resilience and improving the safety of our local communities. I am happy to move, That the Parliament welcomes the Scottish Government's commitment to a fire and rescue service that is modern and effective, with the principal aim of reducing risk, effectively responding to incidents and improving the safety of local communities; notes that the consultation document, Draft Fire and Rescue Framework for Scotland 2009 , has been developed in a spirit of partnership with COSLA and all key stakeholders, and notes that the Scottish Government is committed to working with local government to protect the public from fire and to reduce Scotland's poor record of fire fatalities.

The Government is working with the national violence reduction unit, the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland and other partners to reduce knife crime wherever it occurs in Scotland. The collective effort is considerable, with the Government doing its part. We have committed more than £13 million to the cashback for communities programme, which is giving young people meaningful things to do and keeping them away from knives. We are investing a total of £3 million in the VRU and its innovative project to tackle gangs and knives in the worst-affected areas of Glasgow. In March this year, we launched no knives, better lives—a £500,000 investment over the next two years to communicate the risk of knife crime to young people. In relation to Paisley, I commend the considerable efforts of Strathclyde Police's KA division, which already this financial year has seen reductions in serious assaults of 18.5 per cent and in robbery of 51.4 per cent, and a 69 per cent increase in stop and searches.

The Scottish Government believes that circumstances in different parts of Scotland require different approaches. I am sure that the member agrees that what may be appropriate in the areas where gangs operate in Glasgow, or in Paisley, in her constituency, would  simply not be appropriate in places such as Orkney, rural parts of Scotland or small villages and towns. That is why we allow local forces a measure of autonomy to determine the measures that apply in their areas. We are persuaded that CCTV, which the member mentioned, plays an extremely useful role in assisting the police in the detection and prosecution of crime. As the member will be aware, there are instances of CCTV evidence being used to bring to book people who have committed the most serious of crimes, including murder. I hope that members throughout the chamber appreciate the role and importance of CCTV. It has recently been the subject of analysis, and I expect that its role will continue, as appropriate, with local input as to how it is best employed.

I thank members for their contributions. I will briefly comment on the matters raised in this debate that were not raised in this morning's stage 1 debate or to which I did not respond this morning—thus avoiding repetition of what I did say this morning. I say to Robert Brown and Richard Baker that no decisions have been made about how to spend money that, at this moment, we do not have. It is the Government's practice not to spend money that we do not have. I commend that practice, especially to the Liberal Democrats who are with us here in the chamber. When I appeared in the sheriff court, like Mr Brown used to, I invariably found that I was slapped down when I strayed from relevance. It is fortunate that that does not always happen here, Presiding Officer. I will not respond to some of the other points that have been made. We have made good progress today. The bill will end an anomaly, as all members have said. It will protect the public and strike a fair balance with the human rights of individuals. I thank the officials for the work that they did on the bill. It was a sterling effort on their part, under considerable pressure, and they paid painstaking attention to detail. I am sure that we all wish to recognise the efforts that the officials made in that regard. Finally, I am grateful to all those members who have contributed to the debate. I hope that the Parliament will vote unanimously to pass the bill.

I am grateful to all members for the constructive way in which this morning's proceedings have been conducted. We have, of course, discussed the issues previously, so it is not surprising—but nonetheless it is welcome—that we have been able to make such rapid progress. Other members have set out the important issues behind the bill and the reasons why we need to take action quickly. I will do my best to respond to the important points that have rightly and properly been made. At the outset, Robert Brown raised the issue of consultation. The cabinet secretary rightly responded by referring to the circumstances in which the emergency bill process is used. In fact, it has been used five times, for the Mental Health (Public Safety and Appeals) (Scotland) Bill in 1999, the Erskine Bridge Tolls Bill in 2001, the Criminal Procedure (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill in 2002, the Senior Judiciary (Vacancies and Incapacity) (Scotland) Bill in 2006 and the Budget (Scotland) (No 3) Bill in 2009. It is fair to canvass that for the sake of the record, and to provide a complete statement of the circumstances in which the procedure has been used. Of course, the Somerville judgment has attracted a great deal of publicity. It became available in October 2007. Since then, it has been extremely well publicised, for obvious reasons, and has been a matter of great public concern for reasons that members have explained. Robert Brown raised the issue of what opportunities there have been for consultation. Only in March were we able to proceed on the basis that we had the broad agreement of the UK Government that appropriate steps could be taken, and the Scottish Government has given ample notice of its intentions. Almost immediately after the judgment, in November 2007, we announced that we intended to seek the introduction of a one-year time bar. We then published a draft of the bill in March 2009. On 1 April, we announced the launch of the draft section 30 order. Finally, we advised a range of interests, including all serving prisoners, the Law Society of Scotland and the Faculty of Advocates, of the  planned legislation. That was the narrative of events.

We are always ready to respond to the parliamentary authorities' view on whether the emergency procedures need to be reconsidered. If Parliament decides that the matter should be revisited, we will be wholly co-operative in undertaking that task. It would be not unreasonable for me to point out the extensive information and additional advice that has been provided to MSPs—and, therefore, made public to all those who are interested in the matter—in the policy memorandum and explanatory notes, which, perhaps because of the short time that is available to us this morning, have not been mentioned in detail. For example, in paragraph 13 of the policy memorandum we explained the alternative approaches that we considered and which could have been adopted. We did that because we wanted to be open and transparent in setting out the various approaches that could have been adopted in addressing the time-bar issue that the Somerville case raised. No approach other than primary legislation was identified. In other words, the first conclusion that we reached was that it was necessary to change the law by primary legislation, not secondary legislation. Three possible courses of action were identified. The first was to amend the general law on time bar in Scotland by imposing a one-year time limit for all cases brought before the Scottish courts. However, we all agree that scrapping the triennium would have been absurd. It would have meant that the bill that we passed recently on pleural plaques would have been a bit of a nonsense. It would also have been extremely unfair and inappropriate for us to do that. We are dealing with a tightly focused situation, not the generality of all personal injury cases. The second option was to amend section 100 of the Scotland Act 1998 to make it clear that there is no right to damages under that act, thus requiring all such claims to be brought under the Human Rights Act 1998. The third option was to amend section 100  of the Scotland Act 1998 to impose a one-year time bar on bringing convention rights claims under that act. It was considered that options (a) and (b) would be disproportionate and that, therefore, option (c) would be the most suitable. It is important to point out that the Government's officials devoted a great deal of time and effort to addressing matters in thorough detail, describing all the options fully and explaining why we decided to proceed with option (c) in the documents that were submitted with the draft bill—which itself has been available for a considerable time. Robert Brown asked whether the time bar will start to run one year from the start of the breach. The issue was considered but not determined in the Somerville judgment by the House of Lords. The lords who considered the matter took the view that the one-year period would run from the end of the breach. Ultimately, however, it is a matter for the courts to determine. Members will have noticed that proposed new section 100(3B) of the Scotland Act 1998 states: "Proceedings to which this subsection applies must be brought before the end of— (a) the period of one year beginning with the date on which the act complained of took place". It will be for the courts to determine the interpretation of that. That said, my understanding is that the date on which slopping out ceased was some considerable time ago, so I suspect that whether it happened four years ago or four and a half years ago will not be a practical question. As the cabinet secretary has said, the time limit will apply from 2 November, so not only has there been the notice that I have described and incessant publicity on the issue since October 2007, and not only has every serving prisoner received notice of the matter, but there will be an additional period between 31 July and 2 November—effectively, August, September and October—for claims to be made. These proceedings are available to everyone in Scotland—including all solicitors in Scotland who are active in the field—to ensure that any client who wants to make a claim can make that claim before the cut-off date.

We intend to bring the position in Scotland into line with the position that has  existed in the rest of the UK since the Human Rights Act 1998 was passed. However, the precise interpretation is rightly entirely a matter for the courts. I hope that I have time to answer all the other perfectly legitimate questions that Robert Brown has raised, of which I have a list. Proposed new section 100(3B)(b) of the Scotland Act 1998, which I had not got round to quoting, also gives the courts discretion to set the time bar at "such longer period as the court or tribunal considers equitable having regard to all the circumstances". In other words, not only are we bringing the law into line with the rest of the UK in respect of the one-year time bar, we are also exactly replicating the UK provision on the circumstances in which a court has discretion to disapply that one-year time limit. Robert Brown asked why we did not follow the wording in the Prescription and Limitation (Scotland) Act 1973, which I am sure he and I spent many a happy hour studying in our former lives. It is because the bill's purpose is to bring human rights claims in Scotland into line with those that are brought under the Human Rights Act 1998 that the bill follows the model of section 7(5)(b) of the Human Rights Act 1998 rather than that of section 19A of the Prescription and Limitation (Scotland) Act 1973. The substantive point—to get away from quoting sections of acts in a rather narrow legal debate—is that we are seeking to bring the law in Scotland entirely into line with the law in the rest of the UK, which is perhaps what many people thought was the law in Scotland until the Somerville judgment came along. Robert Brown also, rightly, asked to whom and what the bill will apply. It is clear that the bill will apply to the Scottish ministers and any member of the Scottish Executive, including Scottish Government agencies such as the Scottish Prison Service. Other public bodies that are not caught within the definition in the bill are already caught by the Human Rights Act 1998. The bill will therefore ensure that a consistent time bar applies to all actions that are brought against public authorities in Scotland. That explains the methodology and the terminology that have been used in the bill. Some members asked about the likely number of claims and whether the delay until 2 November 2009 will lead to increased costs. The later date will allow those with potential claims an additional three months within which to bring a claim, so it could lead to an increased number of cases before the time limit comes into effect.  Presiding Officer, I am not quite sure how much longer I have, but I will soldier on.

I just want to ensure that I answer the main questions that members have asked. If any member feels that I have not answered their question, I would be happy to let them intervene.

I thought that I had cowed everyone into submission, but apparently that is not the case.

I am certainly aware of the argument that Mr Aitken has made. In conclusion, the need for action has been agreed on all sides, almost from the moment of the Somerville judgment. The bill is a good example of the rapid change that the Parliament can deliver when we work together. In that spirit of consensus, I am grateful to everyone who has taken part in the debate. It has been a very constructive morning.

I am pleased that we have had the opportunity to debate the Sexual Offences (Scotland) Bill, which will bring much-needed clarity and consistency to the law on sexual offences. I thank all those who contributed to the bill's development. The previous Administration asked the Scottish Law Commission to review the law on rape and other sexual offences in 2004. The Scottish Law Commission's carefully considered "Report on Rape and Other Sexual Offences" and its draft bill provided a solid foundation on which to work in making progress on the reform of the law. We are fortunate to have the Scottish law commissioners and their staff. Their excellent work helps to provide a useful foundation for our legislative work. I also thank all those who took the time to share their experience and expertise on these difficult issues in response to the Scottish Law Commission's discussion paper of 2006 or our consultation on the commission's final report prior to introducing the bill into Parliament, or in giving written and oral evidence to the Justice Committee as part of its consultation on the bill. That wide and informed input was invaluable in helping us and the Justice Committee to identify ways in which the bill could be strengthened and improved. I pay tribute to the Justice Committee, under the avuncular convenership of Bill Aitken, whose stage 1 report on the bill was carefully considered and balanced and identified a number of ways in which the bill could be improved. The Government  worked closely with all committee members to lodge amendments at stage 2 to address the points that they raised and to deal with issues of concern to the Government that had not been the focus of the debate. I put on record the Government's thanks to the committee and its clerks for their careful work in scrutinising the bill's provisions and, more generally, for the balanced and constructive way in which they approached their work on the bill. It is truly appropriate that we have found a modus operandi on the part of the Government, in working with the committee, that is entirely co-operative and not at all adversarial. What more appropriate topic of legislation could there be for such an approach, if one thinks about it? Almost all members have paid tribute to the Lord Advocate. Elish Angiolini has been a long-standing supporter of reform of the law. Her formidable leadership on this issue and her steely commitment to improving the way in which the Scottish justice system deals with rape and other sexual offending were of huge importance in progressing the bill. I thank all those members who contributed during the passage of the bill. We welcome Margaret Curran's amendment to the provisions concerning capacity to consent and intoxication, which brings greater clarity to the law by sending the simple message that sexual activity with a person who is so intoxicated that they are not capable of giving consent is criminal. Sandra White raised concerns about the possible adverse consequences of criminalising girls for engaging in consensual sex while under the age of consent. I understand those concerns and I believe that it is vital that the law distinguishes clearly between the victim of an offence and the perpetrator and treats them differently. However, when we are talking about an offence that is committed by two people acting consensually, it must be right that the law treats them in the same way. It is important that the policy is seen in the context of our broader policy on children who commit offences. In all but the most exceptional circumstances, children would be dealt with through the children's hearings system, with the emphasis on the welfare of the child, rather than being subject to criminal prosecution. We lodged amendments at stage 2 to deal with prior consent and sleep. The new section 10A replicates our understanding of the current law by providing that someone who is asleep or unconscious cannot give consent while in that state. Although the new section provides that consent cannot be given in such circumstances, it does not exclude the possibility of a reasonable belief in consent, nor does it place any specific  restrictions on how such a reasonable belief may arise. In practice, it will be for the court to decide whether any claim of reasonable belief in consent on the part of the accused is credible in cases in which such circumstances arise. It is highly unlikely that a court would regard a belief that a victim gave consent while he or she was incapable of giving consent as a reasonable belief. The cabinet secretary said earlier that the Government agrees that it would be helpful to consult children and young people to help us to decide how we can best take forward the bill. I mention that specifically because of the comments that Robert Brown and Mike Pringle made in their speeches. I therefore echo the cabinet secretary's assurances in that regard. I thank all members for their contributions. The passage of the bill has demonstrated that the Government and MSPs can work across party boundaries to agree important legal reforms in a complex and sensitive area of public policy. I hope that the Parliament will vote unanimously to pass the bill.

Antisocial behaviour in our communities should not be tolerated. However, to provide long-term solutions, we need to address its causes, such as drink, drugs and deprivation, not just its symptoms. Our new framework, which is set out in "Promoting Positive Outcomes: Working Together  to Prevent Antisocial Behaviour in Scotland", sets out how we will do that by focusing on prevention and early and effective intervention; ensuring that bad behaviour is punished appropriately; and spreading good practice from successful projects, such as street base and operation youth advantage.

Yes. I am happy to agree with the member, and I am grateful for the support that we received from his party in approving the framework for tackling antisocial behaviour. He is right to stress that such behaviour is a blight on many communities and that agencies need to work closely together to target it. I have seen from my various visits throughout Scotland that great work has been done, not least in Angus, where I met many of the police and others who are involved in tackling antisocial behaviour. The fact that police numbers are now at record levels has made it easier to tackle antisocial behaviour, and we are well on our way to implementing in full our manifesto pledge of 1,000 extra police officers. We are grateful for the support of Alex Johnstone's party in working towards that aim.

I certainly will. Evaluation is important, and excellent projects are being undertaken. Every £1 that is invested in drugs treatment saves the public purse £9.50; the  problem of drug addiction costs our nation more than £2,000 million a year; and each problem drug user costs society more than £50,000. Drug abuse is one of the most serious problems affecting Scotland. Our new drugs strategy, "The Road to Recovery: A New Approach to Tackling Scotland's Drug Problem", has received cross-party support in tackling the scourge of drug addiction, which—as the member rightly highlights—has a direct impact in creating some antisocial behaviour.

No, I will not join the member in that at all. Plainly, when any MSP receives individual complaints from constituents, the correct approach is to write in with details of those complaints. To come to the chamber to cast a slur on Strathclyde Police is, in my opinion, unworthy of any MSP. I am an unstinting, unswerving supporter of the excellent work that the police do. It is difficult work, unlike our job: we are not under threat and our physical safety is not at risk. I find it quite appalling to hear such an attack on Strathclyde Police by a member from the Strathclyde area.

No nationwide rehabilitation programme is available for offenders who are convicted under section 74 of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2003. However, offenders who are convicted of such an offence and are subject to statutory supervision in the community will receive an individualised intervention to target their related risks and needs. In addition, we continue to tackle sectarianism by funding a range of initiatives. For example, sense over sectarianism is taking forward work to tackle sectarianism in communities; the "sectarianism: don't give it, don't take it" online education resource is available to all schools; YouthLink Scotland's anti-sectarian education resource can be used to work with young adults;  and Nil by Mouth is taking forward work to tackle sectarianism in the workplace.

To answer the first question, the fact that there is such a successful rate of prosecution in the area is perhaps because the Lord Advocate issued guidelines to the police and prosecutors on reporting and prosecuting alleged offences to ensure that any element of religious motivation or hatred is fully recorded in the procurator fiscal's report and dealt with appropriately. The guidelines have been acted upon because of the information to which the member alluded, and the fact that the system is working is a tribute to those who work in the prosecution service throughout Scotland. Secondly, the member asked what rehabilitation programmes have been or should be provided. The idea of a rehabilitation programme has been around for some time. We looked closely at such an initiative with others such as YouthLink Scotland, sense over sectarianism, the Scottish Prison Service and Victim Support Scotland. Unfortunately, the initiative was overly ambitious and could not be achieved without the provision of a significant amount of new funding to support its development and delivery. In the current financial climate, that is not realistic. In conclusion, the YouthLink resource, which I launched and have seen for myself, is excellent. I am happy to explore with the member—who takes a keen interest in the topic—whether it could be developed for use with those who are convicted of sectarian offences.

This afternoon, we heard many constructive comments from all parties right across the chamber. The tone of the debate has been mostly positive, at times even amiable; indeed, it appeared at one point to stray into bonhomie. "Whatever next?" one might ask. We also listened to some rarely heard assertions. Margaret Curran, for example, stated that she was known best of all for the consensual tone of her remarks. Shirley-Anne Somerville spoke up for the interests of goths, who apparently are apprehensive of vandals and even, perhaps, huns. We even heard the assertion that Bill Aitken was once a young person. It has been an afternoon of unfamiliar terrain for old hands. All members praised the basic idea of cashback, which is to use criminals' ill-gotten gains to benefit young people throughout Scotland. Shirley-Anne Somerville set out the argument crisply and succinctly, but all members acknowledged that the policy is excellent. As with all excellent policies, there were many competing bids for parenthood—unlike other policies, which often seem to be more like orphans—but whether the credit is due to previous justice ministers or deputies such as Dr Richard Simpson, who made an interesting speech, or the current cabinet secretary, Kenny MacAskill, does not matter as much as the fact that the programme is being delivered successfully throughout Scotland. We can all welcome that.  I do not want to be repetitive in the substantial time that I have for my speech, but it is fair to say that the first step is the apprehension and bringing to justice of drug dealers and other organised criminals.

Why not?

Robert Brown is right to point to that particularly venal and abhorrent area of criminal activity. He will recall that he and I took part in a separate debate on the issue. The difficulties with apprehending those who are engaged in that vile trade are apparent to all of us and are to do with persuading people to give evidence or at least to remain here to give evidence. However, in principle, I accept that point and we will bear it in mind. We start with the need to apprehend criminals—I pay tribute to the work of police officers throughout Scotland. Lothian and Borders Police's operation focus resulted in 66 arrests, 19 people being remanded, 44 being bailed and more than £50,000-worth of drugs being seized. Grampian Police's operation Lochnagar resulted in 155 arrests. Proceedings are on-going, so the numbers of individuals bailed and remanded have not yet been released, but £77,000-worth of drugs was seized. In a Tayside Police operation, seven individuals were apprehended—two are on bail awaiting trial and four were remanded in custody. In each case the police carried out those operations after a protracted, detailed and thorough effort to gain evidence, using methods such as undercover police officers. The police engaged fully with the communities that are most affected by drug dealing and carried out concerted raids on criminals' houses. We must all acknowledge the excellent work that our police carry out daily throughout the country. I have mentioned campaigns in particular areas, but work is being done in all parts of the country. As I understand it, operation Lochnagar might be regarded as one of the most successful operations against crime ever carried out in Grampian. I mention that because although members are quite right to say that we can learn from other countries such as Canada and Ireland—various members have made good points about ways in which we might learn, and we are willing to do so—we  should look at the good work that is carried out here at home first and give credit where it is due. Members will know that I am an unstinting and unswerving supporter of the police and the work that they do. We have heard much about the activities that are funded by the cashback scheme. The cabinet secretary outlined the fact that 100,000 children have been assisted thus far and that tens of thousands more are about to receive the chance to participate in these schemes. More than £13 million has been invested in a range of projects for young people: £4 million to YouthLink, which I praise for its excellent, outstanding and effective work in administering many separate components throughout the country; £1.4 million to the SRU; £1.7 million to Scottish Sports Futures and basketballscotland; £2 million to the sports facilities fund—members have referred to facilities that have been funded by the scheme; £600,000 to Arts and Business in Scotland; £1.2 million to the Scottish Arts Council and Scottish Screen; and £2.5 million to the SFA. I do not think that anyone mentioned this in the debate, so I am sure that members will be pleased to hear that the SFA is one of only seven national associations to be awarded the new Union of European Football Associations grass-roots six-star membership. Cashback-funded projects were one of the main aspects of the submission to UEFA and the SFA is grateful for the support from the Scottish Government, which enabled it to deliver such a worthwhile programme for many people. I will respond to as many as time permits. A number of members, particularly Bill Butler, who made a magnanimous and measured speech, talked about how the distribution of the funding reflects the level of deprivation and the communities that suffer most from the impact of crime. The distribution formula does reflect deprivation. I have it in front of me, but I do not think that I have sufficient time to read it all out; it is perhaps of interest to those who are interested in technicalities. However, I am assured that it reflects deprivation. That is an important point and I am happy to write to Bill Butler and other members on it in more detail. The scheme seeks to benefit more greatly the communities that need it most. Many members, including Bill Aitken, Margaret Curran and Bob Doris, mentioned Glasgow. I praise the work carried out by the Strathclyde violence reduction unit led by John Carnochan and the community initiative to reduce violence, which provides £1.6 million in addition to the cashback money to tackle that serious and engrained problem in Glasgow.  Bob Doris said that Glasgow has benefited to the tune of £680,000 over the past three years. In fact, the figure is even better than that. YouthLink alone contributed £785,000 to Glasgow, which is £490,000 more than the next biggest beneficiary. Michael Matheson made a detailed contribution about those who might or might not be entitled to apply and qualify for assistance under the cashback scheme. I understand that the football clubs that he mentioned could in fact have applied under the rules. Clubs do not have to be community clubs, but they do have to involve young people. Michael Matheson said that clubs do great work with young people in his constituency, so I hope that what I have said has reassured him and that he will act accordingly. A number of members, including Bill Aitken, Margaret Curran and Tricia Marwick, referred to volunteering. I can confirm that volunteering is a huge focus for the cashback initiative. A great deal of volunteering is already taking place. For example, 1,700 volunteers each year are involved with the SFA strand of the cashback policy and 400 volunteers each year are involved with the SRU strand. Members are right to say that we need to consider why people might be deterred from volunteering and that barriers exist that might prevent people who would otherwise be interested in volunteering for that kind of activity from doing so, but I am sure that members acknowledge that huge contributions are made by individuals throughout the country who carry out excellent volunteer work. I hope I will not try the patience of members if I refer to a few of the projects that I have visited. They include the street rugby activity in Falkirk, which I visited on 27 February, and the twilight basketball programme in Inverness, which I visited on 8 May. The basketball scheme that operates in Glasgow has resulted in one young man, who is now 17, winning a scholarship to the United States of America through his basketball prowess. That is a terrific achievement and it shows what can stem from such a project. Last month I attended the Scottish community wardens conference, at which I had the opportunity to speak to the individuals who are on the front line of tackling antisocial behaviour. There is great support for cashback for communities from community wardens, who are able to identify young people in our target audience and direct them to local activities. Kathy Tooke, the community wardens manager in Renfrewshire, said: "Wardens deal with antisocial behaviour on a daily basis. We know that not all young people in our communities are troublemakers but sometimes they feel as though there's  not much for them to do. Through these CashBack activities I have seen kids and teenagers benefit enormously: their horizons have been broadened and their energies focussed. I am delighted that Wardens are able to direct young people to a host of CashBack activities in their local areas. I am excited to see these great projects continue." I am pleased—

Certainly.

We are certainly happy to consider that suggestion, along with all the other suggestions that members have made in the debate. We will, as is customary, study members' contributions and consider specific suggestions. It would be helpful if members could provide more details on their suggestions in writing. We are concerned to ensure that there are more things to do for girls, as well as for boys. Many of the cashback activities perhaps focus more on boys than girls, but I learned in Inverness on Monday that while the boys are playing football in the local football project, the girls are coming along, as girls may tend to do when there are boys about—

Well, I thought that that was very interesting—[ Interruption. ]

I thought that that was an uncontroversial statement, Presiding Officer, but if I have offended the sensitivities and sensibilities of any member, I humbly apologise. I was going to say that as well as the football activities, which are provided by the community police and many other volunteers—the excellent upstanding citizens of Inverness—a mobile unit is provided by Action for Children where girls can, and do, go to get advice about sexual health and jewellery making, I believe. I am told—[ Interruption. ]

I am sure members will be fascinated by this bit, Presiding Officer. I am told that some of the boys who play football are so  interested and engaged in the prospect of learning jewellery making that they want to stop playing football and learn how to make jewellery, so they are obviously in touch with their feminine side—[ Interruption. ]

All right, Presiding Officer, but I was only just warming up. Shirley-Anne Somerville was absolutely right to say that only a minority of children in Scotland get in trouble. It is only a handful of that minority who pose a serious problem to Scottish society. It is known that I am neither an acolyte nor disposed to sycophancy in any way—however, the strong leadership that the Cabinet Secretary for Justice has shown in delivering record numbers of police and the lowest crime levels ever known in our land are matched only by the success of the cashback scheme, which we will all support this afternoon.

It goes without saying that the abduction of a child is an unimaginably traumatic experience—the worst nightmare—for a family. I welcome the motion, which supports the call that the European Parliament made in September  2008 for member states to develop national child rescue alert mechanisms and to establish co-operation for cross-border searches for and recoveries of abducted children. The response to a suspected abduction of a child must be immediate and co-ordinated, and it is important that the search for abducted children is not constrained by national borders. Scotland's police forces are at an advanced point in developing a Scottish child rescue alert system. That system, which is being developed by an Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland working group that includes Scottish Government representation, draws on the European Commission's 2008 best practice guidance as well as on the practical experiences of police forces elsewhere in the UK and the National Policing Improvement Agency. The Scottish child rescue alert system should be fully in place by 2010. I think that I can provide reassurance on the point that Paul Martin raised by informing him that, this week, the police successfully finished a cross-UK exercise in which the child was found. It is worth taking a moment to distinguish between cases of child abduction, which are exceptionally high risk, and the more general problem of missing children. There might be one or two child abductions in the whole of the UK in a year, but estimates of the number of incidents in which children go missing or run away are as high as 100,000 a year throughout the UK. Children can go missing for several reasons, each of which should be a cause for concern for all of us. We are working closely with our Cabinet Office colleagues in the UK Government to simplify the process for reporting missing children, and there will soon be a tendering exercise for a new Europe-wide 116 000 hotline to become operational throughout the UK. We are also doing further significant work to improve services for young people who place themselves at risk by running away, developing systems for locating children who are missing from education, and working to protect those affected by forced marriages.

As I said, there will soon be a tendering exercise for the hotline to become operational throughout the UK. Robert Brown is correct to say that, for the line to work successfully, people must know that the number is the 116 number. I understand that the 116 number is used throughout Europe, which is why we will have it. I am sure that Robert Brown recognises that, before the child rescue alert system is fully  put in place, it is essential that all the operational challenges are properly addressed—most notably, the huge volume of calls that the use of such a system will produce. Thousands of calls are likely to be generated, and it is essential that the police are fully prepared to handle those calls and deal with the follow-up investigations. Robert Brown will appreciate that. Child protection has been a key priority for the Czech presidency of the EU, and it will be a key priority for the incoming Swedish presidency. Indeed, fairly recently I attended a justice and home affairs council in Luxembourg as part of the UK delegation at which it was clear that the Czech presidency has given an excellent lead on such matters—on the significant issue of abducted children, but also on tackling the sexual abuse of children on the internet. In conclusion, the Scottish Government is delighted to play its part in improving provision throughout Europe for at-risk children, particularly those who go missing or are abducted.

I congratulate John Wilson on having brought this timely debate to the chamber. I visited the Strathclyde Police prolific offender programme just last week, and I was extremely impressed with what I heard. I met Allison Lawson, the contract manager; Andy Brown, the police sergeant and team leader; Keith Chalmers, the social care senior addiction worker; Neil Hunter, joint general manager for Glasgow addiction services; and Stevie Lydon, strategic co-ordinator. Members have already set out many of the arguments that I was going to make. The Strathclyde project seeks to identify prolific offenders who have a serious drug problem, who spend thousands of pounds a week to fuel their habit, and who get that money by committing acquisitive crime. The police, by and large, know who those people are and the programme seeks to identify them, reach out to them and offer them help to tackle their drug problem—but to put the offer in such a way as to make it most likely that it will be accepted. In other words, it is not a case of two polis arriving, chapping the door and saying, "Come to the drugs rehab programme". The police are usually accompanied by a drugs treatment worker if the person is approached in their home, or perhaps in their cell or through other methods of referral. In each case, the message—as Anne McLaughlin said—is fairly clear: "There is help for you, and we want you to break your drug habit. Take this help—here's the fellow from the addiction service who will help you find recovery from your problem." In each case, the police know that the prolific offender has a serious problem—probably a variety of serious problems that go beyond drug addiction—and probably many difficulties in their life such as prostitution, neglect, homelessness: the whole works. However, the offer is made and, as members have said in this debate, it is very often accepted. What really impressed me about the problem was the huge commitment of the individuals. Such programmes often succeed or fail by the quality and commitment of the individuals who are involved. I felt that, with the commitment involved, the joint approach of the police and drugs team workers was the right one—and it has been successful. Of course, we need to evaluate these programmes to find out how successful they have been, but I believe that in a particular year 102 people went through this programme while only 19 went through a previous similar programme. We are talking about a large number of people who have committed many, many crimes; indeed, one of them had, over a 10-year period, committed 222 crimes for which he had been convicted. Goodness knows how many crimes the individual had carried out for which he had not been convicted. As a result, when we are considering the costs of the programme—which, as members have pointed out, are not insubstantial—we must include in the equation the benefits that stem from crimes not being committed and from people not becoming victims. The programme is expensive but extremely worth while. We have contacted other police forces, and it appears that similar approaches and projects have been introduced in all or almost all constabularies. Indeed, I recommended to the chief constable of Lothian and Borders Police that he consider the Strathclyde scheme. Police throughout Scotland are doing excellent work in reaching out to prolific offenders. As always, I want to respond to points that have been made in the debate. Bill Aitken rightly pointed out that in deciding whether to mainstream the scheme—which, at the moment, is funded through the fairer Scotland fund—we should be clear that it stands up to evaluation. I am quite sure that its prospects in that respect are very good. Hugh Henry raised a similar question, and both members are right to ask where the resources for the scheme come from. However, I should point out that I cannot readily be criticised on that score, because I do not readily call for resources from the taxpayer to fund multifarious schemes. Indeed, the reality is the opposite: just recently, we decided not to roll out mandatory drugs testing of all people who are arrested in Scotland. The approach was tried but, as only 223 individuals engaged with  treatment services at a cost of £2.2 million, we decided that it did not represent value for money. As a result, we will save £1.8 million. Similarly, we, unlike the rest of the parties in the Parliament, do not feel that investing £3 million in a new community court building is the right decision. I am not trying to be controversial or make a party political point; I am simply acknowledging that we have made difficult choices and that we will continue to take responsibility for making them. That said, it seems to me that we succeed in turning people's lives around, in taking them away from a pattern of serious crime and in stopping them being a real menace to many hundreds of people in Scotland not by spending millions on new buildings but by ensuring that we harness the skills and qualities of individuals like those who work in the prolific offenders programme. After all, it is their work that has turned people's lives around. Indeed, I had the opportunity to become familiar, on an anonymised basis, with a couple of the cases. One young lady had been involved in prostitution but, thanks to her family and the programme, she is out of that life, in college and in a flat. Her life has probably been saved as a result of the programme. Robin Harper referred to the Airborne initiative, and I guess that, at the time, my view about what happened to it was similar to his. That was another approach in which youngsters were diverted from a life of crime and in which the qualities of individual people in Scotland were harnessed. It did not require money to be blown on new buildings that in any case would probably not be very green.

I note Mr Harper's point. I suggest that the programme has important lessons for other force areas. I commend the work that Strathclyde Police, the Glasgow addiction services and others are doing on it, and pay tribute to them. I hope that we will consider the matter again. Whether those of us who have spoken in the debate are liberals or authoritarians—to adopt the classification of human beings that Anne McLaughlin introduced—I hope that we can all, as pragmatists, recommend, support and applaud the Strathclyde Police prolific offenders programme.  Meeting closed at 17:45.

The Scottish Prison Service is committed, through its substance misuse policy, to meeting the aims outlined in "The Road to Recovery". As an executive agency of the Scottish Government, the Scottish Prison Service maintains close and regular contact with colleagues in the justice and health portfolios on this and other areas of policy.

There is some merit in what the member says. He will be aware of the visit that I undertook with his colleague Bill Aitken to HMP Edinburgh in Saughton, where an addiction support area has been developed and introduced. In that area, treatment and support are offered to those who are motivated to change their behaviour and become drug free. They have a common aim and desire and are not in the generality of the prison, where prisoners may not share that desire and may want others to take drugs. The initiative is a welcome step forward; I hope that it will command support from all members.

I have visited the centre in Bath Street in Glasgow to which Dr Simpson refers and, like him, I was extremely impressed. The females at the centre were positive, confident about their recovery, safe and held in an environment that is far preferable to Cornton Vale. We would like the centre's approach to be extended elsewhere and are happy to work with all parties towards that. It would have a serious cost implication—an issue that the Government must always take into account—but I hope that all members can unite behind it as an extremely desirable aim. The treatment of prisoners on remand is and has always been a challenging issue. It is more difficult for prison officers to handle prisoners on remand than it is for them to handle long-term prisoners, and members are united in seeing that as a serious issue on which we need to do more. The Scottish Prison Service has a well-established policy, of which all members will be aware. More generally, we learn from prison officers that short sentences make it extremely difficult for prisons to provide any realistic form of structured drug treatment, especially for prisoners who spend fewer than 30 days in prison. That is why I hope that all parties will welcome the SNP's policy on sentencing.

Local authorities and chief constables acting jointly are required by the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004 to prepare a strategy for dealing with antisocial behaviour in the authority's area. The 2004 act also contains a range of measures to reduce antisocial behaviour across all tenures, including among tenants in short-term or holiday lets. Our new framework, "Promoting Positive Outcomes: Working Together to Prevent Antisocial Behaviour in Scotland" sets out a new, shared vision for how antisocial behaviour should be tackled.

I certainly appreciate that the lives of those who are the victims of antisocial behaviour can be made an absolutely misery. Perhaps I and other members will know that from our own experience. That said, officials from the City of Edinburgh Council have told us that the problem appears to relate to a very small number  of properties in the city compared with the very large number of holiday lets. The position that we take at the moment—although of course we are willing to consider specific proposals for change if any are put to us—is that existing antisocial behaviour legislation is sufficient to deal with, for example, hen and stag parties, which I think are behind some of the problems to which the member refers. Officials at the City of Edinburgh Council take the same view. I am also aware that, as Sarah Boyack said, this has been raised by other members—Shirley-Anne Somerville and Malcolm Chisholm being two. The Scottish Government is aware that short holiday lets are very important to Edinburgh, especially during the festival—I hope that all members understand that concern. The vast majority of landlords operate responsibly and respectably, and therefore to impose regulation on a sector where the problem is with a few—problems that may amount to criminal behaviour that should be dealt with by the police—may well be to take a legal sledgehammer to crack a nut. I advise proceeding with caution, but we are certainly willing to listen to any specific proposals, should any such be put to us.

I reiterate that, in the event of any specific proposal for legislative reform being put to us, we will consider it. Members have raised the general issue. Houses in multiple occupation are a long-established concept in housing legislation, and one of their defining characteristics is that they comprise living accommodation and not holiday accommodation. A holiday let cannot be an HMO but there are certain technical matters that Shirley-Anne Somerville has already raised in her correspondence with Stewart Maxwell on 4 February. I am aware that Alex Neil, the Minister for Housing and Communities, spoke about the matter earlier today. He was right that antisocial behaviour legislation, and not housing legislation, is the key to tackling the issue. Therefore, I am happy to consider further specific representations from members across the chamber.

On Monday 20 April we held an alcohol and drugs delivery summit at which we, along with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, launched a new framework for action on alcohol and drugs. Members of the Parliament who attended the summit, including Annabel Goldie and Dr Ian McKee, welcomed the announcement of the framework. We have a national drugs strategy that provides a clear plan for how we will tackle the damage that problem drug use has caused to too many of our society for too long. Having the right delivery framework in place will ensure our record investment in drug services will be better targeted to help recover those lives.

Jamie McGrigor's general point is correct—indeed, I discussed it this week during my visit to Turning Point Scotland in Peterhead. Turning Point is a charity that is successfully involved in helping drug addicts find recovery. The member is right to say that some problem drug users have to wait too long for appropriate treatment. We have been determined to tackle the problem, which is why we have substantially increased the available funding. We have substantially reduced the amount of the drugs budget that is spent at the centre so that the maximum amount is available around the country to tackle the problem. I am encouraged that in some areas—such as Aberdeen city, which had and still has a particularly acute problem—the waiting times are going down. I pay tribute to all those in the public and sectors who are carrying out excellent work—difficult, demanding and exacting work—in dealing with problem drug users who need help to find recovery.

Will John Lamont give way?

Will John Lamont give way?

If the Conservatives regard the matter as such a priority, why did they not seek additional provision for new courts in their budget negotiations with John Swinney?

We agree with the Liberal Democrats' broad approach to sentencing policy. In 2007-08, three quarters of short prison sentences were for six months or less. The outcomes for defenders who are sentenced to prison are poor. We all know that only one out of four of those sentenced to jail for six months or less remains free of further convictions within two years of release and that, by contrast, three out of five of those sentenced to community service have a clean record after a similar time. That basic comparison justifies the broad approach that we and the Liberal Democrats take to sentencing. The facts in relation to community sentencing merit some repetition—they might not have been mentioned so far because this is a short debate. More than 6,000 community service orders and 3,000 probation orders with a condition of unpaid work attached were imposed by Scotland's courts in 2007-08. That means that the courts ordered more than a million hours of work to be carried out in the community. I mention that because credit is due to those who are dealing with those orders on our behalf. We should not forget about that in the maelstrom of criticism that there has been today. Nigel Don hit on the nub of the debate when he talked about swiftness of justice. I do not think that anyone is suggesting that the essential thing is that we spend money on a new building. I think that all members agree that it is the swiftness of the response, particularly with regard to the commencement of a community service order, that is important. We have been accused of doing nothing, and the debate has been full of political knockabout, which is all great fun, but it is important to recognise that we are working extremely closely with professional stakeholders to agree a new, tighter framework for starting and completing community sentences. New guidance in respect of community service orders, which was issued on 27 February, will require post-sentence interviews to be carried out within one working day of the order being made by the court, with the work placement to start within seven working days. The new arrangements will take time to bed in. There are problems relating to community service orders in Scotland, not least in Glasgow, of which we are all well aware.  The new arrangements should lead to significant improvements over the current levels of performance. There is common ground between all parties in that regard. However, I respectfully disagree with the implicit proposition in the amendments, which is that we should spend a lot of money on a new building. That is what we are being asked to agree to today, but we do not agree with it. I have said so frankly and candidly, and we will be entirely open with members such as Frank McAveety and Sandra White who, quite rightly, stand up for their constituents. As I said at the outset of the debate, and as Cathy Jamieson also said, we recognise that the concept of community justice is good.

I agree that that is a key feature of the community justice concept, but I respectfully disagree that we are missing that opportunity. We most certainly are not. From my former work as a solicitor in Glasgow sheriff court, I know that some services are co-located there. The social work service is present. I have seen the drugs court operating. I have seen Sheriff Lindsay Wood's manifest and palpable desire to help those who come before his drugs court. That is admirable, and I hope that more sheriffs will undertake the necessary training that will enable them to provide the progress courts approach, which Richard Baker referred to. I respectfully disagree with the proposition that we should progress community courts simply by investing in a new building. I do not think that, even if we did that, we would deliver the swiftness that is the nub of this debate. It is possible to incorporate those benefits of swiftness into the criminal justice system without a costly new building. In the current climate, we must all recognise that resources must be targeted to provide best value for money. The important thing is the swiftness of starting community work and of visible payment to the community—not a building. We will work with Glasgow City Council to explore the scope for investment in a more focused service for the east end of Glasgow, testing out an improved payback scheme. Therefore, I urge members to support the amendment in my name.

As members will see, my amendment shares some common ground with the Conservative motion, but on the big issue—the  coherence of the Government's strategy on crime—it will come as no surprise to anyone that we entirely disagree. Let us first consider the areas of agreement. Bill Aitken's motion recognises the positive lessons that can be learned from the establishment of community courts such as those in Midtown, New York. I accept that point. I hasten to add that I have been on no foreign trips to New York—I get to go to places such as Aberdeen, Peterhead and Dumfries and Galloway—but, nonetheless, I learn from others that lessons can be learned from the practices that have been applied in New York. To some extent, I agree with the analysis of those who support that model. However, the key point in today's debate—at least in respect of the wording of the motion and of the amendments other than our own—is that the essence of the New York model is not the building but how the services work together. That is the fundamental disagreement between where we stand in the debate and where other parties at least appear to stand—in so far as we can discern that from their amendments.

I will do so later. Let me just develop the argument. The swiftness in starting the community payback sentence is what seems to be the holy grail for such courts, not the expense for a new building that the Conservative motion asks us to incur. I see that Mr Brownlee is listening with studious intent at this point.

While we are on the topic of quiet words—not something I excel at—Mr Brownlee might wish to have one with Mr McLetchie and ask him why he supported the spending of £500 million on trams, which we sought to oppose. Two can play at that game. The effective working together of all agencies to provide services is the key to delivery of the results that we all want. We did not dismiss the community justice centre concept out of hand. We appreciate the value of community courts in other areas, so we undertook a feasibility study to establish the costs of building and running such a centre and to identify the potential benefits but—it a big "but"—the study showed that the cost of the  building would be around £3.73 million, which would need to be found from the public purse.

Just a second. The running costs would be around £750,000 a year. That money would have to be spent before any service gains were made. We must be realistic: in the current financial climate, the community court proposal does not offer best value for money.

I believe in complete transparency with regard to provision of documents that can properly and appropriately be made available in accordance with the rules and regulations that applied to the previous Executive. The same rules and regulations apply to this Government. We will work with Glasgow City Council to establish how we can achieve the service gains that were sought from a community justice centre. We want to explore how payback can be targeted at the communities that are most in need of reinvestment, with a strong focus on community buy-in. We want to examine how local services can be directed to support people out of a lifetime of crime. Officials will meet Glasgow City Council's director of social work later this month. The council should be allowed to come up with local solutions to local problems, but we share its commitment to putting resources back into the communities that are most blighted by crime. I hope that members will recognise that resources are not infinite—we are in a recession. We are told by the Government in Westminster that it is essential that we make cuts. The Labour Party in London criticises us and tells us that we must make deeper cuts. It is extremely ironic, and a tad inconsistent, that the Labour Party in Scotland calls on us to do the very opposite—to spend, spend, spend. It used to be the members of the Scottish Socialist Party—who, as I recall, were not known for having quiet words, either—who believed that every leaf of every tree was a high-denomination note. It now appears that that belief is shared not only by members of the Labour Party, whose strange view of arboriculture we are used to hearing about, but by the Conservatives. There is a new alliance of spendthrifts—Labour, Tory and Liberal members are all invoking us to spend, spend, spend. The Government has a strong and coherent strategy to deliver a safer and stronger Scotland.  In such a short speech, I have not had time to address all the issues, but we most certainly will. We will continue to work with our partners in Glasgow to procure the best possible results as regards justice for their citizens. I move amendment S3M-4065.3, to leave out from "notes" to end and insert: "recognises that community courts based on the New York City model in Midtown can help to address patterns of offending behaviour by providing for swift and effective summary justice coupled with a range of rehabilitation services to break the cycle of reoffending; notes the decision by the project board for the Glasgow Community Justice Centre that in the current economic circumstances they should not proceed with the development of a new court building, and supports the joint work underway between Glasgow City Council and the Scottish Government to identify how best offenders can pay back for their crimes to the communities most in need of reinvestment and local services can be directed to support offenders out of a life of crime."

Does Bill Aitken agree that the drugs court's success is attributable not to the building in which it is located but to the way in which it operates, which is different from the traditional court process?

Stewart Maxwell has been a strong advocate of the benefits of using anonymised injury data collected in hospitals to inform local police action. That approach, based on groundbreaking work in Cardiff, is one that we fully support, and the Scottish Government has been working in partnership with the national violence reduction unit to introduce it more widely throughout Scotland. Initial pilots in hospitals such as the Glasgow royal infirmary have shown that the approach can be labour intensive, diverting clinicians from their primary tasks. That is why we are supporting a fully electronic system in the NHS Lanarkshire area, which will overcome those issues.

Yes, I can and yes, we will. The results will be available shortly. Given that the model was based on a project in Cardiff that resulted in a 40 per cent reduction in the level of violence as a result of the co-operation between medical personnel and police, we expect that that excellent work will be rolled out across Scotland in due course.

Does Richard Baker accept that, we have from the beginning and repeatedly made it absolutely clear that we are not restricting opportunities for enforcement. Why does he persist with that false premise, which virtually every Labour member in today's debate has sought to make?

We have made it clear that the measures in the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004, including ASBOs, will still be available. The member said that "until now" local authorities could apply for ASBOs, but they will still be able to apply for ASBOs. If ASBOs are the key to success, why is there still antisocial behaviour in England, where huge numbers of ASBOs have been used?

Is the member suggesting that if ASBOs had been served on the individuals involved that behaviour would not have arisen?

I am delighted to open this debate on antisocial behaviour. Two weeks ago, Councillor Harry McGuigan of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and I published our shared vision for preventing antisocial behaviour. We have united national and local government to deliver a framework that has been devised not by what we might call armchair experts, but by local service providers—the police, councils and the fire service, among others. It is therefore a framework from the front line. Councillor McGuigan and I set aside party politics, which was not really a challenge to either of us, and united in a belief that communities are best served by not having to experience antisocial behaviour in the first place and that prevention through meaningful community engagement offers the best hope of success. Our new framework is supported by COSLA, the Society of Local Authority Chief Executives and Senior Managers, the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland, the Chief Fire Officers Association, the Scottish Children's Reporter Administration, the Association of Directors of Social Work, the Judicial Studies Committee, the centre for regional economic and social research, Victim Support Scotland, Sacro, YouthLink Scotland, Action for Children Scotland, the Scottish Youth Parliament and our communities. It therefore truly is a partnership document. I thank each and every one of those organisations for the huge amount of work that they did to produce the framework document. It is not therefore purely supported by the Scottish Government; it is supported by the practitioners whose job is to tackle antisocial behaviour and who are therefore best placed to inform the task of how we do so in future.

I have personally engaged with several communities that have been supportive of our approach. For example, I recently visited Penicuik crime prevention panel. Harry McGuigan has emphasised the importance of engaging with  communities, perhaps as his key point. If I call Harry McGuigan long in the tooth, he will not take undue offence, so if someone with his experience in local government—as a result of which he is now a spokesperson for COSLA—says that he has engaged with communities, that is good enough for me. Our framework is called "Promoting Positive Outcomes". That is significant for three reasons. First, we are promoting; we are not dictating from the centre what should be done. There is no compulsion and no micromanagement. We have removed the 83 ring-fenced funding streams to allow local government to make local decisions about local solutions. Secondly, we are focusing on the positive, not the negative. We are championing good practice, promoting good behaviour, selling success stories and helping people to fulfil their potential. Thirdly, we are judging success on outcomes for communities, not on how many antisocial behaviour orders are served. Communities want long-term solutions, not short-term fixes. There is a role for the Government, but, equally, there is plainly a role for parents. I fully support that and I accept the part of the Labour amendment that acknowledges that. Many people in Scotland are rightly concerned about the lack of supervision that a minority of parents give their children. We all want all parents to recognise their social responsibility to keep their children safe and, sometimes—such as late at night—indoors and to ensure that their children behave appropriately. It is not for Government to abrogate the role of parents. I am sure that we can all unite in the sentiments that I have expressed. Promoting strong families and good parenting is vital. This Government is committed to providing early support to families to promote positive parenting skills. We should not take such skills for granted. I had the pleasure of meeting John Carnochan again this week in St Andrews. He reminded us that we cannot take the basics of parenting for granted. That is why the work that local authorities and others do to promote parenting skills is so appreciated. Our framework signals a new direction. We are placing prevention and early intervention at the very centre. I will give three examples of projects that typify our approach. The first is street base in South Lanarkshire, which I visited on 21 October last year. The project recognises that alcohol abuse causes antisocial behaviour and works with young people to address their drinking. Through education and diversion and through going out on to the streets to speak to children who were passing the time by glugging the Buckfast or whatever, the programme has diverted children  from that habitat and into more positive outcomes. That project has reduced street drinking by 67 per cent and vandalism by 63 per cent. That is what I call a successful outcome. The second example is operation youth advantage, which is run by the police and the Army in my constituency. The programme provides discipline and education on issues such as drugs and builds confidence and team working through physical activity. I know that it, too, has been very successful in preventing young people—boys and girls—from reoffending and in encouraging them to make positive choices. That is what I call successful intervention and diversion. The third example is twilight basketball, which is one of the cashback projects in which we use money confiscated from drug dealers and other criminals to provide young people with things to do. Twilight basketball uses positive role models and mentors to engage with and inspire young people from deprived communities. They provide educational time-out sessions on healthy living and good citizenship. I encourage everyone to read the profiles of Stefan Caldwell and Rob Yanders—the captain of Scottish Rocks basketball team—in our framework, to see what a difference such projects can make to people's lives. One child from Easterhouse could have ended up on the ropes, but, instead, he is undertaking a scholarship in the United States of America, thanks to the project.

I did not see that particular comment, but any comment of that nature would be unfortunate. I met the professional basketball players who are giving their time freely and without charge to help young people. They told me, "We are not parachuting in and out. We are here to stay. The work we're doing is not here today, gone tomorrow. It's work that we're doing for all time." They are determined to help young people. They have had advantages; they want young people to have them, too. We want to get away from the approach that any negative remark represents. I mentioned several projects that are aimed at young people, but I want to dispel a couple of myths. First, "antisocial behaviour" is not a synonym for "youth". Not all antisocial behaviour is by young people, although that is the insidious myth that a stigmatising media perpetrates, unfortunately. Not all young people are tearaways, running wild in our communities. Only a tiny  minority misbehave. It is about time that someone stood up for all the young people who make a positive contribution to their communities. It is a strange and dark country that chooses to demonise its next generation. We want no part of that. Instead, we want to give people more choices and more chances. Things to do are at the top of the list for the young people whom we have spoken to and consulted. That is why we are investing more than £12 million in cashback for communities schemes for young people.

That is not my understanding of demonising, but perhaps that is a Liberal Democrat construction of the word—I will have to check my dictionary later. We want to promote messages about the sensible use of alcohol. The evidence shows that the pilot schemes in places not far from here had a significant, positive and welcome impact on our young people.

I think that I have to—

All right—since I am reasonable.

Communities are selected fairly; YouthLink Scotland plays a key role. It is plain that spreading money evenly around the country is difficult. We have not reached everywhere yet. I look forward to working with Cathie Craigie to extend the scheme so that it is even more successful in the future. On 17 June 2004, the Parliament united to vote overwhelmingly in favour of the bill that became the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004. That was an important step. Media coverage has suggested that we will scrap parts of that act. We will not. The measures in that act will remain tools in the box that local authorities are free to choose when appropriate. However, they will not be ordered to choose them or told to use them. We will leave that to their judgment, which is the appropriate way forward.  I hope that the Parliament can unite today to recognise that we need to tackle the causes of the problems and not just the symptoms. We recognise that antisocial behaviour blights communities and blights some people's lives—particularly those of vulnerable and elderly people. None of us forgets that for one moment. Serious criminal behaviour should be dealt with seriously. The framework provides the way forward for dealing with antisocial behaviour. Harry McGuigan and I are united in our belief that the framework takes the right approach for Scotland. We realise that it will not be easy and will take time to deliver, but it will work for the benefit of people throughout Scotland. I move, That the Parliament notes the publication of the new Antisocial Behaviour Framework, Promoting Positive Outcomes: Working Together to Prevent Antisocial Behaviour in Scotland , which has been developed in partnership with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities (COSLA) and other national partners; further notes that it builds on the success achieved since the Parliament introduced the Antisocial Behaviour etc. (Scotland) Act 2004; agrees that antisocial behaviour blights the quality of people's lives and should not be tolerated but believes that prevention is better than cure when it comes to protecting communities from disorder; values the cross-party and cross-organisational input and support that the framework has received; appreciates the wealth of good practice across Scotland and the importance of replicating it as widely as possible, and embraces the framework's commitment through enhanced prevention, integration, community engagement and communication to making our communities safer and stronger.

I welcome the opportunity to outline the Scottish Government's plans for tackling alcohol and drug misuse, in light of the report on alcohol and drug services that was published last week by Audit Scotland. These are matters of such concern to the Parliament and to the people of Scotland that we were happy to agree to Annabel Goldie's request for this statement. The Auditor General for Scotland's report lays bare the immense challenge that Scotland faces in tackling drug and alcohol misuse. While not new, the statistics make grim reading: a social and economic cost to Scotland of more than £5 billion a year; death rates from alcohol and drugs among the highest in Europe; and more than 40,000 hospital admissions due to alcohol-related illness. It was for those reasons that, when we came into government, we were determined to get to grips not only with a drugs problem that was already well-entrenched in Scotland, but with a growing challenge around alcohol issues. Working closely with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, we developed and delivered a new drugs strategy, "The Road to Recovery", which was published last year. Last month, we published our alcohol framework for action. Both strategies provide the new approaches for which those problems have been crying out. For both, we have sought to develop a consensus and agree a way forward in Parliament and in the country at large. However, we realised that, as well as setting the strategic direction, we needed to take a hard look at delivery, to ensure that we were getting the maximum impact from the significant investment in services. We took careful note of the problems identified in the "Report of the Stocktake of Alcohol and Drug Action Teams" in 2007 and the Scottish Advisory Committee on Drug Misuse report, "Reducing harm and promoting recovery". We also set in train a wide range of action to address those issues. Early last year, I asked the Auditor General to look into expenditure on alcohol and drug  services. I am grateful for the incisive analysis that he has now published. We will reflect the findings of the report throughout the range of action that we are taking forward. At the same time, we asked an expert group, drawn from our key advisory committees on substance misuse, to design a new accountability and governance framework for action on alcohol and drugs. We have now received the group's proposals—copies are available in the Scottish Parliament information centre—and we are considering them in light of the Auditor General's report. Following our consideration of those proposals, later this month we will announce, with COSLA, a new framework for local action on alcohol and drugs, replacing the current model of alcohol and drug action teams. The new framework will directly address a range of the problems identified by the stocktake and the Auditor General's report. The roles and responsibilities of the key public bodies and, indeed, of the Scottish Government will be clarified and confirmed. Local partners and partnerships will have clear lines of accountability to the Scottish Government and to one another. They will be required to work more effectively within community planning partnerships. New local partnerships will be remitted to develop local strategies for tackling drug and alcohol misuse based on: a robust assessment of needs in their area; a transparent, evidence-based process for agreeing how funds for tackling alcohol and drug misuse should be deployed; and a clear focus on the outcomes that that investment is achieving for their communities. Those local strategies will also need to cover approaches to cross-cutting issues, such as that of children who are affected by parental substance misuse, where integrated working and effective communication are essential. The drugs strategy set out a range of actions that need to be taken to improve the identification of children at risk, build capacity and strengthen the management of immediate risk. The delivery reforms will provide a further impetus to that work. Local strategies will also outline action to help families and better inform parents. The effective operation of local partnerships is critical to addressing the concerns that were raised by the Auditor General's report about variability in the range and accessibility of alcohol and drug services throughout the country. However, the Scottish Government, too, has a critical role to play, in ensuring that appropriate and effective services are delivered in every part of Scotland to those who need them, when they need them.  I acknowledge that waiting times for many services are too long—as revealed again in figures this week. To address that, the Scottish Government is, for the first time, working with the national health service and other partners to develop a target for access to drug services within the NHS performance management arrangements known as HEAT—which stands for health improvement, efficiency, access and treatment. The new target will take effect from April 2010. We are examining the scope for extending the target to cover alcohol services too, providing the same minimum standards for access across the country. Furthermore, as our alcohol framework for action makes clear, we will be updating the national framework for alcohol treatment services, enabling us to outline clearly to local partners the full range of essential services that users should be able to expect wherever they live in Scotland. The corresponding task on drug services will be carried out as part of the programme of work to develop the new HEAT target. Alongside that work, we will strengthen our efforts to promote the national quality standards for substance misuse services, which were published in 2006 by the previous Administration and which set out the prerequisites in terms of quality for all services. We have also sought to ensure that the services are properly funded, while seeking to correct the long-standing funding imbalance between alcohol and drugs. We are increasing direct Government funding to health boards for drugs services by 14 per cent over the spending review period, and we are increasing spending on alcohol misuse by a massive 229 per cent during the same period. Finally, and importantly, we are in the process of recruiting a group of national co-ordinators to help local partners and partnerships meet the challenges presented by the new framework and the Auditor General's recommendations. I am confident that the new team will make an important contribution to improving the quality, range and standards of service planning and commissioning right across Scotland. Those projects form part of our much wider range of action to implement our strategies on alcohol and drugs—strategies on which, as I have said, we are keen to maximise consensus in Parliament and across Scotland. We are, therefore, taking forward Annabel Goldie's proposal for a national event on alcohol and drugs, and, in particular, on the action that we are taking to ensure that delivery is effective. I am therefore pleased to announce today that the event will take place in Edinburgh on Monday 20 April—the same day on which we will launch the new framework for action.  I know that Cathy Jamieson has proposed specific cross-party discussions on alcohol misuse, and the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing will discuss those proposals with her. As a nation, the challenges that we face are indeed daunting. I hope that, as a Parliament, we can work together to achieve the results that we want and which Scotland needs. As a Government, we undertake to do all that we can to ensure that that happens.

I thank Richard Simpson for his broad welcome for the announcement. I recognise his experience and the work that he has done in the field over many years, as well as his deep care for those who are involved in it. I will answer the questions that he raised in turn.  We will announce the new delivery arrangements, which have been agreed with COSLA. We want to build on the best of the work that is done by the DATs. However, members of all parties would acknowledge that some DATs have been more successful than others and that there has been a gap in their accountability to the public for the work that they do. We are seeking to fill that gap in two ways—first, by making DATs directly accountable to their local government parent through the single outcome agreements; and, secondly, by making them accountable to their health boards for the funding that the health boards will provide through the new HEAT target. Accountability means explaining to the public what one does and how one uses the money that one is entrusted with. It means showing the public what one does and, after one has done it, having an analysis done to see how effective that has been. That is what accountability means, and it has been lacking in the arrangements up until now. The Auditor General has recognised that in his report. It is fair to say, however, that we recognised that—and it was recognised in the chamber—long before the publication of the Auditor General's report. Indeed, it was manifest in the publication in January of the delivery reform group's main recommendations. We will fill that gap, but a great deal of work remains to be done. Richard Simpson touched on the situation in Grampian in particular. I have visited Grampian on at least three separate occasions to deal with the matter, and I have worked closely with Aberdeen City Council and Richard Carey at the health board—both have injected substantial extra resources in recognition of the deep problem that exists. I am pleased to say that, although waiting times in Aberdeen are still far too long, they have been reduced substantially as a result of additional funding and the good work that has been done at the local level by drugs workers, whom I pay tribute to and applaud for their efforts. They are the ones who are doing the work, not politicians such as me. Richard Simpson asks when the new HEAT target will apply. Our intention is that the new HEAT target on drugs will apply from April 2010. Of course, we want fully to consult everybody who is involved to ensure that the new arrangements are accountable.

I very much welcome Annabel Goldie's constructive response and I look forward to continuing to work with her and other members to ensure that the delivery arrangements are successful. The new arrangements will introduce accountability, as I have said. One problem with the previous arrangements that must be addressed is that not all ADATs have been headed by people of sufficient seniority and stature to be able to pull rank within their localities. I am confident that the new arrangements will address the concerns that Annabel Goldie raises, but I will be candid: the Auditor General's report is a chilling document. It sets out at length an analysis of a drugs policy that since 1982, as the report records, has had at best a chequered history and has demonstrated neither the effective use of public money nor the delivery of outcomes. Under the new arrangements, outcomes will be paramount and local organisations will be required to deliver them. That is what we need, and what all members in the chamber want. I was happy to agree to the high-level national event that is taking place on 20 April. To call it a summit might be a slight misnomer, since I am not exactly a head of Government, but I hope that it will produce more palpable, successful and manifest results than will another summit—which some members may have read about—that is taking place elsewhere.

Ross Finnie—to name check him—is correct that there are varying levels of funding throughout the country for tackling drugs and alcohol. However, that is partly because the problem varies throughout Scotland. Some areas receive very low funding, particularly in relation to drugs, because they have, I am happy to say, a relatively small problem. It would not be helpful for me to name those areas, for many reasons, but plainly there is a bigger problem in Glasgow than there is in some rural or island communities in Scotland. With regard to the funding issue, I hope that Ross Finnie welcomes, as I think the Lib Dems have done, the additional money that the Government has invested in tackling both drugs and alcohol. I am particularly proud that, in the 2009-10 drugs budget, for which I have responsibility, we managed to increase the amount of money at the centre going to treatment by 13.5 per cent. We did that by tightening our belts at the centre, so that as much money as possible was pushed towards the delivery of treatment. Similarly, the Government will spend £120 million to tackle alcohol misuse during the three years from 2008-09. That is a massive increase of almost 230 per cent, which reflects the huge scale of the problem.  Finally, Ross Finnie asked about the HEAT targets. I think that my statement made it clear what we are going to do about those. We will be open and transparent in what we do, and I hope that all parties will play a part in developing the new HEAT target on drugs. At one level, the big targets are simple. We have 52,000 people who are problematic drug misusers and we want that figure to come down. We have 40,000 to 60,000 children who have one or more parents who are affected by drug misuse, and we want that figure to come down. Last year, 455 people died from drugs. That is a scandalously high figure. We are carrying out a huge amount of detailed work—at least, my officials are doing so—to make that figure too come down. As I said, a HEAT target on alcohol is also a priority for us. I look forward to working with Ross Finnie and his colleagues on that issue as well, as does my colleague Shona Robison, who is responsible for that policy area.

I thank Nigel Don for that question. I know that he takes a close interest in the topics in relation to Grampian. I am pleased to say that I will be speaking at the conference together with Shona Robison and Councillor Ronnie McColl of COSLA. I pay tribute to the work that COSLA has done jointly with the Government, in an extremely close partnership, to develop the strategies. However, the strategies are in place and it is now about delivery. That is the priority, and that will be the focus of the event. We will invite to the event those who will be responsible for delivery. I also wish to see at the event the health and justice spokespersons and committees, and I will shortly be writing to them to invite them to attend an event on 20 April that Annabel Goldie has described as a summit. [ Interruption. ] I say to Mr McLetchie that the invitations will be in the post. On that day, we will launch our new framework for local partnerships on alcohol and drugs. The event is plainly an important and serious one. The focus will be not on high, abstract thinking—something for which many members might believe that I am not ideally suited in any event—but on nuts-and-bolts delivery.

I think that Richard Baker is implying that drug treatment and testing orders are successful. If that is what he is saying, I agree. Despite having extensive criminal histories, 48 per cent of those who have completed drug treatment and testing orders have no further convictions within two years of the start of the order. Richard Baker is also correct to argue that the misuse of drink fuels a great deal of the crime that occurs. However, I think that even he will concede that no one in Scotland has given a clearer or stronger lead on the topic than the Cabinet Secretary for Justice. The provision of unprecedented resources to tackle the problem is hugely welcomed throughout the country. Of course, if anyone has any specific and detailed proposals on how any new measures could be made to work, we will always be ready to consider them.

I am very happy to agree with the member. On the ministerial tour that I had the pleasure of making, during which I made 10 presentations of the drugs strategy, the very point that Mary Scanlon has raised was made forcibly and repeatedly during the presentation that I gave in Inverness. It is very difficult for people outwith Inverness to access post-treatment services; I am sad to say that, in some parts of the north, they cannot even access a place where they can have talking therapy and meet others who have been through the same addiction experience. It would not cost a lot of money to tackle that problem. I share Mary Scanlon's analysis of the situation; indeed, our drugs strategy, which I advertise to members, makes it clear that we need to tackle  the needs of each person as a person. Mental health is, sadly, often a key element that requires to be treated alongside the addiction.

I am not familiar with the case that Jamie Stone has mentioned but, as we all recognise, all young people who have alcohol problems should receive the help that they need. Indeed, the health service, those who tackle addiction and those involved in the type of antisocial behaviour projects that might well be considered in tomorrow afternoon's debate are carrying out a lot of work on providing young people with alternatives that will occupy their time and lead them away from consuming alcohol. I certainly agree that the issue must be tackled, not least at school. In fact, a great deal of work is being carried out to ensure that proper messages about alcohol, drugs—including tobacco—and healthy eating are sent out at school.

One of the most chilling statistics that I have ever heard is that the abuse of alcohol and drugs costs the nation £5 billion a year. We cannot repeat that often enough; after all, if we do not remind ourselves of the scale of the problem, it might not receive the prominence or the attention that it deserves. However, I will make two positive comments. First, treatment for drug and alcohol addiction works. As is made clear in the United Kingdom guidelines for clinicians on the clinical management of drug misuse and dependence—or what is called the orange book—between a quarter and a third of all those who receive  treatment for drug addiction recover and become abstinent. That is the holy grail of our drugs strategy "The Road to Recovery: A New Approach to Tackling Scotland's Drugs Problem". Secondly, the other very good news is the somewhat counterintuitive evidence that for every pound spent in treatment to tackle drug addiction, £9.50 is saved to the public purse in lesser costs to the health service, our justice system and so on. Of course, the human cost saved—the cost of people recovering their lives from the grip and fog of addiction—is incalculable and, indeed, beyond price.

As Duncan McNeil knows, the current best estimates indicate that between 40,000 and 60,000 children may be affected by parental drug misuse that involves at least one parent with a drug misuse problem, and 65,000-plus children are affected by parental alcohol misuse. Members of all the parties that are represented in the chamber recognise that those children need our particular help and support. The drugs strategy recognises the huge amount of good work that is being done, of which I know Duncan McNeil is aware. For example, the Lloyds TSB Foundation for Scotland partnership drugs initiative alone supports 270 innovative projects. It is right to give credit to bodies that fund such good work. My colleague Adam Ingram is taking forward considerable work to help those young people. I agree with Duncan McNeil. The problem is one of the most serious problems that we all face, and I look forward to working with him and every other member in the chamber to address it. I undertake to do so with my colleagues.

I add my praise for Patrick Harvie's persistence in what we learned was a seven-year struggle to arrive at this day. I pay tribute to all the colleagues in his working group, and to others who had the courage to speak out, for their work over a long period, which brings us to this afternoon's debate. The debate has been extremely consensual. The support from all parties should be welcomed when we pass the legislation. The work of the Equal Opportunities Committee and the Justice Committee in scrutinising the bill has, rightly, been acknowledged. The Government, for its part, is keen that the provisions of the bill should come into force and that there should be an improvement in the way in which we deal with hate crimes in Scotland.  As Bill Aitken outlined, the Justice Committee explored a number of lines of inquiry during its consideration of the general principles of the bill. The committee opened up a number of areas of concern for thorough discussion. Those have been considered by various members during the debate. We are pleased that the committee has acknowledged that the bill does not present a threat to freedom of speech. The bill, in itself, does not create any new offences; it simply allows an existing offence that has been motivated by prejudice relating to disability, sexual orientation or transgender status to be tagged as such. It recognises that when the motivation for a crime has been prejudice against an element of the core identity of a victim or group of victims, that should be reflected in the sentence. The Justice Committee addressed concerns about the creation of a hierarchy of rights. As Richard Baker pointed out, we must remember that the bill is about not the identity of the victim, but the twisted motivation of the offender. That recognition leads us to conclude that the argument that there would be a hierarchy of rights among victims is wrong. It is not so much about the victims—although we are here to protect the victims in so far as the law can do that—as it is about the motivation of the assailants. Once one recognises that, concerns about hierarchies and so on can be put into proper perspective. The Justice Committee addressed the broader issue of the necessity of the legislation and came to the conclusion that statutory aggravations are the appropriate response to crimes that are motivated by hatred and prejudice based on the actual or presumed sexual orientation, transgender identity or disability of a victim. The need for the legislation was reflected clearly in the comments from mental health charity SAMH, which said that the bill "addresses the needs of the community, based on people's experience."—[ Official Report , Justice Committee , 13 January 2009; c 1505.] Many members alluded to the plight and experiences of those who suffer from ill health. I, too, have encountered that in my work as an MSP over the past decade. Like David McLetchie, I was particularly struck by Anne McLaughlin's contribution, in what I gather was her maiden speech.

Apparently, it was not her maiden speech. It was maiden to me. Putting aside that minor faux pas, I was about to say—before I misinformed myself—that Anne McLaughlin's speech was thoughtful and passionate. It was passionate because of her  obvious understanding of the issues. Like David McLetchie, I look forward to hearing more about her experience and her work before she came to this place. I enjoyed Linda Fabiani's remarks, too. She suggested that all the groups that will be afforded protection by this legislation are united by their vulnerability to attacks caused by prejudice. It is not that the people themselves are vulnerable or in any way weak or inferior, but that they are exposed to a form of prejudice to which the rest of us may not be so exposed. Linda Fabiani brought out that point well. I was asked to respond to other points and, as the Presiding Officer knows, I try not to disappoint members in that regard. What about protection for women? Many members have asked whether there should be an aggravation for assaults against females if those assaults are because of their gender. The issue is finely balanced. Liberal Democrat members in particular have raised it, and it was the subject of much debate in the Justice Committee. We can all agree that violence against women is a most serious issue. Rightly, it has been debated regularly in the Parliament. The Government is working to address the issue and will continue to do so with the assistance of all members of the Parliament. However, the conclusion that appears to have been reached by consensus is that considering the issue is not necessarily appropriate in respect of this bill. However, we may consider the issue again in due course. Gavin Brown talked about costs and suggested that the financial memorandum to the bill may be considered to be on the light side. I therefore read the memorandum closely and it appears to me that paragraphs 27 and 28, on the Scottish Prison Service, indicate that the likely additional customers in our jails are likely to be relatively few. Although one might say that the cost of retaining a prisoner in Scotland is £40,000, that cost does not apply where there is a relatively marginal change. That is set out in the financial memorandum, but if the Conservatives wish to pursue the issue, we are of course willing to discuss it with them. Figures from the United States and the London Metropolitan Police suggest that race hate crimes substantially outnumber crimes that are motivated by sexuality and disability. Whether that will prove to be the case here in Scotland remains to be seen. As Paul Martin pointed out, we do not yet have a clear steer on the numbers because there is as yet no aggravation. Patrick Harvie made that point too. The main assurance that I want to give to Parliament—although it will not be a blinding surprise—is that the bill requires that the aggravation is recorded throughout the criminal  justice process. Those records will enable us to monitor the use of the aggravations. Indeed, I noted that the financial memorandum provides even for the costs of changing the information technology in the prosecution system. The initial cost to record the information will be about £20,000 for the Crown Office and £5,000 for the police. The information will be recorded; it will inform future policy; and it will allow us to get a clear picture. That will be welcomed on all sides of the chamber. The evidence shows clearly that certain groups in Scotland regularly face crime based on prejudice. That is repellent, repugnant and wrong. Law in itself cannot tackle that; law is just words on a page. Nonetheless, this bill will give a clear signal to everyone in the criminal justice system, and to society as a whole, that such crime is not on and will not be tolerated. It will now be dealt with more seriously and consistently, and with the full will of every member of this Parliament.

I thank members for their contributions to today's proceedings. Like the entire passage of the bill, the debate has been conducted in a constructive and thoughtful tone, which does the institution of the Parliament some credit. The purpose of the bill is straightforward. In effect, it is to keep things as they have been for the past 20 years. It is not often that someone in the SNP argues passionately for the status quo, but in effect that is what we are doing this afternoon. The bill's purpose is to ensure that people who have been, as Paul Martin said, negligently exposed to asbestos have the right to compensation and access to justice. Many members thanked specific individuals. I, too, thank the Justice Committee and acknowledge the huge and constructive role that was played by a number of groups and individuals, notably Clydeside Action on Asbestos and Thompsons Solicitors. As Duncan McNeil said, we should thank a great many individuals in trade unions and the unions themselves. Without their work, we would not have the legislation that has been passed during the Parliament's existence to tackle injustice in relation to asbestos. I also thank my officials for the work that they have done and their painstaking attention to detail, particularly as detail has not been in short supply in the bill. In areas that are associated with Scotland's industrial history, notably shipbuilding and construction, people with pleural plaques are living alongside friends who worked with them and witnessing the terrible suffering of those who have contracted serious asbestos-related conditions including mesothelioma. That causes them terrible anxiety that they will suffer the same fate. The  Scottish Government believes that we have a clear moral obligation to address that. We should not turn our backs on those who contributed to our nation's wealth in the past. I turn to the main issues that were raised in the debate. First, I will respond to the issue that was raised by the Conservatives. In a democracy, there is nothing wrong with having such a dissenting voice, even if I profoundly disagree with what it said this afternoon. There are costs associated with doing the right thing. Members have seen the revised financial implications, which show that, while the costs may be greater than we anticipated initially, they are unlikely to be anywhere near the range of costs that the insurance industry presented. I will reply specifically to others' arguments about costs and say why I believe that they are wrong and why, in anticipating that there will be a huge surge in claims, the insurance industry's arguments are flawed. I echo the arguments of Mike Pringle, Robert Brown and many other members in other parties in that regard. First, our bill seeks simply to preserve the status quo. In the 20 years before the House of Lords ruling, when pleural plaques were deemed to be compensatable, there was no unmanageable flood of claims. Where is the flood? There has been no such flood. Why would one assume that there will suddenly be a huge flood of claims? Where is the rational basis for that proposition? Secondly, before the House of Lords judgment, public awareness of pleural plaques in key communities was already high because people such as Des McNulty, Duncan McNeil, Stuart McMillan and many others had publicised the issue and kept it going. Awareness is high because we have had legislation in the Parliament in a number of respects to tackle previous flaws regarding the lack of access to justice for people who suffer from asbestosis. With all that information constantly being presented by elected parliamentarians—and rightly so—awareness is high. How can the insurance industry argue, therefore, that after the passing of the bill—and as a result of my making this speech and our having this debate—awareness should suddenly be exponentially higher than it was before? What on earth is the rationality in that claim?

I agree entirely with the member's point, which is the third argument that I would adduce in support of my argument that the  costs are likely to continue as they were in the past and at a sustainable level. The Conservatives' argument seemed to be that legislation should not proceed unless we can have certainty about what the financial cost will be. If that were the test for legislation, we would not have much legislation, because it is simply not possible to predict with precision what the costs will be. In fact, the actuarial profession said that "it is not possible to derive a" perfect "estimate of the expected future cost". If perfection in future estimated costs were a sine qua non of legislation, there would not be any negligence legislation, any compensation for personal injury or any right of recourse to the courts. It seems to me that, wittingly or otherwise, the Conservatives have set up an impossibly high hurdle—a kind of 30ft fence that the high-jump team now has to jump over in passing any legislation. With respect, I point out to my Conservative colleagues that, two weeks ago—on the same day that Parliament debated action on mesothelioma day—an insurance company announced that it had made £759 million in pre-tax profits in a single year. I have nothing against profits, but that is pretty high. Equally, an ABI statement declared that the UK insurance industry contributed £9.7 billion in taxes in a single year. In that context, I hope that Bill Aitken agrees that our estimates of the bill's financial implications may not seem too daunting. This has been an excellent debate. The Parliament has shown what it is capable of doing. I am delighted and proud to have had the task, on behalf of the Scottish Government, to move that we pass the Damages (Asbestos-related Conditions) (Scotland) Bill and to defend and confirm the right of access to justice for those who have been negligently exposed to asbestos and have sustained injury as a result.

Will the member clarify whether the Conservatives have decided that they cannot support the bill because they think that the ultimate liability may be substantially in excess of the existing amount? If liability remains at the current levels—essentially, that is what we are assuming—would the Conservatives be willing to support the bill?

The Damages (Asbestos-related Conditions) (Scotland) Bill is short and its aim is simple—[ Interruption. ]

The Damages (Asbestos-related Conditions) (Scotland) Bill is short and its aim is simple: to defend a right that has been understood to exist for some 20 years. However, the associated issues are profound and complex. That fact was underscored by the work of the Justice Committee, and I pay tribute to all its members for their careful scrutiny. The committee reached the important conclusions that the bill's financial implications should be reassessed and that, as a matter of principle, the law of Scotland should allow redress for individuals whose bodies are scarred, albeit internally, after negligent exposure to asbestos. The Scottish Government agrees. As regards principles, we know that pleural plaques are a scarring of the membranes that surround the lungs. We are clear, too, that pleural plaques in themselves are generally not, and do not become, debilitating and that they do not give rise to physical pain. However, the Scottish Government's view is that pleural plaques cannot be dismissed as negligible; rather, they must be regarded as a material injury and actionable harm. That view is informed by the understanding that people with pleural plaques who have been heavily exposed to asbestos at work have a risk of developing a vicious and incurable cancer—mesothelioma—that is 1,000 times greater than the risk for the general population. I will repeat that: people with pleural plaques are 1,000 times more likely to develop mesothelioma, which leads to a quick and often painful death. A diagnosis of pleural plaques does not mean that a person will necessarily develop mesothelioma, but it does mean that the person knows that his body has been invaded and changed by asbestos. Knowing that, and knowing that asbestos is lodged in his system, he and his  family might suffer permanent anxiety, particularly if they live in a community with first-hand experience of the pain and suffering that is inflicted by asbestos. We must also remember that, as Lord Hope noted, a person with pleural plaques has already sustained an injury. It is both internal and painless, but it exists and is imprinted on the consciousness of those who are diagnosed. It might be rendered more vivid by the fact that it cannot be checked in the mirror every morning. Why is the injury there? In the cases to which the bill applies, it is there because, when the dangers of asbestos were well known and should have been guarded against, there was negligence. Some employers failed in their duty of care and put people in harm's way without proper protection. In effect, they played Russian roulette with their employees' health. The bill's opponents say that people who are affected should not be able to take legal action until they develop a condition with debilitating physical symptoms, but the Scottish Government believes that conditions such as pleural plaques are serious enough to constitute actionable harm. The bill is both an effective and proportionate way in which to ensure that that is the case and to deliver justice. We were assisted by a number of individuals and organisations to reassess the bill's financial implications as thoroughly as possible. It was particularly helpful to have input from the actuarial profession, and I thank Bill Aitken for suggesting that. We reflected on all the information that was available to us, and two weeks ago I wrote to the convener of the Justice Committee to provide the outcome. I am grateful that the material was immediately published for all to see. In the time available, I cannot go through every detail of what is a lengthy document, but I will pick out some key points. Taking on board new information, we conclude that, around the middle of the next decade, annual costs are likely to have risen to a peak of between £7 million and £19 million. While significant, that is hugely below the insurance industry's claim that annual costs will average between £76 million and £607 million over the next 20 years. Our original estimates were towards the bottom end of what we now believe to be the most likely range, which reflects two key changes. First, taking account of data that insurers recently made available, we make allowance for the possibility that the volume of past claims, which was our starting point, may be higher than previously believed. Secondly, taking account of doubts about the validity of estimating future trends in pleural plaques claims on the basis of projected trends in mesothelioma deaths, we identified an alternative approach based on published Health  and Safety Executive data in recent reports on benign pleural disease, which suggested a potentially higher rate of increase in future. We are confident that our estimated range is more credible than that provided by the insurers, whose estimates may have been inflated by several factors, including insufficient attention to the differences between the legal systems north and south of the border. I will say one more thing about the costs. I find it unacceptable that legal costs may account for nearly two thirds of the overall average total cost of £25,000 to settle a claim. That is a legacy of the way in which systems for contesting relatively low-value claims have developed. For the future, I hope that defenders' and pursuers' agents will consider whether a less adversarial approach might benefit. I hope that the reforms that flow from Lord Gill's review will improve matters. No decision has yet been communicated by the United Kingdom Government on the statement of funding policy, so I cannot provide any new information, but we are firm in our view that it would be inappropriate to invoke the statement of funding policy in relation to the bill. We have listened to all arguments and relevant people and bodies on matters of principle, drafting and finance. Whether they are friend or foe, we have reflected on what they have had to say. We have no quarrel with the insurance industry: we recognise its importance, we want it to thrive, and we appreciate that its opposition to the bill has been conducted, for the most part, constructively. However, I hope that the opposition ends when the bill is passed and that the insurers respect the will of the legislature of the Scottish people and compensate those who have been injured because of their clients' negligence. The bill restores access to justice for those who, through no fault of their own, were negligently exposed to asbestos and the risks that it brings and who have developed a scarring of the membrane around their lungs. The bill deserves the support of every member of Parliament. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Damages (Asbestos-related Conditions) (Scotland) Bill be passed.

I thank Derek Brownlee for clearly outlining his thinking on the purpose that he sought to achieve by lodging amendment 9. He has raised an important issue about post-legislative scrutiny and the opportunity to compare the actual costs of bills with the costs that were provided in financial memorandums. Mr Brownlee will not be surprised to hear that I have a great deal of sympathy with the aims that he seeks to achieve, given that I was deputy convener of the Finance Committee during the previous parliamentary session. Issues of post-legislative scrutiny of finance such as Derek Brownlee raises are, of course, familiar. His proposal would help all members to achieve a better understanding of the costs of legislation, which is an entirely reasonable and sensible aim. The Government accepts that there should be routine examination and reporting of the costs that arise as a result of legislation such as the bill that we are considering today, and we undertake to do that for this and other new legislation. However, there are opportunities for a simpler and more flexible approach, which would achieve the same laudable objective as the approach that  is envisaged in amendment 9. Members of different parties—Mr Baker and Mr Brown—set out technical objections to the way in which Mr Brownlee seeks to achieve his objective. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth has indicated that he wants to meet Mr Brownlee to discuss and agree the appropriate mechanism to handle the issue. He will report back to the Parliament on the steps that will be taken.

To set the context for the individual amendments that the Government has lodged, I will briefly recap what I said during the stage 2 proceedings. I made clear the Government's willingness to engage with stakeholders to ensure that the bill provides a clear and effective means of securing justice for people who have been negligently exposed to asbestos and internally scarred as a result, physically and often mentally and emotionally. As will be recalled, after careful deliberation I reluctantly concluded at stage 2 that I could not support the amendments that Bill Butler had lodged, even though I wholly appreciated the intention behind them and admired the clarity with which they were explained. However, I reassured the committee that my intention ahead of stage 3 was for officials to seek further early discussion with stakeholders with a view to reaching a mutual understanding and agreement with those who share the Parliament's objectives. I am pleased to inform members that we have listened to stakeholders, in particular, the Law Society of Scotland and Thompsons Solicitors, which have worked with us on the further development of our thinking on the detail of the bill. We have now reached broad agreement. Amendments 1 to 8 fulfil the undertaking that I gave the committee to introduce amendments at stage 3 that meet the Scottish Government's concerns and the concerns that Bill Butler and Robert Brown articulated at stage 2.  I now turn to specifics. Amendment 1 addresses two concerns that stakeholders had about section 1. They were unsure that section 1(2) would effectively ensure that pleural plaques would continue to be actionable in damages. There was criticism that the wording of section 1(2) could be read as creating a strict liability, which was not the policy intention. Amendment 1 introduces into the bill the concept of "actionable harm" to represent the existing legal test that must be satisfied for pleural plaques to be actionable under the law of delict. If we read sections 1(1) and 1(2) together, the bill, by providing that plaques are "a personal injury which is not negligible", provides that plaques constitute "actionable harm" in law. By "actionable harm" in this context, I do not mean anything different from the phrase "material damage" as used by Lord Rodger of Earlsferry in the Johnston case. Amendment 2 is consequential on amendment 1. It replaces the wording in section 1(3), "are not a personal injury or are negligible", with wording that refers to "actionable harm", on the basis that "actionable harm" covers both those concepts. Amendment 3 changes the language of section 1(4) to remove any possible inference that the bill deals only with causation issues. As amended, subsection (4) makes it clear that all other rules of law, both common law and statutory law, regarding the circumstances in which someone can be held liable to pay damages in respect of personal injury continue to apply in pleural plaques cases. Amendments 4 and 5 amend section 2(1) to make it clear, in line with policy intent, that section 2 deals only with asymptomatic pleural thickening and asymptomatic asbestosis. That represents a departure from the bill as introduced, in which section 2, although it primarily deals with asymptomatic asbestos-related conditions, also encompasses—it could be argued—symptomatic versions of those conditions. Symptomatic pleural thickening and symptomatic asbestosis clearly remain actionable under the law of damages, so it is neither necessary nor desirable to include them in the bill. Amendments 6 and 7 make changes to section 2 so that the provisions in respect of asymptomatic asbestos-related conditions in that section are consistent with sections 1(2) to 1(4), as amended. Amendment 8 is consequential on the amendments made to section 2(1). It revises section 3(1)(a)(ii) so that it refers simply to conditions to which section 2 applies—those being asymptomatic asbestosis and asymptomatic  pleural thickening. I hope that members have followed all that. Having listened to all our stakeholders, I believe that the amendments that have been lodged both satisfy their concerns and continue to achieve the policy intention of ensuring that the House of Lords judgment on pleural plaques does not have effect in Scotland, so that people who have been negligently exposed to asbestos who go on to develop an asbestos-related condition may pursue an action for damages. I move amendment 1.

I thank Bill Butler, Robert Brown and the other Justice Committee members for the way in which these somewhat technical matters were dealt with. We all wanted to pursue a shared objective. With the assistance of the Law Society and Thompsons, we will do that when the amendments have been agreed to. For that, I thank everyone who was involved.  Amendment 1 agreed to.  Amendments 2 and 3 moved—[Fergus Ewing]—and agreed to.

I thank Bill Kidd for lodging the motion on action mesothelioma day, and I welcome the compassionate and consensual tone and manner of the debate. The Scottish Government is very pleased to be able to support the motion. We have already heard that mesothelioma is a terrible disease. It is a rare form of cancer that attacks the inner lining of internal organs. As Bill Aitken said, it is almost always caused by exposure to asbestos. It takes, on average, 20 years to develop. However, as many members have said, sufferers often die within just a few months of diagnosis. There is no known cure for the disease, and victims spend their final months in considerable pain and suffering. It goes without saying that, particularly when there is no cure, prevention is the best policy. I am pleased that much has been done to control the risks from asbestos. The use, supply and importation of asbestos and asbestos products have been banned, with only a few exceptions. Work with asbestos generally requires a licence and the use of strict control measures, including personal protective equipment such as respirators. As has been mentioned, the Health and Safety Executive has been running a campaign called "Asbestos—the hidden killer" to raise awareness among tradesmen and tradeswomen that they are at risk from exposure to asbestos. Launching that campaign at Hampden Park last October, Jim Murphy, the Secretary of State for Scotland, said: "The occupational safety of workers throughout Scotland is a major priority for us all". I am happy to endorse that view. However, as we heard from members throughout the chamber this evening, this  devastating problem will not go away quickly. The long latency period means that, sadly, despite far better controls on exposure to asbestos and the elimination of asbestos imports, the rate is still rising. Generally, only about one in 10 of those who are diagnosed with mesothelioma will be alive three years later and only one in 20 will be alive five years later. The latest information from the Health and Safety Executive shows that the total number of mesothelioma deaths in Great Britain in 2006 was 2,056. I think that Bill Butler alluded to that. The latest projections suggest that the annual number of mesothelioma deaths in Great Britain will peak somewhere between current levels and 2,450 deaths a year some time before 2015. That is a shocking and appalling toll of death in the UK. No useful test is currently available that would detect people who have been exposed to asbestos and are likely to get mesothelioma. Unfortunately, mesothelioma can be difficult if not impossible to treat. Nearly all treatment is aimed at controlling the disease for as long as possible and keeping symptoms under control. However, as Bill Kidd mentioned, doctors and researchers are working all the time to improve treatment. Obviously, we all encourage clinicians to ensure that as many patients as possible are included in the relevant clinical trials. There are debates about drugs such as Alimta. Arrangements are in place in Scotland for the assessment of new drugs and treatments through bodies such as the Scottish Medicines Consortium and NHS Quality Improvement Scotland. Those bodies operate independently of the Scottish Government and are widely acknowledged to be robust. I understand that NHS QIS considered the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence appraisal and has advised that its positive recommendation for Alimta is as valid for Scotland as it is for England and Wales. As many members said, a great deal of good work has been done to ensure that there are appropriate rights to compensation. The fact that that work has not been easy is exemplified by the fact that it has taken so many years for so many of the problems to be solved. I pay tribute to the work of members throughout the Parliament, notably Bill Butler, who this evening made a typically eloquent and impassioned plea for justice to be done for all those who suffer from diseases that are caused by exposure to asbestos. The good work to ensure that there are appropriate rights to compensation has been supported in the Parliament in a great number of respects. The amendments to the Damages (Scotland) Act 1976 enabled the families of sufferers to make claims, thereby removing the dilemma that existed hitherto. Previously, the sufferer himself, while coping with the horrific  symptoms of the disease in his last days, also had to cope with consulting a lawyer and all the stress and difficulty that that involved for him and his family. That was dealt with. In addition, action was taken in the legal system. The Coulsfield rules were brought in to ensure that claims were dealt with more swiftly than in normal cases. Robert Brown mentioned in his less impassioned but nonetheless equally effective presentation of the arguments—it was, if I may say so, rather like the closing submission in a civil proof—some of the action that has rightly been taken across the Parliaments and countries of the UK. There has been co-operation between the Parliaments. For example, the Scottish Parliament used a legislative consent motion to allow the Compensation Bill at Westminster to tackle the problems that arose from the case of Barker v Corus. We were happy to co-operate with Westminster on that, and we remain happy to co-operate with Westminster in tackling the issues surrounding exposure to asbestos. I was pleased that many members indicated their continuing support for the Damages (Asbestos-related Conditions) (Scotland) Bill, which we hope to pass shortly. As a Scot, I hope that everyone in the UK who suffers from pleural plaques as a result of exposure to asbestos through their employers' negligence will have the opportunity to obtain compensation. We will seek to ensure that the bill is passed in Scotland, but we very much hope that the Parliament in Westminster will also take the same or a similar approach in the interests of people throughout the UK who suffer from ill health as a result of the accident of the work that they devoted their lives to. That is the position of the Government.  I acknowledge the important contribution that has been made by campaigning groups such as Clydeside Action on Asbestos and Asbestos Action (Tayside). Those groups have been mentioned by many members. Bill Aitken said that one of them became a nuisance. I am sure that, if it was a nuisance, it was a pleasant form of nuisance—not unlike Bill Aitken himself, on occasion. It is the persistence, commitment and dogged determination of those groups that has brought this issue to the Scottish Parliament and Westminster time and again, year in, year out. I congratulate them. Although there are occasions on which the Scottish Government and the Scottish Parliament do not see eye to eye, this is not one of them. On this issue, we speak with one voice.  Meeting closed at 17:42.

The formal legal remedies that are available to a public authority when it is pursuing a debt are diligence and bankruptcy. The diligences that can be used are inhibition, arrestment, earnings arrestment or attachment.

I think that Hugh O'Donnell's description is accurate. The law of prescription of debt for ordinary debts between individual private contracting parties covers five years, but there is not the same period for the recovery process for Government debts in all their forms. Local authorities can apply for a summary warrant to collect outstanding council tax and community charge moneys up to 20 years after the amount becomes due, and they then have up to a further 20 years to collect it. Anyone can see that there are obvious difficulties in proving what occurred after such a long period—a person does not need to have had  any involvement with the legal profession to see those difficulties. It is perfectly legitimate that Citizens Advice Scotland has indicated that it seeks a member's bill on the issue, and I would be happy to explore further with Hugh O'Donnell, other members and CAS the complex issues involved.

The Justice Committee is to be congratulated on the solid piece of work that it has produced. We have responded to it in a positive way, and this afternoon we have had—almost exclusively—an extremely positive and useful debate. It occurred to me that, until Jackson Carlaw got to his feet, we were about as close to a love-in as we are ever likely to get in a Scottish Parliament debate on justice issues. I do not think I can take up Mr Carlaw's suggestion of a future as a car salesman, not least because if I were ever asked what my previous job was, it might undermine any potential transactions. We need to acknowledge that everyone has the right to feel safe in their community. Promoting community safety and tackling antisocial behaviour are and always will be top priorities for the Government. When the cabinet secretary opened the debate, he defined the approach that we are taking to community policing and outlined the good and solid progress that we are making towards fulfilling our manifesto pledge of 1,000  additional police. He outlined the support of £32.8 million that we have provided to the police to fund the additional costs in the pension commutation rates. He also set a tableau that, although it did not use the word equivalents—not a word that rolls readily off my tongue, I say to Mr Carlaw—made a solid statement of the success that we see thanks to the good efforts of all those who are involved in our police service and in law enforcement. We have heard a great deal about the role of the police in making communities safer. I will touch on the work of some others who help to make our communities safer and who, although they are not police officers themselves, play a role in community policing. For example, I recently met representatives of the Perth street pastors. They are volunteers from churches who offer help to late-night city-centre revellers and are on hand to provide advice, solace, counselling and blankets; they provide flip-flops to ladies who may have lost their normal foot apparel and arrange taxis for those who are too inebriated to find their way home. That work is humorous in one sense, but it is serious because it helps the police. The street pastors work in tandem with the police and, before they go out of an evening, communicate with them to say where they are going. They also report to the police any incidents that occur or are likely to occur. People should also consider applying to serve as special constables. I welcome the proposal that Mike Russell made recently when he was Minister for Environment that gamekeepers and other estate workers should be encouraged to join the special constabulary. As I know from my constituency, they often have unique and unparalleled local knowledge of wildlife and, along with guides and rangers from our national parks, are ideal candidates to be special constables.

Those are exciting new developments that, I can see, are welcome in parts of the chamber. They are only two examples. I also refer to the work that is done by the likes of community wardens—whom John Lamont mentioned when he described his work, on the back shift I presume, in Kelso—neighbourhood watch, the safer streets campaign, Crimestoppers, community safety partnerships, cashback for communities, YouthLink Scotland and firefighters, who are now involved in work to divert youngsters from the temptations of a life of addiction or crime. They and many other volunteers are all involved in making our communities safer and all assist community policing. In addition, mainstream police work is helping directly to make our communities safer places.  That is self-evident. As was highlighted in The Herald this Monday, the persistent offender programme identifies persistent offenders and encourages them to enter programmes to tackle addiction problems while warning them that, if they do not, their already lengthy community sentences might involve periods of imprisonment. Detective Chief Superintendent John Carnochan and the violence reduction unit get in among gangs and peel off the ringleaders. That is excellent and, perhaps, pioneering work; it all helps to make our communities safer places. I will mention some of the comments that were made in the debate. There was consensus that it is not necessarily possible, sensible or useful to define community policing. Many concerns were expressed about abstraction—Bill Aitken, Paul Martin and Michael Matheson mentioned that. I noticed, in paragraph 155 of the report, that Chief Constable Stephen House specifically addressed that and talked about a red-circling approach. As many members said, community police officers may be the first officers to be withdrawn to go on patrol and for emergency response work, because we must ensure that we have the response capability to tackle emergencies. Under that red-circling approach, they should at least patrol in the areas in which they are employed as community police officers. There is much to be said for that approach. I know that all members explicitly said that those are operational policing matters. None of us would want to and none of us thinks that it is correct to micromanage chief constables in deploying officers. I know from my meetings with Northern Constabulary that it is pleased with the impact of the summary justice reforms on police time. John Lamont mentioned that issue. Northern Constabulary is already seeing the benefits of police officers spending less time hanging around and waiting in courts, probably not to be called as witnesses by people who are what Robert Brown and I were in our previous lives. Clients can decide, perhaps advisedly, to plead guilty at the last moment and everybody in the waiting room will disperse, having wasted a day, if not longer than that. The summary justice reforms are coming through and are tackling the police time problem that members have identified. Robert Brown referred to visiting Tulliallan. I was proud to make a speech at the passing-out parade there. I admit that that is one of the few speeches that I get to make from a platform—that added a certain piquancy to the occasion. Like Robert Brown, I was proud to see the calibre of the recruits who had undergone the excellent training that is given there, and was impressed to learn on that day that should Tulliallan fulfil its schedule, 1,000 extra recruits will be put through training than were put through in the previous year. That in  itself is surely a marvellous achievement. I did not get any complaints from any of the trainers there about a lack of capacity; rather, the message that I got was, "We are up for this. We think that the policing policy is going in the right direction. We're doing a good job and we'll carry on as before."

I commend the principles of being accessible, present, visible, communicating, consulting and supporting community activities in community policing engagement. Those involved in such policing should be able to play the role that we all wish to see them play in our communities, throughout Scotland.

The First Minister and the Government have made it clear that the Act of Settlement is discriminatory and that it should be repealed. On 26 March 2008, the First Minister wrote to the Secretary of State for Justice, Jack Straw, to make clear the Government's support for its repeal. The Parliament's unanimous support in 1999 for a motion on the repeal of the Act of Settlement makes it clear that the issue cuts across political boundaries.

I well remember listening to a slightly younger Mike Russell in 1999, when he spoke to and moved motion S1M-117, which stated: "That the Parliament believes that the discrimination contained in the Act of Settlement has no place in our modern society, expresses its wish that those discriminatory aspects of the Act be repealed, and affirms its view that Scottish society must not disbar participation in any aspect of our national life on the grounds of religion." I cannot improve on the words of Michael Russell.

I have long believed that one should use sparingly the imputation that any particular form of human conduct is evil, but I would say that human trafficking is truly evil. I am grateful to Murdo Fraser for giving us the opportunity to debate the matter, and I commend him for his informative and measured speech. The Scottish Government is wholly committed to working with others—principally the UK Government but also many other stakeholders—to ensure that this vile trade is eradicated in Scotland. Jamie Hepburn was right to say that human trafficking is really a form of slavery and servitude and to mention those who campaigned to abolish slavery. Indeed, this is an appropriate time to debate the issue given that we are approaching the third anniversary of the ratification of the Palermo protocol. That protocol paved the way for the Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings, which the UK Government ratified on 17 December last year. The Scottish Government worked closely with the UK Government to ensure that Scottish arrangements were in place to enable ratification. Given that the convention comes into effect three months after ratification, the whole of the UK will be bound by its terms from 1 April. That also illustrates the appropriateness of the timing of this debate—between now and 1 April, we will continue to work closely with our partners in Scotland and elsewhere to ensure that arrangements are in place and work well in a Scottish context. We welcome the success of operation pentameter, which was mentioned by a number of members, particularly Richard Baker. The resulting improvements in intelligence and close partnership working have enabled more trafficked people, who might otherwise have remained unidentified, to be rescued from this despicable trade. During the second nationwide, police-led anti-trafficking operation in Scotland, 56 premises were visited, 15 adult victims were recovered and cash was seized. As Hugh O'Donnell pointed out, the victims of this vile trade are in a state of fear that is probably unimaginable to those of us who, happily, have never been in such a position. They are terrified of  saying anything to anyone, and I suspect that only 15 victims were recovered because a larger number decided to make themselves scarce. That fear factor must be borne in mind when we try to tackle the issue. Christina McKelvie rightly highlighted the TARA project, which I understand is receiving support from Glasgow City Council and top-up funding from the Scottish Government. Members also mentioned the way in which the criminal law deals with the matter. The Scottish Government is open to suggestions from all sides as, after all, there is really no place for a partisan approach to the issue. In response to Richard Baker, who highlighted one approach that the UK Government is taking, I therefore make it clear that our minds are open and that we are willing to consider any representation that he might care to make and, if he so wishes, to meet him. I point out to Hugh O'Donnell that the Sexual Offences (Scotland) Bill will create a statutory offence of sexual coercion, which will enable police and prosecutors to target traffickers or pimps who knowingly force someone to engage in sexual activity. Moreover, the bill makes it clear that sex is unlawful when the victim agrees or submits to sex because of violence, threats of violence or intimidation. Those two proposed crimes will cover many if not all situations but, as I say, we are open to suggestions from other members. As many members have pointed out, there are links between trafficking and other forms of organised crime. Trafficking is no respecter of national frontiers, and Christina McKelvie was right to emphasise that action can be effective only if it is undertaken internationally with countries working together. That is why the Scottish Government is represented on the UK interdepartmental ministerial group on human trafficking and why the "UK Action Plan on Tackling Human Trafficking", which provides a framework and strategies for moving forward, is published by both the Scottish Government and the Home Office. That framework is flexible. Indeed, the updated version, which was co-signed last June by Jacqui Smith and Kenny MacAskill, takes the UK approach beyond what is required by the convention. For example, victims of trafficking have a 45-day period of reflection and recovery rather than the 30 days recommended in the convention and they are granted residence permits of one year rather than six months. Margo MacDonald asked whether more should be done to prevent trafficked people from entering the UK. She hit on a key issue, which is dealt with at point 12 on page 40 of the action plan. Our  efforts are increasing—additional staff are being trained at immigration entry points, for example—but, sadly, we recognise that, no matter how robust our efforts are, some people will get through. We must acknowledge and deal with that problem. The UK is primarily a destination country for human trafficking, but the work that is done by organisations that conduct their own investigations and raise awareness, such as the International Justice Mission, is invaluable. Organisations such as the Cupar justice and peace group also make a substantial contribution. The Scottish Government has contributed to Tearfund, which was designed to protect children and young people in Malawi from abuse. It helps them to access their rights, particularly those who live or beg on the streets. Funding of £208,000 has been provided to Tearfund; a supplement was provided recently.  It is clear from the joint Scottish Government and UK Government action plan that the international dimension to human trafficking has always been and remains firmly on the agenda. The nature of the crime is such that no one country acting on its own can be expected to succeed entirely in tackling it. The same applies at a domestic level—we want to work with, and are working with, all relevant agencies at a domestic level to eradicate the evil trade of trafficking. The debate has been extremely useful and timely. I hope and expect that we will continue to work together to tackle human trafficking, which is the most evil of trades that we know.  Meeting closed at 17:47.

The national casework division at the Crown Office and the police work in partnership to investigate and prosecute high-value complex fraud. That is working. For example, a recent case resulted in a bank manager pleading guilty to a £21.3 million fraud from his bank. He was sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment. The Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland is making good progress in working up detailed proposals to address the recommendations in Her Majesty's inspectorate of constabulary report on serious fraud. Scottish Government officials are working closely with ACPOS and we look forward to receiving its proposals shortly.

Whether there should be an investigation in Scotland into the affairs of Bernard Madoff is entirely a matter for the police and the Crown Office, not—as Mr McLetchie is well aware—for Scottish ministers. However, if the Royal Bank of Scotland or any other company were to make a complaint to the police that they had been the subject of fraud by Mr Madoff, it would be investigated by the police. Mr McLetchie asserts once again that there has been some element of delay by the Scottish Government in dealing with the recommendations that the Tomkins report contains. That is not so. There has been no delay—the assertions by the Conservatives are entirely wrong and misplaced—and I am grateful for the opportunity to point that out once again to Mr McLetchie.

The Government supports the establishment of the campus at Gartcosh, which will enable us to bring together under one roof people who are all working towards the same objective—not least those in the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency. To be fair, there is unanimity on the issue—at least in relation to aims—across all parties. My understanding is that the work towards establishing Gartcosh is in train, and no notice of any expected delay has come to my attention. If Mr Baker wishes to write to me, I would be happy to examine in more detail the specific issue that he has raised today.

Neither the current nor the previous Administration has considered it appropriate to collect that data. However, we believe that breaches of residency and contact orders are a factor in only a minority of cases. We appreciate that such situations can be frustrating and upsetting for those who are affected. Wherever possible, conflicts should be resolved in a consensual and collaborative fashion, since the paramount consideration in such cases must always be the welfare of the child.

I accept entirely the excellent role that is played by family mediation services. I know that the member, along with other members, takes a particular interest in the matter.  Before I was elected, I dealt with matters that related to custody and access—now known as residency and contact—as a solicitor. My impression was that the worst place to resolve such issues was on the floor of a sheriff court at a proof. The best place was at mediation, and the best approach was through conciliation and collaboration. I think that that broad approach is supported by all parties in the Parliament, and I am grateful to Margaret Mitchell for giving me an opportunity to clarify that again.

I am grateful to Christina McKelvie for the promotion, although I am not sure that it is entirely accurate. We are doing a number of things. We are supporting the work of family mediation and the development of collaborative law for use in family dispute resolution, where attempts are made to sort matters out without the involvement of solicitors. We are wholly devoted to continuing that good work throughout Scotland. I am grateful to the member for raising the issue. The Scottish Government is taking the entirely correct approach to the matter. As members know, difficult issues arise—particularly where there is domestic abuse or when the parties live far apart—in the practical arrangements for ensuring that the children continue to see both parents wherever possible.

There are 37 contact centres in Scotland, 30 of which are managed by Relationships Scotland. I am aware of the good work that is done at contact centres, which employ the methods of mediation and collaboration to try to sort matters out with both parents by agreement. We value the work that they do. On the funding issue, as the member knows, we are removing ring fencing from local government budgets to enable councils to allocate resources according to local priorities. We believe that that new, productive relationship with local government will deliver better value and a better deal for Scotland's children, young people and families.

The proceeds of crime are reinvested in local communities through the cashback for communities programme. So far, we have committed to invest £11 million in a range of positive activities for young people throughout Scotland in sport, arts and community projects.

Yes. The member highlights one of many examples of the good work that is being done through the cashback scheme. I know the Biggar area to some extent, although not as well as the member, and I praise the work of the Biggar youth project, which has successfully provided activities for young people for 13 years. There is broad support for the policy, which takes moneys that are confiscated from drug dealers and gangsters and uses them to the benefit of youngsters—the money is used to provide more choices and chances for children throughout Scotland. Again, I believe that all parties in the Parliament support the policy.

No, and no. If, for example, a £30 million drugs haul was made off the coast of Mallaig in my constituency, it would be overegging the cake, even for me or the member, to argue that every single penny of that money should be invested in Mallaig—or perhaps, to stretch the point, Mallaig, Arisaig and Morar. The money has to be distributed fairly throughout Scotland, which is what we have sought to do. However, I am aware that we have not reached certain parts of the country. As a result, we welcome members' representations about various projects in their areas, because we want to be the Government that reaches parts that other Governments do not reach.

I might be wrong—if I am, the member will no doubt let me know—but my understanding is that we use all the money that is recouped from crimes committed in Scotland. There has been no dispute over that issue and, if Dr Simpson has any particular concerns, I would be very pleased to receive the details in writing. As all members know, it is not our habit to seek unnecessary disputes with or to have unnecessary grudges or grievances against our Whitehall colleagues. There is really no tension or conflict over this matter and I can assume only that, like Dr Simpson and the Conservatives, those who work in Whitehall fully support Scottish Government policy.

This is an operational matter for the Scottish Prison Service. HMP Bishopbriggs has been the working title for the new prison since 2006, but the SPS will give proper consideration to representations about the name of the new prison in Bishopbriggs before it decides its official title prior to opening around 2012.

As Ross Finnie well knows from his eight years as a member of the Cabinet, the SPS—not ministers—decides what prisons are called. Its policy is to call prisons after their locations. There is a logic behind that approach; for a start, it makes it easier to know where the prisons are. I also note that Ross Finnie has no objection to HMP Greenock being called HMP Greenock, HMP Addiewell being called HMP Addiewell or HMP Kilmarnock being called HMP Kilmarnock. If confusion has arisen in the cynical and querulous public—that is not how I would describe them, given that we seek their votes from time to time—I would not be arguing that the pressing issue is the name of the prison. Instead, I would be ensuring that we had enough prisons in which to house our prisoners. [ Interruption. ]

Despite that display of polemics, it remains the fact that Mr Whitton's party, when it was in power, did not intervene in decisions that were the responsibility the SPS. The Labour Party was happy for the policy that I have described to be applied, but the policy that it was happy to apply when it was in government is apparently now inconvenient. Although Mr Whitton is obviously far better acquainted with the residents and denizens of Bishopbriggs than I am, it surprises me that the most pressing issue of the day in these times of economic recession and crisis is the name that is to be given to a new prison. I assure Mr Whitton that we are investing record amounts in Scotland's prison estate: £120 million  a year. Under this Government there are new prisons and crime is at record low levels—the previous Executive should envy that record rather than decry it.

With your permission, Presiding Officer, I would like to raise a point of order. Last week, at First Minister's question time, the issue of Government funding of the Scottish Inter Faith Council was raised, with the First Minister giving an assurance that the matter was resolved satisfactorily. For the avoidance of any confusion, I would like briefly to outline the sequence of events. After being made aware of concerns regarding the Scottish Inter Faith Council's budget, I intervened by contacting the council on 20 December, giving assurances that its funding from the Scottish Government would continue. A public statement was issued to that effect. That assurance was acknowledged on 6 January—Tuesday of last week—by Alan Dixon, the convener of the SIFC's executive committee, in an e-mail to me in which he expressed his appreciation for my intervention on the funding issue and for my "assurance that this will continue". As with all matters involving grant funding, that assurance required subsequently to be set down in writing. It was on the basis of my formally acknowledged intervention that, last Thursday, the First Minister gave the assurances that he did to the Parliament. On the basis of the continued funding from the Scottish Government—for the rest of this financial year and the following two years—the SIFC has assured me personally that all staff posts in the organisation are secure. I know that all members will continue to support the good work that the Scottish Inter Faith Council does. I hope that I have provided the confirmation that members may feel that they need.

I begin by congratulating Lewis Macdonald on bringing the matter to the Parliament for debate. It is a good thing that he has done so, because it is right that we debate hotly disputed, controversial issues that affect people's lives. I also commend members from all parties for speaking. There are clearly strong feelings on the issue. Rightly, all members—particularly members from the north-east—have expressed, on behalf of their constituents, their vehement views in defending their constituents' interests. The matter goes beyond the interests of the north-east. Mary Scanlon alluded to a meeting, at which I was present, that took place with senior officers of Northern Constabulary. The Highlands and Islands are also directly affected. Mr Purvis and Lord Foulkes mentioned the national aspects. Later, I will turn to some of the comments that members have made, but first let me set out, by way of general background, the facts in relation to the SPSA. It is important to set them out clearly for the record, because they have brought us to where we are today. The Scottish Police Services Authority was established on 1 April 2007, following cross-party support in this Parliament. The purpose of the SPSA is to deliver more effective police support  services, including forensic science services, in an efficient way. The first sentence of Nanette Milne's speech and her carefully couched language accurately summed up that objective. The SPSA inherited forensic science laboratories in Aberdeen, Dundee, Edinburgh and Glasgow, which have been developed and adjusted over a long period and are, to varying degrees, no longer fit for purpose.

I do not think that anyone is suggesting that the SPSA plans to diminish the level of service, so I agree with that as a general proposition. It is clear to everyone that urgent investment is required. We are committed to ensuring that the SPSA provides the best possible service to all eight Scottish police forces, which is why the taxpayer, through the Scottish Government, is funding new forensic facilities as part of the Gartcosh crime campus and why we approved the SPSA's proposal to build a new facility in Dundee. As Richard Baker or Lewis Macdonald said, documents have been submitted by the fingerprint unit and the forensic laboratory. I have had the opportunity to read them, albeit relatively briefly. All welcome the fact that Dundee is to be upgraded—not least the police, who will reclaim part of their offices, which they need. So far as I have been able to judge, that is not in dispute. Investment is required, which the taxpayer is providing, and I believe that all parties support it. The new units will provide the SPSA with the tools that it needs to keep up with the demand for expert scientific analysis of forensic evidence. That is a good thing as it will, to use Mike Rumbles's phrase, level up services. It would be foolish of any Government, when creating two excellent new facilities, to fail to consider the national picture, therefore such consideration is being attempted. All members have expressed the view, and I concur, that it is important to concentrate on the outcomes for the police service in Scotland and for the public in identifying and securing the conviction of criminals. The SPSA has a statutory remit that was set out, I believe, by us all in the previous session of Parliament. Let me emphasise that no decision has been made to close the Aberdeen laboratory. It is essential to clarify that. Members who attended the meeting with the Cabinet Secretary for Justice on Tuesday are aware that he made that clear statement. Equally, the SPSA clearly states in "Delivering Forensic Services to North and North  East Scotland" that it has no plans to move its scene of crime staff, who are embedded within forces and are under the direction of investigating officers. I think that that is also accepted and understood.

I fully understand the view that Lewis Macdonald expresses. He is perhaps speaking on behalf of all the members who have made similar points. The SPSA understands that the process of engagement and consultation has been regarded as flawed and defective. When any one body or person is being attacked by a group of people, it is reasonable for someone to say a word in defence, otherwise the process becomes somewhat invidious. I have a list of 20 or 30 engagements and consultations. For example, I know that meetings have taken place with MSPs, chief constables and police boards. I could read them all out. There has been an attempt at consultation. I think that Brian Adam—

I was just about to come to the member, but I am happy to give way.

I am willing to go on for longer, if there is time, Presiding Officer. I do not know whether that is possible within parliamentary procedures. There are many interested people in the public gallery who would perhaps like to hear a little more.

I am grateful. I was almost going to move a motion myself, which would not have been very parliamentary. The paper is not a consultation paper; it is a question and answer paper. To characterise it as a consultation paper is perfectly understandable, but it is not a consultation paper. It clearly states that comments are being sought, and I am delighted that we have comments. Some members, such as Mr Don, mentioned specific aspects of the document, which is good. There is no time to go into all the submissions, but they plainly address every one of the 10 questions in great detail. Mr Purvis will be pleased to hear that we in the Scottish Government thoroughly endorse and support that process of rational analysis—it is the way in which decisions should be taken. Once the consultation is completed, the SPSA, as the duly established agency—it was established by us all—will have to consider how to proceed. The cabinet secretary asked for stock to be taken and for a review to be carried out of the further work that is required to address the perceptions and fears that were raised at the meeting on Tuesday, today and elsewhere. To address points that Mr Macdonald and other members made, I say that I understand that there will be meetings with Unison and many others in the remaining part of this month. I fully welcome and endorse that, as it is essential that the workforce representatives are fully and properly consulted. Once the SPSA board has finished its consultation, which is not closed and is on-going, it will be its legal responsibility to present proposals to the cabinet secretary. Various members have asked whether the proposals will include one option or more than one option. Plainly, the SPSA will read carefully the speeches that have been made in the debate.

I do not have much time, Lord Foulkes, so I am afraid that I will not.

I am not taking an intervention, so sit down. The documents need to be considered seriously. I understand that the SPSA may not yet have received them all. Plainly, it must study them extremely seriously, and I am fully confident that that is exactly what it will do.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I will return to the relevant parts of the debate. The matter is extremely serious.

I really must move to a conclusion, as time has already been extended. The cabinet secretary will receive recommendations from the SPSA board in due course. That is the process, which I think follows of necessity from the fact that we set up an agency. The Parliament set the process; that is how the process operates. However, the SPSA proposes and the Scottish Government disposes. That, too, is the process. I accept fully that, as Nicol Stephen said—he speaks from personal knowledge—the buck stops with us. That is the nature of the job. When the cabinet secretary takes his decision, I am sure that he will accept the responsibility that falls with it.  I am extremely grateful to all members who made relevant contributions to the debate, and I thank them. I also thank those who have visited us from Aberdeen—they have come a long way to listen to this debate. I assure them that this matter is being treated with the utmost seriousness by the Scottish Government, as indicated by the cabinet secretary's requirement that stock be taken of the way in which the consultation process has been handled to date. We will ensure that their views are taken into account fully before any final decision is taken.  Meeting closed at 18:01.

The debate has been about offender management. It germinated in the work of the McLeish commission, which set out a clear vision and a stark choice in relation to how we as parliamentarians who belong to different parties should approach the future. It was about the Scotland that we would like to exist. Some of us should perhaps lift our eyes to the horizon a bit more, because the Scotland that we occupy at the moment is a Scotland of conundrums. Despite the fact that recorded crime is at its lowest level for 25 years, which is a remarkable statistic, the prison population has been at record levels of well over 8,000—I say to Richard Simpson—compared with the approximately 7,600 at which it currently rests. We have one of the highest imprisonment rates in western Europe and it is roughly twice that of Ireland or Italy. I assume that no member would argue that Scottish people are more evil—to use Nigel Don's characterisation—or more prone to carrying out crimes than Irish people or Italians. Crime is also at its lowest level for 25 years, so we plainly face a conundrum. In "Protecting Scotland's Communities", his response to the McLeish commission, the cabinet secretary last month set out an extremely clear vision of the future. As someone who is generally relentlessly positive in mien, I believe that a kind of consensus is lurking covertly in some of today's speakers, whom Angela Constance described as engaging in idle "political posturing". Members including Cathy Jamieson acknowledged that we may have shared objectives, even although the rhetoric at times reached a high point on the centigrade scale.  I found the debate interesting and will comment on some the themes that were discussed. It is important to highlight what the Government is actually saying about sentencing because our position has not—deliberately or otherwise—been accurately represented in the debate. What we propose is summarised on page 26 of the document, which states: "We will legislate in the forthcoming Criminal Justice & Licensing (Scotland) Bill to ...reduce the very short term prison population by legislating to make it clear that judges should not impose a custodial sentence of 6 months or less, unless the particular circumstances of the case lead them to believe that no other option would be appropriate." We go on to say that we will require sheriffs "passing a sentence of 6 months or less to explain in court the circumstances which made them conclude that only a custodial sentence could be imposed". I do not know about you, Presiding Officer, but one thing that irritates me in my life as a parliamentarian is replies from an authority—whether it be the Scottish Government, the United Kingdom Government, a quango or local government—in which it states its decision but refuses to give the reasons for it. That happens a great deal. Assertion without evidence was the prerogative of Joe McCarthy, as I recall, but it is not the Scottish Government's modus operandi. We do not believe that sheriffs should have no requirement to explain their decisions. Mr Baker mischaracterised our position as removing sheriffs' discretion. We are not doing that—I have just read out what we are proposing, which will create a presumption, but will by no means remove sheriffs' discretion.

Not at the moment. The document states that if a sheriff passes a custodial sentence of six months or less he or she must "explain in court the circumstances which made them conclude that only a custodial sentence" is appropriate. That is an extremely sensible suggestion that I am happy to defend. I am confident that, once the heat has lessened and the light has obtruded back into the room, we may be able to persuade colleagues that the proposal is sensible. I can imagine Bill Aitken explaining why he intends to send people to prison—perhaps he does so at the moment—but it is eminently sensible that our judges should have to explain why a community disposal is not being applied. We have not ruled out sentences of six months or less; we are not removing discretion at all. I have set out our proposal in black and white.

It is because there are too many people in our prisons. Despite the fact that crime is at its lowest level, Scotland has more people in prison serving short sentences than the other countries that I have mentioned. Indeed, the cabinet secretary quoted the Scottish Prisons Commission's finding that, in 2006-07, 7,000 prisoners had in total served 47,500 previous sentences. Part of the purpose of a prison sentence is to prevent reoffending; if that figure is not proof that prison is not working, I do not know what is. The document—which, putting it as kindly as I can, Mr Baker should reread—has two watchwords. The Liberal Democrats have grasped that and we are pleased to have their support although, typically, their support is not entirely unqualified. The first watchword is "safety". We need to protect the community against people who should, must and will continue to be in jail. I repeat: those who commit serious crimes will remain in jail. That is the Government's view—let no one talk about us emptying prisons or putting prisoners on the streets. Such rhetoric should be recognised for the complete and utter rubbish that it is. I see the Tories smiling in recognition; perhaps that is a sign of their guilty consciences. The other watchword is "prevention". We need to prevent reoffending. After all, what is the use of a penal policy if people keep going back to jail? What better proof do we need that we have all failed in this matter in the past? If the Tories think that they are going to solve the problems by scouring the country for hospitals to convert into prisons, I wish them good luck in their efforts. So far they have found one in Broughty Ferry, one in Pitlochry and one in Cumnock, but I do not know whether they have told those communities about their plans. They should let us know. Perhaps Bill Aitken can give us an update on the hospital hunt.

The comparison that Ian McKee drew between Bill Aitken and Alf Garnett was not entirely apposite—even if these debates can, in their longevity, feel like an episode of "Till Death Us Do Part". Do the Tories seriously think that the public is going to be persuaded by this plan—which has been announced by Annabel Goldie and reported in the annals of that august journal The Courier  under the headline "Tories' prisoners plan criticised"? A better comparison would be  with Michael Crawford in "Some Mothers Do 'Ave 'Em". As she scours the country for hospitals to turn into prisons, Miss Goldie has no doubt been marking out the cells in each ward and wondering whether the matron can be retrained as a prison officer. If the Tories seriously believe in this plan—and, chaps, it is the only policy you have come up with since this Government was formed—I suggest that they go back to the drawing board. Returning to my theme, I thank Angela Constance, Richard Simpson and many other members who, had this debate been a round of golf, scored an albatross or an eagle with their speeches—unlike the several double bogeys that were scored by certain members on the other front benches. Of course, good grace prevents me from naming those members. Joking aside, I make it clear that we support this policy 100 per cent and I believe that, as our proposals come forward, all members of above-average intelligence will see the good sense in them. We will drive forward to make Scotland a safer place and to deal more effectively with those who break the law.

The logic of the Tory position is that there will need to be new prisons. Mr Aitken announced previously that he was looking for suitable hospitals—in use or, perhaps, not in use. Will Mr Lamont give us an update on his hospital hunt? How is it going? Has he found any and, if so, where are they? Has he worked out how much it might cost to convert these as-yet-unidentified hospitals into secure prisons?

Is it not a bit sweeping to say that the public have no confidence in community disposals, given that 1.3 million hours of community service is performed and thousands of people are engaged in supervising that work? Is it not a real slur on Scottish citizens who are trying their best to carry out that difficult work for Mr Aitken to say unequivocally that the public have no confidence whatever in those disposals?

Will the member take an intervention?

The member said that he is against removing all discretion from sheriffs, but that is not what is proposed. We are not removing discretion but creating a presumption. Does he accept that his analysis of the Government's position is fundamentally flawed?

The findings of the review will be reported to Parliament early in 2009.

I recognise Jim Tolson's interest in the matter and that of members from many parties who write to me frequently about the problems associated with high hedges. I confirm that we are investigating options, including legislative ones, for supporting a means of resolving disputes about high hedges. The findings of that work will be reported to the Parliament early in 2009, along with the findings of the review of national antisocial behaviour policy.

Yes. At Roseanna Cunningham's request, I met Mike Archibald and Sandy Scrimgeour and discussed with them the work of the street pastors. The street pastors perform an excellent function. They are absolutely marvellous, particularly in Perth. By helping people who are depressed, drunk, in trouble or in need of a wee bit of practical help, they are a great help to the police. They are volunteers and they perform an excellent role, which I am certainly including in our consideration of how we tackle antisocial behaviour. We will announce the findings of the review early in 2009.

The matter is presently in hand. The Scottish Law Commission is undertaking a comprehensive review of land registration, which includes consideration of new procedures for the keeper of the registers of Scotland to follow when a disposition a non domino is presented for registration.

The keeper advises me that the use of dispositions a non domino is relatively  infrequent, amounting to 100 a year out of some 500,000 registrations. The recording of a disposition a non domino does not by itself, as I understand it, confer a good title: it has to be followed by a period of 10 years of possession without judicial interruption. Only then would the title be made good. It is open to Mr Coffey's constituents, on whose behalf he has argued strongly for action, to raise—if they are so advised—court proceedings by way of an action of reduction in the Court of Session to challenge the disposition a non domino. However, his point is that the procedures need to be reviewed. The Scottish Law Commission is considering those procedures as part of its review of land registration, and his suggestion is worthy of serious consideration. I urge him to write to me in more detail and I will ensure that his suggestion is fully considered by the Scottish Law Commission.

The position of the existing drugs courts in Fife and Glasgow is due to be reviewed by spring 2009, against the progress of the summary justice reforms. While the current funding period extends to March 2009, further funding will be provided to allow time for the review process to be completed and informed decisions to be taken on future funding.

The evaluation of the Glasgow and Fife drugs courts was published on 30 March 2006. The previous Administration decided that funding should continue until next March. The evaluation report stated that offenders "who completed their Orders had fewer convictions in the 2 years after being made subject to an Order than in the 2 years immediately before." It added:  "there was widespread support for the Drug Courts both from those working within them and from other criminal justice professionals." Those professionals included sheriffs sitting in other courts. However, it was less clear that the outcomes of orders made by drugs courts were better than the outcomes of drug treatment and testing orders made by ordinary sheriff courts. This Government strongly supports DTTOs, which have proven to be effective and are a key part of our drugs strategy "The Road to Recovery". We look forward to building on that work with the DTTO pilot that is being rolled out in Lothian and the Borders for lower-tariff offenders. We want to ensure that every court in Scotland has an appropriate device to provide people with a road to recovery, that is, DTTOs, which, at a cost of £10,000 each, cost substantially less than sending people to prison at a cost of £35,000. We will consider carefully a further evaluation of drugs courts, but we will do so in the light of the proven success of DTTOs and the fact that we have already rolled them out to every sheriff court in Scotland.

I join other members in congratulating Jamie Hepburn on securing the debate. I am pleased that the Parliament is marking the important occasion of the 60 th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.  The declaration was adopted by the UN General Assembly in response to the experience of the second world war, especially the horrors of Nazism. It was appropriate for Robert Brown to remind us of that point. As a Liberal Democrat, he pointed out in a typically balanced way that Stalin was equally guilty—perhaps at the other end of the spectrum, or as one of two heads on the same coin. The secretary-general of the United Nations, Ban Ki-moon, has described the declaration as the first global statement of what we now take for granted—the inherent dignity and equality of all human beings. Jamie Hepburn was right to emphasise that point. Human rights are not just for other people in other countries. As many members have said this evening, in a wide-ranging debate, they are also for us in Scotland. The values of the declaration are at the heart of what the Parliament and the Government are about. For example, article 4 prohibits slavery and servitude. Members will recall the debate on human trafficking that took place in Parliament in March this year. In that debate, to which Marlyn Glen referred, I was pleased to set out what we in Scotland are doing to stamp out that vile trade. During last month's debate on children's rights, we made clear our intention to use the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child to deliver improved outcomes for all children in Scotland. In my portfolio area, I am reminded that between 40,000 and 60,000 children in Scotland live with one parent who has a serious drug misuse problem and that 65,000 children have at least one parent with a serious alcohol problem. Recent events have shown just how seriously we must all continue to take issues relating to the rights of those sad and vulnerable children. In last month's debate, members spoke passionately on the rights of children, and today I have been encouraged to hear many members speak with equal passion on a variety of topics related to the rights of every human being. As Jamie Hepburn said, human rights are universal. The Government has taken a firm stand in defence of human rights on a wide range of issues. We have spoken out against the UK Government's proposals on identity cards and 42-day detention without trial. We have strongly condemned dawn raids on failed asylum seekers and the holding of children in Dungavel, and have made clear our opposition to rendition flights. I pay tribute to Trish Godman for her eloquent advocacy of the rights of veterans. In my constituency, I have encountered similar difficulties, with constituents not even getting a wheelchair. The member is right to highlight that issue today. I know that she is aware that the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing views it with the utmost gravity.  Rightly, many members have taken the opportunity to set out their views on the situation in other parts of the world, not least Israel, Zimbabwe and Gaza. They are quite right to do so and to use the platform that today's debate provides to raise their concerns. I do not have time or the portfolio responsibility to address all the issues that they raised, but it is entirely appropriate for members this evening to express concerns on international issues, on which the Parliament has a voice. We should also recognise the need for a proper balance between rights and responsibilities, to which some members alluded, including Hugh O'Donnell and Bill Aitken. For example, there is understandable public concern about substantial amounts of public money being used to pay compensation to convicted criminals. The rights of others, such as the victims of crime, prison officers and other staff who work in our prisons, should also be respected. We need to find ways to address such issues if we are to maintain public support for the human rights agenda, which can be tarnished by episodes such as the ones that Bill Aitken was right to highlight. I should not and will not let this occasion pass without mentioning the new Scottish Commission for Human Rights. The SCHR has as its chair an internationally respected expert in human rights, Professor Alan Miller, and we look forward to working closely with the commission. When I was listening to various members' speeches, I was reminded of the huge contribution that authors have made to strengthening human rights and ensuring that they are not breached. They include Solzhenitsyn, with his "One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich"; Kafka, with "The Trial"; Orwell, with "Animal Farm"; and Camus, with "The Outsider". Those formed the staple diet of my adolescence—and I am sure that those authors' works will be long remembered after this speech is long forgotten. I conclude with the observation that struck me as I listened to the speeches from Robert Brown and Ian McKee, who mentioned the time when a member of his family suddenly found herself in a nightmarish situation. The reflection is a prosaic one, and certainly not an original one. It is this: human rights are not only important when they are under threat; it is when they are under threat that we begin to appreciate just how important they are.  Meeting closed at 17:47.

I am very pleased to have the opportunity to discuss this extremely important issue, and I thank Alison McInnes for lodging the motion, which has enabled us to do just that. Young driver safety is a huge concern for us all and for the Scottish Government. It is a major concern for the great many people in Scotland who have seen young people die on our roads. One in four drivers or riders who were killed or seriously injured on our roads in 2007 was aged between 17 and 25. One in five new drivers is likely to be involved in an accident within one year of passing their test. The recently published Scottish road accident statistics show that, in general, casualty numbers in Scotland are moving in the right direction, as I think Alasdair Morgan suggested, with 45 per cent fewer deaths and serious injuries in 2007 than there were in the mid-1990s. However, every road death is one too many, especially for the families involved. I am sure that we all know many families who have lost children or young adults in such circumstances. We are all determined to do everything that a Government and its agencies can do to prevent such tragedies.  I welcome the information and advice that has been provided in the report from the Institute of Advanced Motorists, which I read earlier this year. The Scottish Government is developing a 10-year road safety strategy, which will be published early next year. To respond directly to Alison McInnes, it was not published earlier because the consultation did not successfully elicit the views of young drivers. Those views are at the core of the issue, so we wanted to ensure that we got some analysis data about young people's opinions. We therefore felt it important to convene focus groups to gain better insight and understanding, which could be used to set actions for our strategy. The report on the focus group discussions will be published on 12 December. Neil Greig, the head of the IAM Motoring Trust, sits on the panel of experts that was set up by Stewart Stevenson to advise on measures that can be expected to be most effective in improving road safety in Scotland over the next 10 years. Earlier this year, we consulted the public and stakeholders and sought views on what our strategy should cover. More than half the responses highlighted young drivers as the key road safety issue. Members have made a number of useful and wide-ranging speeches. Alasdair Morgan pointed out that more regulation or laws will not necessarily reduce the number of fatalities, and that many existing laws—on driving without a licence, for example—are breached by a huge number of people. It is right that the whole power of the law should be brought down heavily on people who commit such serious road offences. Dr Richard Simpson made a large number of useful points, for example about the value of post-test experience, green L-plates and alcohol levels. He advocated a zero-limit approach. I should make it clear that the Scottish Government is concerned about the matter, and we welcome the contributions of the British Medical Association and the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland on it. Lowering the limit and the introduction of random breath testing are options that should certainly be considered.

Mike Rumbles raises a serious issue. The Scottish Government has advocated a reduction in the limit, but we have not advocated a zero approach. We think that a reduction would be appropriate, given that the law has not been reviewed for many decades.  Richard Simpson alluded to the problem of what happens when one loses the faculty of sight as time goes on. It is not very gallant of me to mention my mother at this point—I will be in trouble—but I recall that she took an unusual approach to road safety when she last bought a car. It was a sprightly sports car. She pursued the unusual road safety mechanism of having it blessed by the monks of Pluscarden, near Miltonduff where she lived. I suspect that that may not necessarily become Government policy. Scottish Government research—"Rural Road Safety: Drivers and Driving"—will be published on 12 December, along with the report on young people's views as they were reported to focus groups. The study on rural road safety, which has been highlighted by many members—including Alex Johnstone and Nanette Milne, to name two—found that more than a quarter of drivers aged between 17 and 24 reported having had a near miss while driving on a rural road within the last twelve months. Many members have acknowledged that as new drivers ourselves we were perhaps not safe to be on the road—we did not have the experience and we lacked confidence. That was certainly my view. The Scottish Government responded earlier in the year to a consultation by the Driving Standards Agency on changes to the driver training and testing regime. Our response urged that consideration be given to the incorporation of the pass plus scheme into the training and testing regime. Nanette Milne referred to that. We advocate that step and agree with the argument that she adduced. At the same time, we strongly believe that the training of future young drivers starts many years before they can apply for a provisional licence. Education should be provided at all stages, from pre-school right through secondary school. Road Safety Scotland's crash magnets resource for senior pupils aims to encourage responsible attitudes to driving before young people get behind the wheel. Its publicity campaigns aim to raise awareness among young people of their vulnerability on the roads—they are not immortal, they are not invisible and they are perhaps not always worldly wise. Patience is a virtue that they should learn from Robin Harper. A great deal of good work is being done. The innovative campaign that used the Xbox gaming system has just won a Prince Michael of Kent award for innovation and excellence in road safety. Such initiatives are making a significant contribution and we are developing the approach. The Scottish Qualifications Authority is working to develop a pre-driver award that focuses on safe and responsible road use. The award will be available at eight centres in Scotland in January  2009 and there will be a more general roll-out in 2010. The role of parents should not be overlooked. A guide for parents is available. It covers the development of attitudes that influence later driving behaviour, the driving test, the value of professional tuition, further training for new drivers, and further experience, particularly of different and more challenging road conditions, such as night driving on motorways, for new drivers. These are just a few of the initiatives that have been put in place. I pay tribute to the work that many of our emergency services workers—in particular police and firefighters—do in their education role. I also express my personal concern about the toll that it must take on our emergency service workers to attend fatalities week in, week out and to have to deal with the carnage at the scene and with the survivors. That must be a demanding and difficult task.  The debate has been very useful. We are indebted to Alison McInnes for introducing a debate of the utmost gravity, relevance and importance to our nation. Collectively—as a Parliament and as a nation—we cannot and will not tolerate the waste of young lives on our roads. The devastation that it causes is immeasurable, so we are determined to work with our partners across government and in the private sector to try our best to prevent these terrible tragedies.  Meeting closed at 17:49.

I welcome this afternoon's wide-ranging debate, and the cross-party support and commitment to eradicating forced marriage and other forms of honour-based violence—perhaps I should say so-called honour-based violence—and violence against women. There have been a number of excellent speeches this afternoon, and I pay tribute to members who have campaigned on the issues for many years, during the two previous sessions of Parliament as well as the current session—Gil Paterson, for example, who has not been able to speak today. What we know from the statistics is the tip of the iceberg, so the challenge remains huge and the necessity for action is clear. Cathy Peattie said that we might learn of only one case in 10 because the rest are not reported. We simply do not know how big the iceberg is, but we know that it is lurking beneath the surface, representing unreported violence against women. Each woman who faces the awful predicament of violence against her, and who is afraid to report it, is in a truly nightmarish situation. I will respond to some of the many points that members have made during the debate, starting with Johann Lamont. She has, as members know, campaigned on these issues for a long time—long before she was first elected to Parliament, if that is not an ungallant way to put it. She mentioned single outcome agreements. They are, in a sense, toddlers—they are in their infancy in the historic concordat. National outcome 7 is: "We have tackled the significant inequalities in Scottish society." We expect that councils will address that in their single outcome agreements.

There is a difference between the two prospects, but I certainly do not accept that the issue has been in any way deprioritised, nor do I accept that any council of any political hue would wish to deprioritise the issues—the situation is quite the contrary. From my work with Ronnie McColl, Harry McGuigan and Barbara Grant, I know that we have good relationships with all parties in our dealings with senior COSLA spokespeople. It is important that we work in partnership on all these matters. It is also relevant to point out that we have substantially increased the funding that is committed over the three-year period to tackle the abomination that is violence against women—and men, but primarily women—to £44 million. That is a major contribution, and it is fair to say that it is a very substantial increase. Many members talked about the difference between forced marriage and arranged marriage, and implied that they are in some way antonyms. The difference is the lack of consent. As Bashir Ahmad, John Lamont and others pointed out, there is consent in an arranged marriage but none in a forced marriage. Bill Aitken said that he could think of no religion that favours forced marriages and it was useful to hear Bashir Ahmad state that Islam has no place for forced marriages. As Johann Lamont did, I applaud people such as Bashir Ahmad and Mohammad Sarwar for making their views known and for providing leadership on such issues to their communities and their constituents. Many members, including Margaret Smith, Christine Grahame and Johann Lamont, pointed out the difference between UK legislation and current Scots law. I must admit that I pinched myself—I had never heard Christine Grahame say that she stood corrected by Johann Lamont. That reflects the consensual tone of the debate. Johann Lamont was correct to say that the difference is that the position in UK law—the Forced Marriage (Civil Protection) Act 2007—is that third parties can apply for orders on behalf of a victim of a forced marriage. Powers of arrest can also be directed against others, not just against the principal perpetrator named in the order. In Scotland, on the other hand, only the victim can apply for an interdict and power of arrest, and those are enforceable only against the person named in the interdict. I am pleased that we are launching the consultation paper today and I restate the  Government's commitment to this agenda. We are clear about the basis for our work—it is correct to consider the broader agenda of violence against women. We will not overlook violence against men, although more work needs to be done. We will consider the influence of alcohol, which is not a cause for violence but an excuse. It exacerbates violence and records show that alcohol is central in a high proportion of reported domestic abuse incidents. I pay tribute to the 218 project in Glasgow, which I visited earlier this year. It provides a specialist multidisciplinary facility for women aged 18 years and over who are involved in the criminal justice system and may have co-existing addiction issues. That facility plays a great role in assisting victims of domestic violence. I pay particular tribute to all those who do excellent work at the project, which is at 218 Bath Street, Glasgow. I turn to the consultation paper. Many members asked whether there should be a specific criminal offence relating to forced marriage. I remind members that, as is stated in paragraph 3 of the consultation paper, a previous joint consultation between the UK and the Scottish Government yielded mixed results: 39.4 per cent of Scottish respondents were against the creation of a new offence while 36.4 per cent were in favour. The balance of opinion today suggests that more MSPs are against criminalisation than are for it, although one or two members have argued that the door to criminalisation should not be closed. In the 19 questions that Stewart Maxwell has asked in his consultation paper, the focus is on the civil approach rather than on the criminal approach. I recently read a crime novel by an Icelandic novelist called Indridason—a novel I thoroughly recommend—on domestic violence. Because of the paucity of my research, I do not have a quote to offer members, but the book says that victims of domestic violence suffer not only because of the violence against them but because they lose their souls. I feel that that offers an interesting perspective on the predicament of many people who face this awful fate, which is meted out to them by others. I conclude by echoing a phrase that was picked up more than any other by members this evening. Bashir Ahmad expressed a sentiment that I think we all share: one forced marriage in Scotland is one too many.

This has been an interesting debate—I am not sure that it was at all times a constructive debate, but it was certainly heated. Several aspects stood out. The first involved the timing of the debate. This is exactly the right time to have this debate. Labour said that we should not have debated ID cards—it was the only party to oppose the debate; all other parties welcomed it. The Labour line would have been a bit more convincing if the party had actively opposed the debate in the Parliamentary Bureau. For Labour to give us a lecture in the chamber today was just a waste of our time. On the substance of the issue of timing, it is axiomatic that the time to debate an issue is the time when something can be done about that issue. There would be no use in our debating the issue in 2020, when £5 billion—or, if the London School of Economics is correct, £18 billion—has been spent on the scheme. It is far better to debate the matter before the majority of that money has been spent, and to send out a clear signal from most of the parties in Scotland that we do not think that this is the right time to spend such a huge amount of money for so little—if any—benefit.  I bow to no one in arguing that this is the right time to debate ID cards, because minds can be changed. The UK Government has changed its mind on issues such as the length of time for which someone can be detained without charge—[ Interruption. ]

I am sorry, Presiding Officer. The UK Government has changed its mind when it has been forced to do so by public opinion. Public opinion in Scotland on the issue of ID cards may well be mixed—it is not monolithic. However, I suspect that once the public are aware of the huge cost of the scheme—whether it is £5,000 million or three times that amount—they will conclude that that is far, far too much. Since we debated ID cards last December, the world economy has begun to face the biggest recession for nearly 100 years. It therefore behoves those of us in public life to say, "Let's rethink all our discretionary expenditure". No expenditure could be more discretionary than the £5,000 million of discretionary expenditure on the ID card scheme. This is exactly the right time to decide whether to go ahead with such a massive commitment of public money, given that every member—even Labour members—can come up with ideas for how that money could be spent more effectively. The Liberals and the Conservatives have suggested a greater number of police—or border police. Such ideas are well worth exploring, and we will support both amendments to the motion in an act of unity that involves all but one party in the Parliament. This is the right time for us to send a message from Scotland that that money should not be wasted on the scheme; instead, it should be devoted to more worthy aims. I am proud that we are sending that message tonight.

By 2012, which is three years away, there may be moves that would require us to have biometric data on a European level. By taking the lead on the issue of ID cards, the UK Government might incur entirely unnecessary expenditure. It has already wasted a lot of time and money by changing the identifier in the original plans, which involved the iris—it scrapped those plans, as it has changed so many other aspects of its so-called plans.  It is by no means clear that savings would be made, as the Home Office has alleged. Moreover, the Home Office has repeatedly refused to say exactly how the £5,000 million is broken down, on various grounds such as commercial confidentiality, potential breaches of procurement law or potential prejudice to procurement operations. Those grounds may be valid to some extent, but the fact remains that we have not had a proper breakdown. How, in the depths of a recession, can the Government propose spending £5,000 million of taxpayers' money without saying how it will be broken down? That is disgraceful. If any member thinks that this debate is a waste of time, they protest too much. They know very well that once the public realises what an incredible amount of money will be wasted on a scheme that may well serve no purpose at all, public opinion will certainly change.

I would have thought that the member could do better than that. I do not know whether we are spending £5,000, or even £50,000, on the national conversation. To say that we should not have a conversation about the future government of our country is a pretty weak argument, and there is no comparison with this debate, which is about whether we should spend £5,000 million at a time when the economy is facing real problems. In the past 24 hours, I have spoken to two employers in my constituency that are likely to issue redundancy consultations. I am sure that members throughout the chamber have had similar conversations. Day in, day out, we hear that people are losing their jobs, but then we hear that the UK Government is going to spend £5,000 million on something that is not necessary. Most of us have a passport and credit cards, and in any event everybody's identity has to be checked by lawyers, under money-laundering regulations, and in umpteen other circumstances. The proposal is ridiculous.

Not for the first time, Mr Carlaw makes a point that had not occurred to me. There  is certainly a problem with Lord Foulkes's identity: it is not that we do not know who he is, but that we know far too much about him. Another argument is that identity cards will contribute to the reduction in fraud. What complete and utter nonsense. If fraud is reducing, it is because, belatedly perhaps, the banks that issue credit cards have introduced a chip-and-pin system and now have several identifiers to verify people's identity. It is difficult for people to remember all the passwords—never mind their grandmother's maiden name and the rest—that they have to come up with when they are trying to sort things out. The idea that ID cards will sort out fraud is simply hokum. I was touched by the Labour ranks' slavish loyalty to their London lords and masters. Sandra White appositely pointed out that, in a previous debate on ID cards, there were some slight hints of rebellion and suggestions that the orders from the chateau were not being implemented in the trenches. She was right to mention Pauline McNeill in dispatches. However, the rebellion was entirely snuffed out today. There was not a rebel in sight. Everybody was absolutely loyal to General Darling. When General Darling was a mere private back in 1989, he made a speech about national identity cards in which he said: "Identity cards ... will not assist ... the detection of those suspected of having committed offences." That is a good argument. The now chancellor also said: "The scheme would create a vast bureaucracy—an industry of identity." Many industries in Scotland are going down the plughole, but at least we know that new Labour is committed to a new industry—the identity card industry.

Alistair Darling continued: "Does the House seriously imagine that someone seeking to bring heroin or cocaine into the country or intending to blow up property or individuals would make the mistake of coming here without identification?" Private Darling had a good point there, but he kept his best point until the end of his speech, when he said: "if £350 million were available to set up this scheme the money would be better spent employing police officers to go out on the streets".—[ Official Report , House of Commons , 10 February 1989; Vol 146, c 1310, 1314-1315.]

Let us hear it for Private Darling. What on earth happened in the intervening years,  other than the price going up from £350 million to £5,000 million?

The best speech of the afternoon was from Bashir Ahmad. In answer to the proposition from the Labour benches that we should not be debating ID cards, he said that every person in Scotland will be affected, so of course we should debate the matter. He was quite right. I look forward to a united message on the matter from everyone—except General Darling's army.

I welcome today's debate. It allows us to discuss the United Kingdom Government's plans on ID cards, and it enables me to make quite clear where the Scottish Government stands on the issue. The debate is timely because, earlier this month, the Home Office announced how it will start to implement its plans for ID cards. It also released its latest cost projections for its ID scheme. The Scottish Government is extremely concerned about the costs of the scheme. In the current financial climate, the UK Government should have better use for the vast sums of money being spent on the scheme.

Not just yet, thank you—but I will take an intervention later.

Millions have already been spent and projected costs have been rising. In 2004, the UK Government estimated projected costs to deliver the scheme at £3,100 million. The latest figures show that that amount has now risen by almost £2,000 million to around £5,000 million.

No, I do not accept that. Even if that were true—

Mr Foulkes will perhaps have his chance to speak from a non-sedentary position later.

The scheme will cost £5,000 million. Even if Mr Baker and the Home Office are correct in saying that some of that money may have to be spent anyway because of the need for a Euro-ID biometric system, that would still—according to the Home Office's figures—leave around 30 per cent of that cost to be paid, which is more than £1,500 million. Even if the cost were that amount, we would argue that it would be a waste of money at this time. Previously, the Home Office made it clear that, for an individual, "the charge for a stand-alone ID card, valid for 10 years, will be £30."

No. However, citizens now face two separate fees: the statutory fee of £30 and the enrolment fee. In addition, just as the overall costs to the taxpayer are very much estimates, citizens have been told that only for 2009-10—when very few people will have to get a card anyway—has the application fee been set at £30.

No. You have had your chance, Lord Foulkes. I am not giving way to you.

I hope that the level of debate in the House of Lords is of a higher order than we have heard this afternoon. What someone will have to pay the "open market organisation" for collecting their biometric data—the second fee—is anyone's guess. Using private sector organisations for enrolment may be a way of keeping the figures down in the official cost reports, but it ignores the fact that the public are extremely uncomfortable about giving their personal data to the private sector. I turn to issues of terrorism. Not only is the scheme extremely costly; ID cards will not make us more secure, whatever Lord Foulkes says from a sedentary position. The well-respected human rights organisation, Privacy International,  undertook an international study of the supposed link between ID cards and the prevention of terrorism. It found that ID cards, with or without biometrics, do not deter terrorist activity and that the vast majority of terrorists operate under their true identities. In Spain, where ID cards are compulsory and must be carried by all, those who were responsible for the 2004 Madrid bombings used at least one genuine ID document. All of us in the chamber are totally opposed to terrorism. However, it is not only legitimate, but essential that this Government points out that, in our view, with support from others in the chamber, this vastly expensive scheme will not significantly—if at all—contribute to the successful combating of terrorism. With regard to large databases, the national identity register could increase the risk of fraud rather than reduce it. Jerry Fishenden, Microsoft's lead technology adviser for the UK and a member of our privacy expert group, mentioned the ID card scheme in relation to his warning that "significant additional problems could arise if yet more of our personal information is acquired and stored in new central databases." He explained that "the more databases set up and the more information exchanged from one place to another, the greater the risk of things going wrong." Further, he said: "Put simply, holding huge collections of personal data brings significant risks." In Germany, the use of unique ID numbers and the storage of personal data on a central register are prohibited. In France, the national commission for data protection has reservations about plans for a national database ahead of the introduction of biometric passports, and has forced its Government to rethink its proposals. The Scottish Government's eCare framework, our multi-agency information sharing service, is finding ways to share personal data securely and with the strictest controls, without creating a large centralised database. Further, the local authorities' citizen's accounts initiative, which started under the previous Administration, has recently been independently reviewed and will report shortly. However, the Scottish Government is not complacent. It is up to all of us to take care to protect data and confidential information, and to avoid data leakage. The United Kingdom Government's abysmal record on data security is reason enough to cancel the ID scheme. How can we trust the UK Government with our personal data when its track record has gone from bad to worse? Not only did it lose 25 million child benefit records but, since  then, the number of data breaches reported to the Information Commissioner has soared. I am also concerned about the recent failures in security clearances at the Security Industry Authority, a public body sponsored by the Home Office. The authority has responsibility for regulating the private security industry across Britain. I was dismayed to learn that the authority itself employed agency staff without appropriate security clearance.

As I said earlier, we are absolutely not complacent. That is why I specifically said that. We must constantly be vigilant. On the UK Government's record, since Paul Martin raised it, I can say that in December 2007, 3 million learner drivers' details went missing; in January 2008, the loss of a laptop resulted in the details of 600,000 military recruits being made public and hundreds of Department for Work and Pensions documents went missing; in June 2008, a senior intelligence officer from the Cabinet Office left a top-secret file on the seat of a train; in August 2008, information was leaked about 84,000 prisoners in England and Wales; and in October 2008, a computer hard drive containing the details of approximately 100,000 armed forces members was lost. Perhaps the UK Government should focus on the issue of looking after the data that it has, rather than creating a new, complicated system for new data. We are also concerned about the potential impact on community relations. Ethnic minority communities are worried that the introduction of ID cards will strain relations with the police. The Commission for Racial Equality said that ethnic minorities' fear of discrimination is neither misconceived nor exaggerated, as latest Ministry of Justice statistics on the stop-and-search policy show that black people are seven times and Asian people two times more likely to be stopped than white people. The first group of UK citizens who will be required to enrol in the identity register and have ID cards are airside workers. To begin with, from October 2009, this will affect airside workers at two airports: Manchester and London City. Trade unions and airlines have criticised those plans, pointing out that their members and employees are already subject to stringent security checks—as one would expect. Those workers now face an ultimatum: get an identity card or get a new job. The general secretary of the British Airline Pilots Association—an organisation that should know  something about airside security—said that airside ID cards "will do nothing to improve aviation security" and called on the Government to stop playing Big Brother and concentrate on sorting out existing problems. The Scottish National Party has opposed ID cards from the outset. The scheme will not achieve its primary stated objective of making people safer and reducing the terrorist threat, and it poses an unacceptable threat to citizens' privacy and civil liberties. It is also a colossal waste of money that would have been better spent supporting the front-line services, such as police and prisons, that actually make a difference to the people of Scotland. The Scottish Government has made its position clear to the UK Government on several occasions. I look forward to hearing members' views on those important issues. I move, That the Parliament notes that the UK Government's proposals for an ID card scheme are presently estimated by it to cost the public purse around £5 billion and considers that the scheme as proposed will not increase security, nor deter crime, and will have serious implications for the civil liberties of ordinary citizens.

Any death from fire is a tragedy. I recognise the vital work of our fire and rescue services across Scotland, particularly on fire safety and prevention. There has been a long-term declining trend in fire deaths. However, the recent increases in fire fatalities and injuries clearly show that more needs to be done. In response, with the support of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, I announced the establishment of a short-life working study, which will be chaired by Brian Sweeney—the chief officer of Strathclyde Fire and Rescue—to examine how fire deaths and injuries can be reduced in Scotland. Mr Sweeney will work with a small group of core staff, including representatives from Scottish resilience, which will consult widely with all stakeholders who have views and ideas to offer.

The study will be chaired by Brian Sweeney. COSLA supports the initiative. Michael Matheson has pursued the issue of fire sprinklers diligently. His previous work led to the introduction of a mandatory standard for the installation of sprinklers in shopping centres, residential care buildings, high-rise domestic buildings and sheltered housing complexes. However, we want to do more. Scottish ministers are currently considering proposals for amending the regulations through a major review by the Building Standards Advisory Committee. Briefly, the review will consider new standards and guidance for the introduction of sprinklers and automatic fire suppression systems in schools. I would very much welcome any other contributions from members of all parties on this vital issue, which Michael Matheson has campaigned on with diligence and tenacity over many years, as it is an issue of concern to members of all parties.

Plainly, public awareness of the risks of death through fire is being pursued by this Government and our counterparts in Westminster as it was by our predecessors. On the example that the member mentioned, certainly the message should be sent out to everyone about the risks of fire from cigarettes when smokers fall asleep and also from the abuse of alcohol, which, I am sad to say, is the cause of a great many fire deaths in our country.

We are making good progress on implementing the Charities and Trustee Investment (Scotland) Act 2005, which includes mechanisms for regular review.

The charities legislation, which was introduced by the previous Labour-Liberal Administration, received broad cross-party support. For an organisation to qualify as a charity, it must demonstrate that it provides a public benefit, and that criterion was employed by the independent charities regulator in reaching the decision that was announced on 28 October. Some private schools passed the test on the grounds that they satisfied the public benefit test, in particular by providing assistance to those who are unable to pay fees to attend those schools; other schools did not. I note in passing that Lord Foulkes's personal details, which can be found on the Scottish Parliament website, show that he attended Haberdashers' Aske's school, which is a notable and significant private school. Members will therefore be interested to learn that along with the actor who played Borat and the comedian David Baddiel, Lord Foulkes is a notable old Haberdasher.

I was simply going to suggest that those who have benefited from a system should perhaps not decry others who take up opportunities to do so.

The debate has been very positive. I cannot recall one in which there has been such consensus in the chamber—that is to be welcomed by us all. Jackson Carlaw set the tone when he made clear his support for the bill. Throughout the debate, we have had thoughtful, passionate and moving contributions. Particularly in respect of the latter, we heard from Cathy Peattie about how this matter has touched her family. We heard passionate contributions from the two Bills—Butler and Kidd—and I hope that it is not too mischievous of me to reflect in passing that any matter upon which Jackson Carlaw and Bill Butler manage to unite to some extent is—

Yes, it is something approaching a miracle, as Mr Brown said. It is my duty to apply myself to some of the serious points that were made in the debate, not least of which are the committee's criticisms. I start with the criticism of the consultation, which Bill Aitken properly mentioned when he opened for the committee. I acknowledge the concerns about our consultation approach. We did move quickly, but I maintain that were right to do so and, in practice, we had little alternative. It is important to recall that the circumstances were unusual and that 20 years of precedent had been set aside. The UK Government moved swiftly to announce that it would not legislate straight away. In such circumstances, it was important to get clarity in Scotland, not least, as Bill Butler pointed out, for those whose cases are in limbo. We need to provide clarity for those people who are waiting in the legal system limbo. As a lawyer, I know that delays in legal cases are hard enough for clients to deal with, but when the delay is induced by Parliament, it only makes things worse. We moved quickly to consult on a partial regulatory impact assessment from February to April, as is recorded in paragraph 12 of the financial memorandum. That was a fair attempt at as detailed and thorough a consultation as we could muster. Not everyone replied to it by any means, but we received solid contributions, not least from the Law Society of Scotland, that supported the bill and our approach. There was a great deal of support for our general approach. So, although the committee had its criticisms, I hope that it appreciates that there were reasons for moving swiftly and that we believe that we were right to do so. Robert Brown properly raised the issue of quantum. If the bill becomes law, how much will be awarded to future claimants who have pleural plaques as a result of their employers' negligence? As Mr Brown knows, the bill does not  address quantum—the amount awarded to any particular litigant—because that is properly a matter for the courts. It is not for Parliament to lay down how much an individual should be awarded because, even among those who have pleural plaques, there are differences. Every litigant who goes to court is in different circumstances. They will be different ages and have different life expectancies. One of the features of pleural plaques is the long latency period; it can take 30 years for the condition to be diagnosed in some cases. All cases are different and it would be difficult to set out on the face of the bill a formula for calculating quantum. It would be a departure from the laws of delict, to which many members have referred in general terms. However, the bill will follow Parliament's consensual approach. Members may have amendments that they wish us to consider, and I will meet any member of the Parliament—or anyone who is listening to the debate—who thinks that they can improve the bill. My officials will study carefully any serious proposal. It is our understanding that, prior to the House of Lords judgment, the courts understood that pleural plaques caused no physical symptoms, but awarded compensation for the anxiety that sufferers felt. That being the case, in our view the rationale for awarding quantum should be the same after the passage of the bill as it was before the House of Lords ruling. We see no reason to assume or to speculate that the approach that is followed in future will be different from that which was followed in the past. The issue that, rightly, has prompted the most comment concerns the financial estimates. Let me restate what I said at the outset of the debate. Although detailed work has been done to provide estimates that are as sound as it has been possible to produce, further work has been initiated to provide reassurance that those estimates are far more robust than the insurance industry claims them to be. I will inform Parliament of the outcome of that further work on the estimated cost of the bill as soon as I can. That said, it is not unreasonable for me to point out that the provisions of the financial memorandum from paragraph 11 until the end are extremely detailed. Members might not be surprised to learn that I spent some considerable time on those paragraphs. Not many members have had the opportunity to go into each of them in detail—time has perhaps not permitted them to do so—but they provide the best possible estimate of the likely costs. Paragraph 13 says: "There is no reliable way of estimating how many individuals who have pleural plaques as a result of  negligent exposure to asbestos will ultimately make a claim." We admit that we are not trading in certainty. There is no mathematical formula that we could apply; were there any such formula, I would fear for the fate of people who have the condition because they would know when they were likely to meet their maker. That would be a chilling mathematical formula; however, no such formula exists. It is clear that there is a degree of uncertainty about future numbers of pleural plaques claims, but I want to give a brief description of the rationale that we applied as we set about the task of preparing the financial memorandum, on which the debate has centred. It is extremely simple—we examined the claims that were made over the past few decades. We looked at how many cases were pursued, how many went to court and how many were settled. We reached the best figure that we could arrive at. We appreciate the assistance of the Scottish Court Service and of Thompsons, the firm that has acted in about 90 per cent of the cases in question. We met them and studied the figures, which are in the financial memorandum. The same is true of the estimated cost of £8,000 a case, plus legal expenses. That is the best figure that we could get. We did not get figures from the insurance companies, which said that their figures were commercially confidential. I hope that members will agree that we have done our best in the financial memorandum, and I thank my officials for their efforts. I will conclude by mentioning some of the other issues that have been raised. It will be a good thing if the bill is agreed to when it moves to stage 3. As many members have eloquently said, it will redress an injustice. I am immensely heartened by what Richard Baker said in his intervention at the beginning of the debate about his willingness to engage with us in further constructive dialogue with the UK Government in relation to its statement of funding policy. We can return to the issue. I will be happy to meet Richard Baker and representatives of all other parties on that issue. Although this Parliament is standing up, as many members have said, for the people of Scotland; is cognisant of our industrial heritage; and is aware of the problems and ills of the past, about which members such as Gil Paterson spoke movingly, we in the Scottish National Party would like every person in the UK who has pleural plaques to be able to pursue their claims, and we very much hope that where the Scottish Parliament leads, Westminster will follow.

I thank my parliamentary colleague Mr Crawford, not least for his ingenuity, and I apologise for being late. First, I thank Bill Aitken and the Justice Committee for its scrutiny of the Damages (Asbestos-related Conditions) (Scotland) Bill and its stage 1 report. I also thank everyone who gave oral and written evidence to the committee and those who provided the Government with information, particularly in response to our consultation on the partial regulatory impact assessment. I know that several representatives of the campaign groups are in the gallery, anxiously awaiting the Scottish Parliament's decision on the general principles of the bill. I thank Tommy Gorman and Bob Dickie, who are two of the leading campaigners, for meeting me last week. The Cabinet Secretary for Justice also met campaigners from Clydeside Action on Asbestos. The origins of the bill are well known. Pleural plaques have been regarded as actionable for more than 20 years, but a House of Lords judgment on 17 October last year ruled that, in the absence of symptoms, the condition does not give rise to a cause of action under the law of damages. That judgment is not binding in Scotland, but is highly persuasive. It has caused consternation among those who have been exposed to asbestos, and among their representatives, including MSPs. Indeed, concern appears to go wider than that. Let me quote the remarks of two of the judges who were involved in the judgment. Lord Scott said: "the conclusion that none of the appellants ... has a cause of action against his negligent employer strikes, for me at least, a somewhat discordant note." Lord Hope said: "I share the regret expressed by Smith LJ that the claimants, who are at risk of developing a harmful disease  and have entirely genuine feelings of anxiety as to what they may face in the future, should be denied a remedy." In sum, the judgment led to a palpable sense of injustice. When the application of the law appears to result in injustice, it is the duty of legislators to address the situation. Against that background, there was a great deal of consensus when the issues were debated in Parliament last November. The cross-party concern that exists was reflected in a range of well-informed speeches. I hope to maintain a similar consensus today. The purpose of the bill is straightforward: it is to keep things as they have effectively been for the past 20 years, and to ensure that people who have been negligently exposed to asbestos and have developed a symptomless asbestos-related condition continue to be able to raise a claim for damages in Scotland. The bill meets that policy objective while making the minimum incursion into the general law of delict. Many people in Scotland will be unfamiliar with the term "pleural plaques". Pleural plaques are scarring of the pleura—membranes that surround the lungs. The Scottish Government understands and accepts that pleural plaques in themselves are generally not and do not become debilitating; they do not in themselves give rise to physical pain. However, for the reasons that I gave in my oral evidence to the Justice Committee, the Scottish Government's view is that pleural plaques are not a negligible injury. They are and ought to be seen as a material injury for the purposes of the law of delict. Pleural plaques that are associated with exposure to asbestos signify a greatly increased lifetime risk of developing mesothelioma and a small but significantly increased risk of developing bronchial carcinoma, compared with the risk for the general population. Indeed, an eminent medical expert who gave evidence to the House of Lords, Dr Robin Rudd, has said: "People with pleural plaques who have been heavily exposed to asbestos at work have a risk of mesothelioma more than one thousand times greater than the general population." Let us not forget that, in areas that are associated with Scotland's industrial past, people with pleural plaques are living alongside friends who also worked beside them and are witnessing the terrible suffering of those who have contracted serious asbestos-related conditions, one of which is mesothelioma. That can cause genuine and understandable anxiety that they will suffer the same fate. We cannot ignore that or turn our backs on those who in the past contributed to our nation's wealth. Therefore, we intend to do two things: we intend to explore options for alleviating anxiety by improved provision of information and  advice; and, through the bill, we intend to preserve the right to seek redress from employers or the insurers of employers whose negligent breach of a duty of care led to asbestos exposure and consequent scarring of the membrane around the employee's lungs. Employers and insurers have registered concern about the costs that they may incur and the implications for our economic competitiveness. We understand that concern, but we believe that it is seriously exaggerated. To give one example of that exaggeration, the Association of British Insurers suggested that 30 per cent of United Kingdom asbestos exposure and asbestos-related disease may occur in Scotland. However, the ABI has not yet given us any evidential basis for that assertion, whereas we were able to provide the committee with clear evidence from the Health and Safety Executive demonstrating that the level is closer to 10 per cent. We know that successful economies require a competitive business environment. We are working to foster such an environment, but we believe that economic growth on its own does not give a complete picture of the success of a nation. We should balance the need for business-friendly policies with actions that protect the people who contribute to our nation's wealth. That is partly what we mean by the economy being sustainable. Given what I have said, it should come as no surprise that, as well as warmly welcoming the committee's endorsement of our objectives and of the principles of the bill, I agree with the committee that the bill's financial implications must be understood fully. Specifically, I appreciate why there was a recommendation that, ahead of stage 3, the Scottish Government should revisit the estimates that were given in our financial memorandum. We are doing that. We are already seeking further information from insurers and from the actuarial profession's United Kingdom asbestos working party. We aim to analyse any new information carefully and to report the results to Parliament in good time. On that basis, I see no need to resist Jackson Carlaw's amendment. I should say that the actuarial profession itself has admitted that "it is difficult to make a sensible estimate". Therefore, it is unlikely that any amount of work would lead to absolute clarity and unanimity. For now, my view is that our financial memorandum is as clear and robust as it could have been, in the circumstances. One aspect on which I have less confidence is the UK Government's position on the pleural plaques liabilities of its departments. The UK Government suggests—although so far it declines to tell us definitely—that it could invoke its statement of funding policy and, in effect, make  the Scottish Government pay for its liabilities. In a debate about principles, I do not propose to dwell on that aspect. It is certainly no part of my agenda to pick a fight with the UK Government on this sensitive topic.

Yes. I welcome that intervention and the approach that it signifies. I will be happy to engage fully with all parties on the issue so that we can—as I hope—achieve consensus among all parties that the UK Government should continue to meet its responsibilities in the future, as it has done in the past. I hope that all members will follow the recommendation of the Government and the committee and support what will be a short but vital piece of legislation that will provide justice to all those who have been negligently exposed to asbestos and who go on to develop a related condition that, although symptomless in general medical terms, is nevertheless not negligible in human terms. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Damages (Asbestos-related Conditions) (Scotland) Bill.

I very much welcome the opportunity to tell members about the work that we are doing to improve the effectiveness of secure accommodation in Scotland. I will also draw the Parliament's attention to some of the challenges facing the sector. I will paint a rounded picture for members, highlighting both the strengths and the weaknesses in the secure estate. By making this statement, which has been agreed with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, I hope to get consensus across the chamber that we need to work together to ensure that Scotland's secure provision is fit for purpose. We need a secure estate that both helps to improve outcomes for the small number of high-risk young people who require it and protects the public. I hardly need to remind members of Scotland's long and proud tradition of taking a child-centred approach when it comes to services for young people. The focus of the Scottish children's hearings system on needs as well as deeds is unique. Scotland's secure estate is located firmly within that welfare framework. It provides high-quality care and education for young people up to the age of 18 who have been deemed by children's hearings to pose a serious risk to themselves and/or others or who are required to be detained by the court. Young people are placed in secure care by local authorities or, in the case of those who are sentenced by the court, on the authority of Scottish ministers. Scotland has seven secure units, offering 128 places. Five of them are owned and operated by independent charities: St Mary's Kenmure in Bishopbriggs, East Dunbartonshire; St Philip's in Airdrie, North Lanarkshire; Kibble in Paisley, Renfrewshire; Rossie in Montrose, Angus; and the Good Shepherd centre in Bishopton, Renfrewshire. Two units are owned and operated by local authorities: the Elms in Dundee; and Edinburgh secure services in Edinburgh. Staff in secure units work daily with some of Scotland's most challenging, and yet most powerless, young people. During my visit to Kibble secure unit in Paisley earlier this week, I was impressed again by the fierce commitment of staff  to the young people in their care. I am sure that members will agree that the work that secure care staff carry out to help stabilise lives, protect youngsters and make our communities safer is invaluable—although, I regret to say, it is too infrequently recognised or celebrated. I therefore take this opportunity to thank all those who work in secure accommodation for what they do for our young people. In March we saw only too clearly how challenging that work can be. St Mary's Kenmure in Bishopbriggs, near Glasgow, was forced to close temporarily following a serious disturbance, during which a number of young people absconded from the unit. Although that was a unique incident in Scotland's secure care history, it gave the whole secure estate occasion to reflect on the difficulties associated with caring for young people. A number of important lessons have been learned, particularly in relation to staffing and security. I visited St Mary's Kenmure on 29 July, shortly before it reopened. David Whitton MSP, in whose constituency St Mary's is located, joined me on the visit. I spoke to staff and was reassured by the measures that the board of managers has taken to address the factors that contributed to the incident and to minimise the risk of such an incident happening again. Immediately following the events in March, the board of managers of St Mary's appointed an independent expert to lead a thorough investigation. Managers and staff at St Mary's have worked incredibly hard over the past four months, and I am delighted to report that they have successfully implemented the recommendations set out in the internal report as well as those made in the inspection report from the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care. Improvements include stronger and more effective leadership; a revised management and staffing structure; better staff induction; replacement and reinforcement of external windows; training for staff in the new security procedures; and repair and redecoration of damaged areas. St Mary's Kenmure has now reopened, and I am pleased by how responsibly the unit, which has a long history of positive inspection reports, has acted in facing up to the issues that led to the crisis. I am also confident that others in the sector, through the well-established secure forum, will become wiser as a result of that traumatic experience. Moving on to the strategic issues facing the estate, I acknowledge the very significant programme of investment in the secure estate that was made by the previous Administration, which we are committed to completing. The investment  of more than £20 million increased the total number and geographical spread of secure places, and improved specialist provision, with the creation of a dedicated unit for girls and young women and better support for those with mental health problems. The final stage of the redevelopment will be completed shortly, with Rossie due to open its refurbished unit near Montrose early in 2009. However, the improvements to the estate have come at a cost. The increase in demand that was projected when the programme was planned has not come to pass. At a time when our prisons are bursting at the seams, secure units have experienced difficulties in maintaining capacity. Let us be clear: a reduced number of young people in secure care would be something to celebrate. There are strong signs that more young people are being kept safely in their communities as a result of the increased availability of alternatives to secure accommodation. One such alternative is intensive support and monitoring, which this Government has rolled out to all areas of Scotland. Intensive support and monitoring services—ISMS—provide local partners with a robust alternative to secure accommodation and show how the combination of support and control can keep young people and communities safe in a more cost-effective way. Early evidence shows that that community-based alternative is having a real impact, with reduced reoffending and improved outcomes. No wonder practitioners prefer ISMS to under-16 antisocial behaviour orders, which are designed in a way that risks doing little more than setting children up to fail. However, the providers of secure accommodation cannot sustain a position in which costs exceed income and which is already threatening outcomes for young people. Does Scotland want to lose in an unplanned manner what is arguably world-class provision? Do we want a situation in which increasing costs mean that purchasers are forced to make decisions on a financial rather than a child-centred basis? I am sure that members in the chamber this afternoon will share my concern about those issues. Our priority must be to work in partnership to ensure that Scotland has the right range of services to keep young people and the public safe, while maintaining youngsters in their communities wherever possible. We have therefore made a commitment with COSLA to work with secure providers to find a sustainable way forward that makes the best use of the estate and meets the needs of vulnerable young people and their communities. That work will include looking at the opportunities afforded by  capacity in the secure estate to address the needs of other vulnerable young people. This Government is committed to the provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child and we are working to keep children out of prison. That is why we will legislate next year to abolish the unruly certificate, which enables children to be remanded to adult prisons. A short-life working group, the securing our future initiative—SOFI—has been tasked with considering how best to meet the nation's need for secure accommodation over the short to medium term. The group will produce recommendations for the Government and COSLA by spring next year. That work is being undertaken as part of the national residential child care initiative that was announced by the Minister for Children and Early Years, Adam Ingram, in February. The initiative is aimed at shaping the future direction of services to suit the needs of children and young people, in order to ensure that residential placements are the best choice for those children who need to live away from home. Both pieces of work are being independently led on the Government's behalf by the Scottish institute for residential child care. Members will surely agree that the young person's best interests must be at the very heart of future policy direction. Our secure estate must reflect the needs of troubled young people rather than society's inability to provide alternative care. To repeat Adam Ingram's recent message, we want every care home, including secure care homes, to be the first and best choice for those children and young people, rather than a place of last resort. That is why it is vital that we work in partnership—including with local authorities, providers of secure care, young people who stay in secure care, their families and communities—to ensure that our secure accommodation estate is fit for purpose for today and for where Scotland wants to be in future.

I welcome Richard Baker's general approach to the issue. I will try to answer as best I can each of his questions in turn. First, it seems to us entirely reasonable that there should be a debate in the Parliament in due course. My view is that we should wait until we and COSLA have digested and considered the SOFI report, which we expect to have received by spring 2009. Thereafter, members should most certainly have an opportunity to debate the report's findings, once they have had a chance to consider the issues. I confirm that there should be a debate—subject to the usual channels being able to organise that—which I suggest should happen next spring. Secondly, the short-life working group to which I referred—SOFI—has been tasked with considering how best to meet the nation's needs for secure accommodation over the short to medium term. I want to share with the Parliament SOFI's membership, which shows—this might influence members' thinking—that we have the right people, with a broad range of expertise, to address the problem. Romy Langland is SOFI's independent chair. The group's membership includes representatives from: social work; the care commission; the Scottish Government; COSLA; various of the secure establishments; academia; Includem; ISMS; and the Scottish Prison Service. A broad range of people are included on the group. It would be wrong for me to  pre-empt SOFI's decisions, but with an average cost of £4,500 per person per week, we all acknowledge that the costs of the estate are extremely high. I pay tribute to the previous Administration's work to increase the number of secure places, which we supported. However, our expectations that demand for places would rise inexorably, perhaps to as high as 200, have not been realised. Perhaps that is good news. No one wants to see a child in one of these institutions if there is a better and safer way. During my visit to Kibble last week, I saw some very troubled youngsters. If there are better ways of helping them, it is our duty as a society to find them. On 21 February, the cabinet secretary announced plans to abolish unruly certificates, which allow children aged 14 or 15 who appear before a criminal court on a charge to be remanded in prison custody. Prison is no place for children. There are no children in prison in Scotland as I speak; that is as it should be. I believe that the governor of Polmont takes a similar view, and, as far as I am aware, it is a unanimously held view in the chamber. Next year, we will legislate to abolish unruly certificates. Plainly, we want best practice to be used throughout Scotland. Those who work in secure units are often exposed to the risk of attack or assault in a way that is unparalleled in most other lines of work. We should acknowledge the professionalism of those people in using their character and skills in managing the most challenging and difficult of youngsters, and in doing so successfully so that the youngsters emerge on the other side.

The secure units are considerably aware of the need to treat separately youngsters who are in secure units for different reasons. When I visited the new, ultra-secure unit at Kibble this week, I saw that youngsters were kept in separate wings: those who had been sexually aggressive were dealt with in one area; those who were there on welfare grounds were held in another; and those who were remanded or convicted were held in another. That may not be the practice in every secure unit, but I hope that those who manage the secure estate are extremely aware of that practice. Bill Aitken's first, and perhaps main, question was whether we can guarantee that every child who needs a place will have one. Plainly, there has been investment in the secure estate of around £20 million, much of which was put in by our predecessors; we have put in around £3 million. It does not really matter who spends the money, as we all agree that it should be spent. The number of places in secure units is being brought up to 124. That capacity will be reached as St Mary's capacity increases—St Mary's is being reopened in a phased fashion and has not yet reached its full capacity. I believe that it will do so by the end of this month. Its present capacity is 15, which will increase to 24. When that happens, we will reach the figure of 124. The main problem, which SOFI is grappling with in a focused way, is that most of the secure units require to be operating at or near full capacity to break even. In other words, unless they are full or nearly full, they will sustain a revenue loss. That creates an extremely difficult challenge for them, to which I wanted to alert Parliament formally. That is why we want any closure not to be driven by financial considerations but to arise in a planned way, and why SOFI has been charged to do such work, which we will bring back to Parliament for discussion in due course. The problems are very real. Given that the average cost per week per child is £4,500, we are talking about a very large sum of money to look after a group whose members include some of the most challenged and vulnerable children in Scotland, as well as children who have committed crimes and who present a real safety risk to the public. I am not in the business of being a guarantor. I am a Government minister; I am not undertaking  the somewhat fixed and absolute role of a guarantor. By working together across parties with everyone involved, we can at least reach the best solution so that a substantial number of secure places will continue to be available in Scotland, which I hope will be adequate for the purpose—although, as Bill Aitken will understand, it is a demand-led service.

We intend to introduce the criminal justice bill next year, through which we will abolish unruly certificates. I fully agree that Kibble provides many facilities in addition to the secure unit. Its day centre has been particularly successful in guiding youngsters towards work. It has a great connection with various local businesses, which have engaged and played a part. Given that Kibble is possibly unique in providing an additional day centre facility that offers work-based approaches to providing boys with training, particularly in the construction trades, it could play a part in the expansion of our policy on community sentencing and non-custodial disposals. That issue was raised with me at Kibble in the course of my visit. Robert Brown seems to be so well acquainted with my visit that I am surprised that he was not in the room at the time. In general, intensive support and monitoring services, which were introduced by the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004, allow people who are at risk of offending or of harming themselves to be monitored and supported in the community. Evidence from the case studies and  local evaluation exercises indicates that those services have been effective for a significant number of young people in reducing offending. I saw that for myself in Inverness when I went to see the work of Action for Children. Other charities have done similarly good work across Scotland. The youngster builds up a bond of support and trust with a social worker or other professional person, which is key. That relationship is geared towards the provision of mentoring, support and counselling, and can divert the youngster from antisocial behaviour. The early, positive signs of the success of the intensive support approach are evident. If that prevents children from being sent to secure units, so much the better for them and for us all.

I join Joe FitzPatrick in acknowledging the work that is carried out by the Elms in Dundee. I believe that it caters for boys and girls and that it is managed by Dundee City Council. This Government wants as many people as possible to be diverted from antisocial behaviour and offending. Our approach to that task involves a variety of methods. In that task, we are greatly assisted by the excellent work that is done by the police and the fire service, as well as by the third sector. The work that is being done to divert youngsters away from crime and antisocial behaviour is not generally recognised or understood in Scotland. It is not reported by the media, perhaps because it is good news not bad news. Particularly after the antisocial behaviour review is completed next year, I want to focus on the good work that is being done and harness cross-party support to ensure that there is more of it. That will mean more children being directed away from crime and antisocial behaviour and given more choices and chances to take part in sport, leisure and other pursuits, which, once they have tried them, will help to turn them away from temptation.

I can provide an assurance that we want to continue to see the funding of those places. Part of the funding is from the Scottish Government and part is from local authorities. As I have mentioned, five of the secure units are charities that are not owned or run by the Government, but they play a part. The costs of secure units are extremely high. Plainly, if alternatives can be made to work without jeopardising public safety or disadvantaging the children concerned, we would all like those children not to be sent to those units, otherwise they will end up looking as frightened and alone as some of the youngsters whom I saw this week. We all want to achieve the same objective. We have absolutely no plans to cut anyone's funding, but we are aware that the institutions and secure units face difficult financial challenges. One reason why I am on my feet today is to share that news with MSPs and to encourage them to visit the units, as Mr FitzPatrick, Mr Whitton and Mr Brown have done, and find out for themselves what the problems are, so that they can contribute more effectively to the debate about how we can devise the best solutions.

I should say that St Mary's operated for 32 years without incident and received extremely positive reports. The staff there have done an excellent job. Problems arose that have been the subject of two reports, but I have been advised that they have been dealt with and that the board of managers at St Mary's has successfully implemented all the recommendations that resulted from the expert inquiry. Perhaps the whole experience has been a sign to everyone in the secure estate to reconsider what they do and how they do it. I am sure that that has happened. I have asked for the owners of secure units to be involved in SOFI's work and to have an opportunity to consider SOFI's recommendations before they are implemented. That will be done. After all, the owners must pay the bill if there is a deficit in their funding, and it is correct that they should be involved in the discussions on how we can progress in a planned fashion. I believe that the lessons from St Mary's have been learned. The episode was extremely difficult and bruising for many of those who were involved.  Plainly, we want to see engagements between secure units and the communities in which they lie, and we want to see the best possible relations between employers, staff and owners of the establishments. I believe that those objectives are being met.

I am pleased to have made my statement. It was right to make one today, and members have welcomed it. Mr Whitton and I met St Mary's managers, and had a thorough discussion in an extremely long meeting about the problems that St Mary's has faced. The internal summary report to which I alluded earlier, which was commissioned by the owners and prepared by an independent third party, was made available to staff on request, and it has been made available to Mr Whitton and the MP for the area. The care commission's report is publicly available on its website. I have read those documents and the recommendations that have been made, and have been advised that the recommendations have been adopted in their entirety, which is a very good result. Indeed, St Mary's was allowed to reopen only after the care commission's recommendations were largely implemented, as Mr Whitton knows. The unit is being reopened in a phased way to ensure that it meets all the appropriate requirements and, like all secure units, it is subject to quite extensive regulation by the care commission. Incidentally, that is why such high staff complements are needed in units. Indeed, they are probably the most labour-intensive institutions in the land, because such staffing levels are required to protect the staff and the children, but particularly the staff, who are at risk of assault. Their strength of character prevents them from being assaulted more frequently than they are. The work of secure units is extremely difficult. There will be incidents, as the units deal with the  most challenging children in Scotland. To suggest that staff will not have to face incidents that none of us would want to, or could, face is risible. Incidents will happen. The staff have an extremely difficult task. I am pleased that the recommendations of both reports have been implemented. I hope that we will all work together to ensure that our secure estate serves us well in the future, as it has done in the past and does now.

Plainly, the incident at St Mary's was unique. The member appears to suggest that other incidents of young people absconding from secure units have occurred that we somehow have not noticed. Unless he specifies what he means in his question—which suggests that other units are not performing properly or even in accordance with the law—I cannot answer the question. I cannot answer a question about unspecified allegations of unknown charges—that is for Franz Kafka to write about, not for me to reply to. We have every confidence in the people whom Mr FitzPatrick and I have met, the other people who are involved in the institutions and the good work that they do. I hope that all members will unite behind that. The institutions are policed strongly by the care commission and others, so if anything is not being done as it should be, it will most certainly be picked up. The care commission inspections continue at St Mary's and some of them are not heralded—they are unannounced inspections. The units are rigorously policed and inspected and they do a good job. We should support them, not undermine them.

I stress that youngsters are sent to secure units only as a very last resort. No youngster is sent there unless other options have been considered and tried. Most of the youngsters who end up in secure units have difficult family circumstances. There may be no parents around, and perhaps not even any family. I totally agree with Mike Pringle's approach, but we should recognise that any child who is sent to a secure unit is sent there as a last resort and that we are talking about a small number of young people. The most common age of young people in secure units is about 14 or 15, although sadly some are even younger. Occupancy levels vary. It would probably be more fruitful if I wrote to Mr Pringle, rather than give a rough and perhaps misleading figure. The key factor to bear in mind is that, unless the institutions operate at or near their full capacity, they are loss making. If they are making losses, there is a problem that we need to acknowledge and tackle. I understand that, of late, the occupancy levels have been fairly high, but they might fall off when St Mary's reopens to its full capacity, which will be fairly soon. I can write to the member with more information. For the information to be valid, it will need to show the occupancy levels of each establishment, because they are different. Today, we have had a good opportunity for members to gain a better understanding of an issue that I do not think has ever been discussed or debated fully in the Parliament in the past nine years.

We certainly respect and acknowledge the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child, and we wish to ensure that the practical imports of its provisions are fully observed in our legal system.

I can share details of SOFI's membership with members. I thought that it was publicly available anyway, but I will ensure that the Scottish Parliament information centre is given a list of the members. I alluded earlier to SOFI's members' areas of expertise. It is no secret—we will show who they are. I do not want, in my answers today, to prejudge or restrict SOFI in its deliberations. There is no point in it carrying out its task if I pre-empt it with an extemporary, unscripted remark. The member's first question was about local authority funding. I have mentioned the figures: £4,500 is the average cost per week of keeping a child in one of the institutions. That is more than £200,000 a year—the figure for prisons is around £40,000 a year. The reason for that is that the institutions require so many staff to run them safely and properly. The member asks whether local authorities take account of finance. Local authorities must, of course, run their budgets properly, but they have, as I understand it, received a record budget settlement—that is a matter of record. I am working closely with Isabel Hutton, the COSLA spokesperson on the issue, to find a solution. I hope that all parties can work together to seek consensus on this difficult topic.

Intensive support and monitoring services were introduced in 2004, as an alternative to secure accommodation for young people aged between 12 and 17 who are being dealt with by the children's hearings system. The services consist of a wraparound package of 24-hour crisis-responsive intensive support and, in some cases, an electronic monitoring device—a tag—to help to provide structure and boundaries in a young person's life.  I acknowledge Gil Paterson's long-standing interest in campaigning on these issues. He is absolutely right to say that intensive support is an extremely useful way of helping those young people. Personally, I would prefer to avoid tagging, where possible. Tagging is pretty demeaning. If it is possible for intensive support to be provided without tagging, as it has been in Inverness, so much the better. I have seen that for myself, and I have discussed with young people how they found the experience. It only works if they build up a bond of trust with those who provide the support, counselling and monitoring—if that bond does not exist, the support does not work. Gil Paterson is right. He spent many years working in the field, so it does not surprise me that he put his finger on one of the key ways forward for Scotland.

My officials and I meet representatives of the fire service regularly. The meetings cover a wide range of issues.

I acknowledge Michael Matheson's work in this field. This morning, I met representatives of the Fire Brigades Union. They were delighted that, on Tuesday, the Government reached a deal with our colleagues and partners in the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities not only to fund in full the additional cost arising from the increase in pension commutation factors for firefighters and police—that decision was taken at the United Kingdom level and it is right that it should be implemented—but to provide extra funding to meet the extra costs arising from the  retirement bulge: the growth in the number of firefighters and police who are coming up to their normal retirement date. I agree with Michael Matheson that, as the UK Government said that the cost of the increased commutation factors should be paid for and met that cost in full for firefighters and police in England and Wales, money for that should also have been provided to this place. We will continue to make representations for equity and parity of treatment, perhaps including representations to Mr Murphy shortly.

We are committed to perpetrators paying back to communities for damage that they have caused. We have given courts a range of community sentencing options for unpaid work. We are also piloting fiscal work orders in four areas. As an alternative to prosecution, people reported for low-level offending such as vandalism and graffiti will undertake between 10 and 50 hours payback.

I was not aware of the particular problem that the member highlights, but I would be happy to meet if that would assist him. We recognise that graffiti is a serious problem. Various statutory remedies have been provided for dealing with it, including the provisions in part 10 of the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004, which introduced a ban on the sale of spray paint to under-16s as a useful step in preventing graffiti and vandalism. If someone is found guilty of selling spray paint to under-16s, they are liable to a fine not exceeding level 3 in the standard scale, which is currently £1,000.

The real tough option can be work in the community. Work of a demanding nature is perhaps more of a punishment and tougher than being given bed and board and sitting in a prison cell watching "Neighbours" on television. I agree entirely with the broader approach that Robert Brown suggests.  Some 6,000 community service orders and more than 2,500 probation orders with a condition of unpaid work attached to them were imposed by Scotland's courts in 2006-07. That means that courts ordered more than a million hours of work to be carried out. That is a high number, but we believe that much more can be done and that many more offenders whose crimes involve vandalism and graffiti should be dealt with in the community, giving payback rather than sitting on their haunches in a prison cell.

Once again, we hear more whining from members on the Labour benches but absolutely nothing in the way of alternatives. I would have thought that Labour would welcome the community sentencing approach and the facts that I have just announced, and would see that the future requires much more to be done in that regard, instead of giving us a scratched record of whining, whingeing, moaning and endless calls for more resources to be aimlessly ploughed into every problem under the sun.

The Title Conditions (Scotland) Act 2003 provides a legal framework for the variation or discharge of burdens that are found in title deeds. Homeowners should first seek legal advice as to the appropriate option, according to their circumstances. Ministers have no powers to intervene in private disputes. Issues can arise due to poor and unacceptable standards of service. The trading standards service is aware of such consumer protection issues and has mechanisms in place to deal quickly with disputes. The Office of Fair Trading is undertaking a market study into property managers in Scotland. I will meet the OFT later this month to discuss land maintenance companies.

My officials are in contact with the Lands Tribunal and will work to examine and evaluate the issues that arise in connection with Greenbelt. I look forward to receiving Angela Constance's letter on an issue that she is pursuing tenaciously. Complex legal areas are involved and we all wish to make progress on them. One reason why I arranged to meet the Office of Fair Trading in London later this month is so that I can see what, if anything, it can do to protect consumers. In this case, we are talking about a substantially reserved issue.

I am not aware of the company to which the member refers. If she writes to me with the details, I will be in a position to reply. Of course, when one buys property, one should take legal advice. Currently, there are no rules to prohibit the separate sale of amenity land within an estate. That is a law reform that no previous Administration sought to introduce; indeed, there may be problems in introducing it. In any event, given that any law reform would not be retrospective, it would not apply to those who have difficulties with land maintenance companies. Nonetheless, many members have raised the issue. The Government is very keen to work with members and their constituents to see whether any other remedy can be found.

From the outset of this Government, we have made it clear that there is no place in modern Scotland for the sectarian bigotry that has blighted the lives of so many of our people. This Government will continue to tackle sectarianism and believes very strongly that education and the promotion of constructive dialogue will deliver the sectarian-free Scotland that we all aspire to.

I hope that all members believe that, of all issues, sectarianism is one for which we should eschew any temptation to indulge in any element of partisan or party politics. From the outset, the First Minister has made absolutely clear his commitment to opposing sectarianism in all its forms. His commitment was exemplified when he hosted in Edinburgh castle what I believe was the first reception of its kind, to thank the people who have worked so hard—in churches, football clubs, voluntary organisations and elsewhere—to tackle sectarianism. I hope that it is not in doubt that all members in this chamber are wholly committed to such objectives. The Government is working in a huge range of ways to exemplify that commitment.

Roseanna Cunningham is absolutely correct. In September last year I met the faith liaison advisory group, which represents religious communities across Scotland. I also hosted an anti-sectarianism event in Dynamic Earth to recognise the innovative ways in which young children have used art to show that we are all the same underneath the skin and underneath the football shirt. In October I met Action of Churches Together in Scotland, and in November I took part in Nil by Mouth's "Sectarian Stories" launch and gave the keynote address at the churches' anti-sectarianism event. In February, Dr Paisley and Martin McGuinness joined the First Minister and me in participating in another event involving young people, to show a united front against sectarianism. We have also launched the Scottish working group on religion and belief relations, and in July I met Sense over Sectarianism to agree formally a further funding package that will provide the partnership with £412,500 to continue the good work that it does to attack sectarianism in all its forms. On the question of a summit, there is no doubt that all religious leaders and all leaders of football clubs have already expressed their commitment to the task. On every occasion at which I have spoken, I have congratulated the former First Minister on his efforts. I congratulate him again here today. That commitment is not in doubt, but we need to move on towards the implementation of the campaign—especially among the young people of Scotland.

I thank the right hon Henry McLeish for chairing the Scottish Prisons Commission and I thank the commission members. I concur with the view that various members have expressed: that we do not have enough time to do justice to the commission's report. Anyone who has read the extremely readable report cannot help but be stimulated, at the very least, about how we approach the task of addressing the future of our criminal justice system. We owe the commission a considerable debt of thanks for that piece of work. As reports go, it is extremely thoughtful, provoking and evidence based. If we take it as seriously as it merits, it will help us improve considerably not only our criminal justice system but our society. I have listened with great interest to the points that have been raised in the debate. One of the key messages around which a consensus is perhaps struggling to escape and be expressed explicitly is that we need more effective community sentencing—that is perhaps the core of the debate. As the cabinet secretary said on Tuesday at the annual Apex Scotland lecture, community penalties offer the prospect of payback to our communities. That link has perhaps not been understood. Communities do not see community sentencing as involving or providing the possibility of payback. That needs to change. We heard, from Robert Brown and many others—even Lord George Foulkes mentioned it, somewhat to my surprise—that 75 per cent of those who are sent to prison for under six months are reconvicted within two years, compared with a reconviction rate of only 39 per cent for those who are given community service. That is a startling statistic, but I do not recall Pauline McNeill or Bill Aitken mentioning it. I do not suggest that they did not do so because it did not suit their particular point, but the statistic is nonetheless true.

I will do so in a second. I hope that we can all accept that prison does not work in terms of preventing reoffending. The statistics clearly show that for those who are sentenced to relatively small periods of  imprisonment—we are not talking about rapists and murderers, but about those at the other end of the scale—prison is a revolving door and they are in and out repeatedly. We all accept that that is the case. If communities need respite, as Paul Martin said, it is gey short because offenders come back out and do the same thing again. I hope that we can all recognise and unite behind the notion that—

Yes, I will do so in a second. I hope that members will agree, as I struggle to find this consensus, that community sentencing offers a better way in the long term of protecting communities because sending offenders back to jail for short periods manifestly has not done that.

I will take the latter, positive, part of that contribution rather than the former part, if I may, as a sign that there is some sort of light at the end of the tunnel and not just more tunnel, as sometimes occurs in these debates. Rather than give specific examples of what a payback scheme would involve, I suggest that it must have three requirements. First, it must be tough for the offender—it cannot be a breeze. A payback scheme is tougher than spending time watching daytime television in a prison cell or, as the cabinet secretary said, playing pool. It is tough doing hard work and it should be tough. There should be hard work to do. More communities want to see people doing that work in their communities—for example sorting out the litter that despoils the verges of our main roads, not least in my constituency where we want the tourists to see another, tidy, Scotland as well as a safe one. Communities want that work done, and I hope that we can all agree that it is work that offenders should have to do. Secondly, communities should have a say in determining what work is carried out in their areas. That would let them buy in, and it would address the problems that Paul Martin has described in relation to communities' concerns. Thirdly, the activity should help the offender get their life back on track through teaching them a  new skill and providing access to support and a bit of old-fashioned routine. I heard a story about some young lads who turned up for work under a programme one morning, but they did not come back in the afternoon—they did not know that work was done in the afternoon. It can be as basic as that. Richard Simpson was right to raise the matter of drug use. For people who have a serious drug addiction problem, short sentences are perhaps the least effective solution of all. I understand from my recent visits to various prisons that if the sentence is less than 30 days there is not time for any meaningful activity or programme to be provided. Short sentences are not only no use, they are worse than useless because they interrupt the treatment that might be going on outside the prison system.

Certainly.

I am too kind to allude to the fact that the Conservatives are the ones who introduced early release, thereby allowing offenders out after serving one half of their sentences. I will not mention that. Bill Aitken's intervention gives me the opportunity to dispel a misconception that Nigel Don correctly identified. We do not have a target—nor will we accept one—of 5,000 for the desired average prisoner population. That is to misunderstand what Henry McLeish said. He said that, after his recommendations were implemented, we would be able to have a prison population level such that the people in prison are those who should be in prison—for the most serious crimes. That is the basis of that recommendation. We are proud of our record, since coming into government, of instructing the building of new prisons. I am prepared to accept the point that Richard Simpson made: that the world did not begin when the SNP came into government—but it is now a happier place, and safer, stronger, healthier, et cetera.

It is not tidier yet, but it will be, after we get community sentencing on the go. I am proud that the cabinet secretary has given such a strong lead in the improvement of our prison estate. It is badly needed. It is an extremely serious point that the prison population is now at a record level. Today, it stands at 8,116, which is up from 8,098 last week. Prisoners cost the taxpayer £40,000 a year each. I thought that it was somewhat indelicate of Mr Robert Brown to point out that that is more expensive than the annual cost of an education at Eton College. Nonetheless, it is true.

As has been said, part of the answer to that question is undoubtedly that it is not perceived that community sentencing is as effective as it should be—although page 67 of the McLeish report shows that there is an excellent community service programme in Falkirk, which gives us an example of best practice that we can follow, as Mr Matheson has urged me to do. There are two visions of Scotland's future: the one that Henry McLeish set out, in which prison does the job that it should do and prisoners are rehabilitated and do not reoffend on a massive scale; or the one for which some of the recidivists on the Conservative benches have argued, despite the fact that, as Mr Robert Brown pointed out, their friends down south fundamentally disagree—I presume that down south they are soft-touch Tories, as opposed to the real McCoy that we have up here. I have no doubt which vision Scotland will choose: it will be the one that Henry McLeish has set out in his excellent report.

Only police officers and other emergency workers are identifiable in the recorded crime and court proceedings statistics on assaults. In 2006-07, there were 723 minor assaults of an emergency worker, 113 incidents of obstructing or hindering emergency workers in pursuance of their duty and 3,274 crimes of obstructing a police officer. Also in 2006-07, 4,061 people were proceeded against for assaulting or impeding police officers  and 212 were proceeded against for assaulting or impeding emergency workers. Figures for 2007-08 are not yet available.

I agree with the sentiments that Hugh Henry has expressed. I think that we all accept in principle that an assault on any citizen of Scotland should be condemned and that the forces of the justice system have to be applied strongly to crimes against the person. Hugh Henry makes a case for the Emergency Workers (Scotland) Act 2005 being extended to cover other workers. I am always willing to look at that. Following Shona Robison's representations with regard to an odious assault on Scottish Water workers, we are looking at that. I am pleased that, this year, we have already extended the act to cover general practitioners, other doctors, nurses and midwives working in the community. I am pleased that we have a cross-party approach to this issue and I am sure that it will continue.

The latest statistics on fires in Scotland are available in the annual publication "Fire Statistics Scotland, 2006", which is available in the Scottish Parliament information centre—Bib  number 45584. The publication includes statistics on the number and causes of fires by property type, along with data on fire casualties. Property types in the publication include domestic dwellings and commercially run establishments providing sleeping accommodation. Statistics on fires in hotels and bed-and-breakfast premises are not available separately.

First, bed-and-breakfast providers contribute well to the Scottish economy and we are extremely supportive of their work. Secondly, there are guidelines and in preparation for the question I recently took the opportunity to read them. They point out the blindingly obvious: when people are asleep, whether in a hotel, a B and B or another establishment, they are vulnerable to fire, and whether they are in a B and B, a hotel or another establishment they are entitled to have appropriate protection against fire. I imagine that all members would take that to be self-evident. The guidance, which I can share with the member if he wishes, often seems to be no more than common sense, if rather lengthy common sense. I believe that it was prepared following the introduction of the Fire (Scotland) Act 2005—I believe with cross-party support—and the subsequent Scottish statutory instrument in 2006; it is intended to ensure that proportionate steps are taken. The member will probably also be aware that if any B and B provider is dissatisfied with the indication of requirements by the enforcement officer, there is an appeals procedure. Thus far, as I understand it, that procedure has not been triggered. I assure the member and others who have written to me that we take the matter very seriously. A reasonable question is being asked, but I hope that we all recognise the overriding requirement and duty on us all to provide adequate and appropriate protection against fire, which, as we well know, causes a great many deaths in our country.

In accepting a number of the points that the member makes, I assure him that my mind is rarely padlocked shut. However, I am confident that the guidance was prepared with the benefit of consultation with 15 tourism industry representatives, including the Federation of Small Businesses, the Association of Scotland's Self-Caterers, Scotland's Best B&Bs and Scottish Independent Hostels. The industry was certainly consulted about these matters. I am sure that the member will agree that, if one dies in a fire, it makes no difference whether that fire was in a bed-and-breakfast establishment with two rooms or a hotel with 250 rooms, and that, therefore, the fundamental principle of the policy is correct. We are, however, extremely aware of the need to ensure that the practical measures that enforcement officers believe are necessary should be proportionate, not disproportionate, and we hope that these matters can be resolved at a local level, by agreement, as appears to be the case in most cases at the present time.

Paul Martin knows that I would be happy to mention specific measures that we have introduced. However, does he accept the key findings in the report by the Auditor General that was published last autumn? The report says that "the impact of this activity ... is not yet demonstrated", despite the extra funding and the "earlier commitments made by the Scottish Executive."  The report also mentions "the limited progress made" over five years.

I am delighted to present to the Parliament a new youth justice framework, "Preventing Offending by Young People: A Framework for Action". At the outset, I re-emphasise the Government's overarching purpose: to create a more successful country, with opportunities for all of Scotland to flourish through increasing sustainable economic growth. Young people and their families and communities are at the heart of that vision for Scotland. There can be few more pressing issues for this Administration than the need to tackle problems associated with youth crime. The successful future of Scotland depends on getting it right. When we talk about youth crime and youth justice it is imperative to stress that the vast majority of young people do not offend. Most of our young people make an extremely positive contribution to society and are valuable and valued members of their communities. We need to build on the great qualities that young people bring to our society: energy, enthusiasm, creativity, an appetite for learning and huge potential for the future. At the same time, we must acknowledge that a small but significant number of young people offend and reoffend. It is therefore essential that everything possible is done to address the issues in a young person's life that cause offending behaviour. The purpose of the framework is to outline a shared ambition of what we, as national and local agencies, want to do to prevent, divert, manage and change offending behaviour by children and young people and how we want to do that. In driving forward our work, we will focus on prevention, early and effective intervention, managing high risk, victims and community confidence. We are proud to have developed the framework jointly with our partners in the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland, the Scottish Children's Reporter Administration, the Crown Office, the inspectorates, the Association of Directors of Social Work and Audit Scotland. Many large third-sector organisations have also welcomed the framework. Indeed, I had an extremely  constructive meeting with a number of key players last week. Our shared vision is to work together as national and local partners to deliver real improvements on the ground. All our partners will have a part to play in taking the framework forward through their various responsibilities. I have been greatly encouraged by the extremely constructive spirit of the discussions that I have had with all the parties involved in the development of the framework and I place on record my thanks to everyone who contributed to the work. The framework's foundations were laid some time ago. For a number of years, the youth justice agenda in Scotland has been busy: there have been national standards, targets, legislation and we have had new money. During that period, a great deal of positive work has been carried out with young people and lots of good practice has developed. However, we have to ask ourselves what impact all that activity and extra money has had on outcomes for young people. For example, despite the £7 million of Government funding that has been devoted to antisocial behaviour orders for under-16s since ASBOs were introduced in 2004, only 14 ASBOs have been issued. It is perhaps no surprise that the appropriateness and effectiveness of ASBOs have been questioned.

We must take into account the effectiveness of expenditure of public money. If £7 million has been devoted to junior ASBOs and only 14 such ASBOs have been issued, by my arithmetic the cost must have been £500,000 per junior ASBO. The member might not agree with me on every occasion, but what I say is not my judgment but the judgment of Audit Scotland in its report "Dealing with offending by young people: performance update", which set out the number of ASBOs that had been issued—at the time it was even fewer than 14. The Auditor General for Scotland said in the report: "the impact of this activity on improved services and outcomes is not yet demonstrated ... sustained reductions in offending behaviour have yet to be realised." The road to Polmont and Barlinnie is paved with good policy intentions. This Government has clearly signalled its belief that if action to tackle offending and antisocial behaviour is to be effective it must be taken at the  earliest possible stage. We are determined to ensure that all young people have more choices and chances and that positive opportunities are available for all. Perhaps Cathie Craigie agrees that if £7 million were spent on providing more choices and chances rather than on junior ASBOs, the outcome might be more successful.

From my discussions with the third sector last week, my impression is that the belief that more effort on prevention and intervention would pay dividends is common ground among key players—that seems almost axiomatic. Indeed, there is such clear consensus on the matter among all people who are involved on the front line that it is scarcely a matter of controversy. I will mention specific examples. We are already delivering on prevention and intervention through cashback for communities funding of around £7 million, which is providing a wide range of physical and cultural opportunities for young people in our communities. We are investing money confiscated from drug dealers and organised criminals in choices and chances for young people. After all, when asked what they want most from Government, young people most often say, "More things to do." That is what we are trying to offer. According to the old saying, crime pays, and it is now time for criminals to pay up. I am particularly keen for youngsters who have been identified as being on the cusp of developing a pattern of offending behaviour to be given the opportunity to take part in structured outdoor activities on residential courses. In the long-term fight against crime, prevention is better—and far less costly—than cure. Of course, that does not mean that we should ignore the small but significant number of children and young people who have complex needs and present a high risk both to themselves and to others. Their needs should be met and the risks that they pose managed to ensure that they have an opportunity to change their behaviour and become positive contributors to society. I believe that the word "divert" comes from the Latin "divertere", which means to turn aside—I see Bill Aitken, that noted Latin scholar, nodding sagely at that—and that is what we wish to do with these young people. Although this framework signals a new approach, it builds on the best of what has gone before. I recognise, again, the positive work and commitment that have taken us to this point and will highlight a couple of examples of the effective work that is going on. For example, NCH's early  intervention project, which works with not only primary school age children who are at risk of offending or who display challenging behaviour but their families, has been very successful in diverting children from entering the youth justice system. Moreover, by working together effectively, agencies in Fife have in the past year cut in half referrals to an overburdened hearings system—a particular problem, which the Conservatives have identified in their amendment. Following a successful pilot, we have extended intensive support and monitoring to help to manage high-risk and vulnerable young offenders. I have seen for myself how effective a strong bond of trust between a youngster and the worker deputed to provide support can be. I could cite many more examples, but time does not permit. This framework, which covers prevention, diversion, intervention and risk management, sets out a new approach to achieving better and more consistent ways of tackling offending by young people. However, although we are united in our focus on this problem, I am under no illusion about the task that faces us. I very much welcome the time and effort taken by all the partners to come up with this framework, which I hope that we all can unite behind. By doing so, we can secure a safer, stronger future for our young people and Scotland. I move, That the Parliament acknowledges the positive contribution that children and young people across Scotland make to society; believes that every young person deserves the best start in life; is committed to giving young people more positive choices and chances and removing the barriers that prevent some from realising their potential and leading successful lives; notes that there are a number of young people who do not realise their potential and get into trouble and recognises the need to intervene quickly and effectively to turn their lives around; further recognises the need to support victims of offending, and considers that communities, the third sector, the private sector, public services, local authorities and the Scottish Government need to work together to build a more successful Scotland by preventing offending and intervening early with children and families at risk.

The Scottish Government does not directly monitor the effectiveness of public-space closed-circuit television systems that are controlled by other public authorities. However, we believe that public-space CCTV systems can play an important role in the prevention, detection and prosecution of crime. To help to clarify that role, we are currently undertaking a strategic review of  the use of public-space CCTV in Scotland, which will conclude later in the summer.

We believe that CCTV plays an extremely useful part in detecting and prosecuting crime. The idea that we are somehow all going to be placed under 24-hour surveillance is somewhat overblown and extravagant—even if we had the money to undertake such a spurious and futile venture. The review is being undertaken, and if Patrick Harvie wishes to send in specific evidence, we will of course consider it, along with everyone else's views. I highlight the evidence from Detective Chief Superintendent John Carnochan to the health inequalities task force. Detective Chief Superintendent Carnochan showed images of a murder in the centre of Glasgow in 1997, in which an innocent bystander was stabbed by a young man, who went on to be sentenced to seven years for culpable homicide. It was CCTV evidence, in part, that led to that conviction. I hope, therefore, that all members will continue to endorse the use of CCTV for such valuable purposes.

As set out in the new drugs strategy—"The Road to Recovery: A New Approach to Tackling Scotland's Drug Problem", which was published last week—the Scottish Government is committed to a new approach to tackling drug misuse across Scotland. Dundee will receive its share of the £94 million that is to be made available over the next three years in the justice portfolio to tackle drugs misuse, alongside the resources that are contributed by local partners such as Dundee City Council. It will be for the local alcohol and drug action team to decide how those resources should be allocated according to local needs and priorities in order to achieve maximum benefit for the people of Dundee.

I am certainly aware of the statistics that have been referred to in the local paper's campaign and in associated publicity. I also recognise that Joe FitzPatrick has taken an active role in advocating that steps must be taken to tackle the situation. The Government stands four-square behind the police in their efforts to tackle such matters. I believe—as, I imagine, Joe FitzPatrick does—that the most effective approach is to allow decisions to be made at local level on a community basis so that they are informed by close knowledge of the problems. I do not think that he is asking for the cabinet secretary and me to direct or dictate how the police tackle such issues, although we are of course fully behind the police's efforts.

I congratulate Nigel Don on his ingenuity in framing that question. I am able to inform him that the latest drug seizure figures—admittedly, they are for the whole of Scotland—show that the number of seizures of class A drugs is up by almost 18 per cent and stands at 6,451. That is the highest number of class A seizures on record. I am aware that Aberdeen—if I am allowed to refer to that city, Presiding Officer—has a particular problem with cocaine. We are not complacent. Drug dealers are interested not in peddling a particular type of drug but in making profits and wielding power. That is why we stand fully behind the efforts of Gordon Meldrum and the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency and the police in continuing successfully to tackle drug dealing. I hope that all members will combine in giving their full backing to the excellent work that those agencies do.

It has been six days since the publication of our new national drugs strategy, "The Road to Recovery: A New Approach to Tackling Scotland's Drug Problem". I felt it right to allow time for members to reflect on it and to seek views from the field before we debated it. Members will express their views today, but I am pleased that there has been widespread support for the central thrust of our strategy, which is the concept of recovery. That support reflects the many positive discussions that I have had with a range of parties—from key experts to practitioners, politicians, and service users and their families—during the development of the strategy. In particular, I am pleased that the health and wellbeing spokesperson for the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, Councillor Ronnie McColl, welcomed the publication of the strategy, which he said gives a renewed focus to local authorities' work. Last week, Tom Wood, who has retired as chairman of the Scottish Association of Alcohol and Drug Action Teams, said that the strategy "marks a very positive change in direction, towards recovery", and the chief medical officer, Harry Burns, thinks that it provides "a clear set of integrated actions aimed at tackling the drug problem in Scotland." To recap, recovery means recovery; it means more than simply reducing risk and harm. Services should help a person to move on towards a drug-free life as an active and contributing member of society. Our approach is person centred. It places service users' needs and aspirations at the centre of their care. Recovery is a process, not an event; it is a journey, not an end point. People's milestones on the road to recovery may be as simple as gaining weight, re-establishing relationships with friends and family or building self-esteem and then entering a training or education programme and developing skills.

Earlier in the process, I had constructive discussions with my counterpart down south, Vernon Coker, which were conducted around the confines of the British-Irish Council in Dublin. I also corresponded with him recently, and I met Roger Howard of the UK Drug Policy Commission, which does good work—indeed, it has made proposals on recovery that are similar to ours. "Journey to Recovery", which was published with the drugs strategy, contains stories of the different ways in which a number of individuals have recovered. Let me be clear: the Government is not in the business of second-guessing clinicians or seeking to disparage particular treatments without which individuals and society would be exposed to unwarranted risks.

I have had the privilege of travelling around Scotland and visiting a great many service users in every city of Scotland—indeed, I visited service users in Edinburgh this morning. Recovery is hard. It takes a long time to recover and a lot of effort by the person involved and by those who provide help. It can come in many different forms. This morning, for example, I saw skills being developed as part of the transition project in Edinburgh. Johann Lamont asks whether methadone treatment should or could in some circumstances continue indefinitely. Such matters are matters for clinicians. I have already said that I cannot and will not second-guess what clinicians say. It would be completely wrong for any minister to do so. I am a politician, not a doctor. There is a place for methadone. Some people argue that it is like another drug, and that in some circumstances—perhaps relatively few—people may persist in taking it for some or many years. However, the main point is that it is not for me to second-guess what drugs should be prescribed to whom; rather, my job is to set out a vision and strategy, the guiding and central principle of which is recovery. We must recognise that substitute prescribing has an important part to play in tackling addiction. That was the conclusion of an expert report that  the Scottish Advisory Committee on Drug Misuse published last year, and it is also entirely consistent with the recently reviewed United Kingdom guidelines on clinical management, which are known as the orange guidelines, for obvious reasons. However, simply getting people into treatment can no longer be seen as a successful outcome in itself. That is a key point of the strategy. Treatment services must be integrated with wider employment, training, housing and counselling support services to help people to recover and rebuild their lives.

Working with COSLA, we are pursuing an approach that, as I will explain, is based on the development of outcomes. That is not easy. Of course we want more people to get treatment, but there are dangers in setting targets that may prove to be arbitrary. For example, if the target is simply to deliver an extra 300 people into treatment, there is an in-built incentive for local authorities to chase the numbers, and quantity does not always mean quality. Targets can have unintended consequences. Similarly, at the transition project this morning, an official from City of Edinburgh Council said that there is a danger that, if the focus of all the activity is on treatment, as Richard Simpson suggests, other worthy parts of recovery, such as training, will be sidelined and will not receive resources, because they will all be going towards meeting a target. Therefore, although I have some sympathy with the approach that is set out in the Labour amendment, I say with respect that I hope that we can instead continue to work across the parties on the outcome agreements with local authorities, to which COSLA has agreed. The implementation of the strategy is key. We have developed it in partnership and it is essential that we deliver it in partnership, both within and outwith the chamber. I am personally committed to working with ministerial colleagues, external stakeholders and political parties to ensure that the strategy is implemented successfully. I want to do that in the same spirit—and, I hope, with the same vigour—that we have already shown. We owe it to every person in Scotland who has been affected by drug use to work together to support practitioners who will work on the ground to implement the strategy. Central to the delivery of the strategy is reform of the way in which drug services are planned, commissioned and delivered. To make recovery a  reality, local partners need to ensure that the appropriate range of services is in place locally and regionally. We have, therefore, set up an expert delivery reform group to consider future delivery arrangements. The continuing work of that group will determine how best performance management and accountability arrangements for local delivery of drug services should operate within the context of single outcome agreements and national health service accountability structures. That is broadly similar to what I just said to Dr Simpson. The same group is also seeking to develop an outcome-based framework for assessing and managing performance at a local level to improve outcomes for service users.

Margo MacDonald makes a telling point. The problem may often be not insufficient resources but lack of skills, personnel, or skills and personnel at the right place or throughout Scotland. We accept that point.

Because I have taken interventions, I must fast-forward about eight pages into my speech, to the approach that we are taking in our prisons. The Scottish Prison Service is piloting a new model of care within Saughton prison, which aims to integrate medical treatment with wraparound therapeutic support to give prisoners the best chance of recovery from drug problems and enable them to rebuild their lives after prison. We are happy to consider carefully the proposal in the Conservative amendment, which was lodged yesterday. The Government has some technical difficulties in accepting it, because it makes a proposal that we must consider extremely carefully, but I undertake that the Scottish Government will examine it fully, and we have agreed to meet Annabel Goldie to do just that. I hope that that assurance provides some comfort. The publication of our new drugs strategy provides an opportunity for everyone in the chamber to work together, to put the sterile debates of the past behind us, and to reform drug services so that more people recover, reclaim their lives and make a positive contribution to society. Our new strategy provides a sound framework on which to take that work forward, and I recommend it to the chamber.  I move, That the Parliament welcomes the publication of the national drugs strategy, The Road to Recovery , as a sound framework for tackling drug misuse in Scotland; acknowledges that it is founded on expert advice and has been developed through a wide-ranging and inclusive process; supports the Scottish Government's vision that recovery should be the guiding principle of all services for problem drug users; recognises the breadth of action set out in the strategy to prevent drug use, to make communities safer, to tackle drug use in prisons and to protect children affected by parental substance misuse; recognises the Scottish Government's intention to support action to tackle drug misuse with £94 million from the Justice portfolio alone over the next three years and welcomes the work that Audit Scotland is carrying out into the scale and effectiveness of drugs expenditure, and resolves to support the implementation of the strategy over the coming years.

I am delighted to present to Parliament the first national drugs strategy since 1999. Indeed, "The Road to Recovery: A New Approach to Tackling Scotland's Drug Problem" is the first national drugs strategy since devolution. There can be few more pressing issues for the second year of this Administration than tackling problem drug use. Scotland has, per head of population, more problem drug users than any other country in these islands, and more than most comparable European countries. We should not accept that as an inescapable fact of life. Contrary to some perceptions, drug use is not glamorous. It severely damages health and in some cases kills—421 people in Scotland lost their lives to drugs in 2006; it undermines family life and relationships; it can lead people into crime and prostitution; and it can damage children and young people beyond repair. The wider costs to society, which are estimated to amount to some £2.6 billion—£2,600 million—a year, are enormous and are mirrored by lost opportunities. Drug use is both a symptom and a cause of the health inequalities that afflict Scotland. If we want a more successful Scotland, in which all have opportunities to flourish, tackling problem drug use is not a task that we can avoid or ignore. As a society, together we need to face up to Scotland's drug problem. I have been greatly encouraged by the highly constructive spirit of the discussions that I have had over the past year with all the parties that are represented in Parliament, which reflects the cross-party support that was expressed in Parliament last September for the development of a fresh approach to tackling drug misuse based on consensus. I hope that, over the next week, we can show that we have achieved that, and thereby  send out from Parliament a powerful signal of common purpose. The strategy's foundations were laid some time ago. As the incoming Minister for Community Safety, I was pleased to learn last May of the imminent publication of a series of wide-ranging expert reports on different aspects of the drug problem. That consolidation of the evidence base provided an excellent basis for a wide-ranging series of discussions. I would like to place on record my thanks to everyone who contributed to that work, particularly the members of the Scottish Advisory Committee on Drug Misuse, who provided invaluable advice. This is not in the script, but I would also like to thank most sincerely my officials for their advice, support and energy. Our vision is that recovery must be central to our new strategy and that it must be the guiding purpose of all drug treatment services. Recovery is, above all, about movement and dynamism. It is the principle whereby services should not just reduce risk and harm but support people to move on towards a drug-free life as active and contributing members of society. Recovery involves a person-centred approach that recognises that drug users come in units of one, each of whom has different aspirations and needs, will require different assistance to help them recover and will aim for different milestones along the way. That is entirely consistent with the approach that was set out in the recently reviewed and updated "Drug misuse and dependence: UK guidelines on clinical management", which are sometimes known as the orange guidelines, for obvious reasons. Saying that more should be done to help people to move on is not a criticism of the dedication of practitioners in recent years to get more people into treatment. Governments should not second-guess clinicians or seek to disparage particular treatments, without which we would expose individuals and society to unwarranted risks. However, in the past there has not been enough focus on achieving positive outcomes for people who have drug problems, so we must make that a priority for the future. We will achieve such outcomes by reforming how drugs services are planned, commissioned and delivered. We are working with partners, including, of course, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, to ensure that services deliver recovery outcomes in the context of the new single outcome agreements and national health service accountability arrangements. We will establish a new national support capacity to help to support local partners to deliver the recovery approach in drug services and we will embed recovery in training and workforce development.  However, our strategy is not just about treating people who have established drug problems—it takes a broad approach to preventing problem drug use. We believe that the most effective way to prevent future problem drug use is to create a more successful society that has sustainable economic growth, stronger families and communities, and more opportunities for all to flourish. We are also taking action, through an expert group and by reforming the education system as part of curriculum for excellence, to sharpen up the delivery of substance misuse education in our schools, but the strategy recognises that education extends beyond schools. Parents, in particular, have a key role to play in educating and supporting young people, but that can be difficult if they do not think they know enough about drugs. That is why I am pleased to announce that the Government will provide a copy of the know the score publication "drugs: what every parent should know" to every family in Scotland. As a society, we need a better and more informed dialogue on such issues, and I hope that the provision of that publication will be helpful in that regard. At the other end of the spectrum, parental drug use can have a serious and damaging effect on children. An estimated 40,000 to 60,000 children are affected by parental drug use, so it is crucial that we tackle the complex problems that children who live in such households face. The strategy builds on the improvements that have already been made under the banners of "Hidden Harm" and "getting it right for every child" but signals a change of emphasis towards support for children and families. It places the child firmly at the centre of agency responses and embeds in practice the principle of early intervention. We are setting in motion a programme of action to improve the identification of children who are at risk, to build the capacity of services, to strengthen the management of immediate risk and to develop an evidence base. We want to build on the extensive good practice on the ground. Tackling the supply of illegal drugs remains an essential part of our new strategy. We want to strengthen the powers that we already have to recover assets and cash from criminals who benefit from unlawful conduct, including drug dealing, in an effort to make a lifetime of crime open to a lifetime of recovery. We want to continue the practice of channelling those moneys back into communities, so that young people have the choices and chances that they need. We remain committed to breaking the cycle of drug addiction and crime by providing opportunities for treatment at all stages of the criminal justice system. For every £1 that is spent on treatment, at least £9.50 is saved in health and  crime costs. Piloting the extension of drug treatment and testing orders—DTTOs—to lower-tariff offenders will contribute to those savings. Our strategy sets out a new approach to achieving better quality and more consistent treatment across all prisons. In Her Majesty's prison in Edinburgh, we are piloting a new model of integrated care that aims to give people the best chance of recovery from their drug problems. We will also maximise the continuity of care between prison and release into the community by developing and implementing an information-sharing protocol between the prison and throughcare service. From the justice portfolio alone, we are making available £94 million over the next three years to tackle drug misuse. I am pleased to announce today that health boards will receive a 3.8 per cent increase in funding for drug treatment services. However, that is not the whole picture, because funds from other general budgets that are allocated by Government to local authorities are also spent on tackling drug use. The report that Audit Scotland is undertaking on the scale and effectiveness of expenditure on drugs, which was announced by the Auditor General last year, will be critical in developing a stronger base to inform future spending. Our strategy sets out a vision where fewer people start using drugs; where early intervention prevents and reduces the harms caused by drugs; where more people recover to make a positive contribution to society; and where communities are stronger and safer places to live and work. I hope that the strategy will have the whole-hearted support of all members when it is debated in the chamber next Wednesday.

First, the Government is working extremely closely in partnership with COSLA on tackling drugs. Later today, I will make a joint statement with Councillor McColl to an audience of those who are directly involved in tackling drugs. We work in partnership, jointly and severally, with local government, and that will continue. We are all in this together. It is a matter not of apportioning blame but of trying to achieve greater success for Scotland. Secondly, it is clear that the Government has increased the funding that is available to tackle drugs and drug misuse. A total of £94 million has been made available for the next three years in the justice portfolio, which is a substantial increase of 14 per cent. In addition to the funding that the Government provides, local authorities are devoting substantial resources to tackling the problem. Further, the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency, the prisons, social work and the third sector are devoting huge resources to tackling it. One of the things that I have done as Minister for Community Safety is to ask Audit Scotland to examine the whole area and to answer two fundamental questions that I believe have not been conclusively or clearly answered over the years. First, how much money is being devoted by all arms of government to addressing the drugs  problem? Secondly, how effectively are the existing substantial resources being used and can we use them more effectively than we have done in the past? I am pleased to say that the Auditor General agreed to carry out a substantial piece of work on the issue. It is expected that his report will be available next spring. I welcome that, and I think that the Parliament will be able to learn a substantial amount from that corpus of work.

I very much welcome the constructive approach of Annabel Goldie and the Conservatives towards the strategy, and that of the Lib Dems and the Greens. I hope that there was a shred of support for the principle of the strategy from the Labour Party as well—I am an optimist.  It was a great pleasure when Annabel Goldie joined me on a visit to the fv-tox project in Alloa in October. It was a double act in which both of us were entirely sincere in the lines that we took. I think that we are both committed to making a success of the new strategy and the new recovery approach that it sets out. I believe that the recovery approach has widespread support from all those who are involved in tackling drugs. Annabel Goldie mentioned DTTOs. We believe that they have had a record of success. The evidence shows that those who are subject to DTTOs and the disciplined approach that they entail have a high success rate in achieving recovery. That is why we are piloting the extension of DTTOs to lower-tariff offenders in Lothian and Borders. We chose Lothian and Borders because DTTOs have been remarkably successful there, so if the pilot can succeed there, it should be possible to make it succeed in other parts of Scotland. Conversely, if it does not succeed in Lothian and Borders, that would provide lessons. We very much support the proposals that I acknowledge have come from the Conservatives on the extension of DTTOs. We have sought not to bring partisan politics to our approach in that regard, and I intend to keep it that way. Annabel Goldie mentioned the importance of continuing work on enforcement. I have worked closely with Gordon Meldrum of the SCDEA and I applaud the agency's many successes in bringing drug dealers to boot and recovering their cash and confiscating their drugs. I am sure that all members support the successful work that the agency and the police do throughout Scotland. We are absolutely behind those efforts. Annabel Goldie asked about the legal issue of the recovery of assets from criminals. I said in my statement and we state clearly in our strategy that it is essential that the state is able to recover assets from convicted criminals who have engaged in a lifetime of organised crime, particularly drug dealing. After a person has been convicted of a drug dealing offence, and if they have no obvious visible income, they will be asked to explain where the Ferrari, the yacht, the many houses and the bank accounts came from. It is common sense that in such circumstances there is a strong case for shifting the onus of proof. The plight of children is at the heart of the strategy, as I think every member acknowledges. The 40,000 to 60,000 children who have a parent who abuses substances—drugs or alcohol—are extremely vulnerable. I have been working closely with my colleague Adam Ingram to tackle the issue, and I recently met leading organisations in the third sector that do a terrific job to help Scotland's most vulnerable children. We look forward to continuing to work with Annabel Goldie  and her party and with all other members, to add to the excellent work that local authorities and the voluntary sector are doing.

I thank Margaret Smith and her colleagues for engaging during the past year in building a consensus around the strategy that is free from partisan party politics. I welcome her party's approach. I visited the Glasgow drugs court and discussed its work with sheriffs. I pay tribute to the sheriffs and everyone who supports them. They are committed to taking a fundamentally different approach on the bench, in which they become involved in seeing through sentences. I think that the approach has worked, but we need to evaluate it thoroughly. If it is demonstrated that the approach should be extended, we will give most careful consideration to the matter. Another issue is to do with educating sheriffs and giving them the proper training that they need. What we need might be not drugs courts but sheriffs who are fully trained and versed in the complex issues around helping individuals to recover. Margaret Smith mentioned support for families. I had great pleasure in speaking at the annual  general meeting of the Scottish Network for Families Affected by Drugs. I hope that we will continue to support SNFAD's excellent work at community level to support families. In many cases, the family provides the most direct support to people who are trying to tackle a drug addiction. That is why the publication "drugs: what every parent should know" is being sent to every family in Scotland. Although adults over a certain age might know quite a lot about the dangers of alcohol, they might know little about drugs. By providing the guide to every family, we will equip families and parents with the facts about drugs, educate them about the risks and empower them by setting out where help can be obtained. That is an excellent initiative. I think that all members who have been involved in the debate about methadone would acknowledge that it has a key role to play in treatment. It was introduced in response to the serious threat of AIDS and other health problems. However, although we have been fairly good at getting people onto methadone treatment programmes, we have been less good at getting them off methadone and into full recovery. I stress that recovery is not just an end point; it is a journey that is different for every person. That is why our approach is informed by the publication "Essential Care: a report on the approach required to maximise opportunity for recovery from problem substance use in Scotland", which was produced by Brian Kidd and his team. The report points out that individuals have different needs if they are to achieve recovery and that everyone is entitled to be treated individually.

Brian Adam and I attended a meeting in Aberdeen to discuss the serious problem that has existed in the area for a long time. I welcome his support and his advocacy of his constituents' interests and I acknowledge that there has been a particular problem in the area. That is why I visited the area and why more  resources have been made available to tackle the problem. We are closely monitoring continuing efforts in that regard. I hope and am confident that the new approach in our strategy will involve a focus on people's need for extra help to get off methadone and become drug free.

I have made it clear that the Government is allocating substantial additional resources—an increase of 14 per cent over the next three years. However, as I have already pointed out, that is not the whole picture. Local government and the third sector are also contributing resources to deal with the problem. If it were as simple as signing a cheque and all would be well, we would sign a cheque, but it is not that simple. That is why we have asked the Auditor General to investigate not only the totality of funding from all Government departments and agencies but the effectiveness of spending. Is there a member in the chamber today who can put their hand on their heart and say that every £1 million that is spent on the problem is well spent? I cannot say that, which is why we have asked the Auditor General to examine the matter. It is not about throwing money at a problem. If there has ever been a more complex, ingrained problem as that of tackling the grip of drug addiction, I do not know what it is. Tackling it requires the continued devotion of many people, who help users with problems and do a job that few of us would like to do. In more than 50 visits around Scotland, I have seen at first hand the results of the work that people do on the ground. We want to praise that work and reinvigorate and energise those people, rather than argue about percentage points and cash and throw money at the problem.

The information that we are providing to parents will have a significant impact. Of course, it is always difficult to measure the precise impact of prevention efforts, education and information campaigns—it is not really possible to do so in a scientific sense—but I will give one example. The cost to society of one drug addict in Scotland with a problematic habit is £50,000 per year. Over 10 years, that person will cost Scotland £0.5 million. That costs more than the exercise of providing every family in Scotland with the "drugs: what every parent should know", which provides information to parents that I believe they would not otherwise have. If that helps 10 or 100 parents to address earlier the problems that they see in their son or daughter, and to identify earlier the problems of a young teenager who is starting to get into the grip of addiction, the cost will be repaid many times over. That is why I am proud and delighted that we are taking this initiative.

I thank Richard Simpson for his input in relation to the drugs strategy. I know that he played a significant role in his ministerial career, not least in establishing the 218 service in Glasgow, which I have visited and which does an excellent job. It is no secret that the key to the strategy is delivery and implementation. That is the next step, to which Shona Robison, Adam Ingram and I are devoted. We accept that the evidence base is poor, particularly in relation to the unacceptably high level of drug-related deaths in Scotland. One death is too many; 421 are, frankly, disgraceful. That is why we are establishing a database to record more accurately the circumstances and facts surrounding the deaths of those individuals. It is, I think, admitted that we do not have a sufficient information base. On evidence gathering, I have been disappointed by the lack of up-to-date evidence. Even the evidence on the number of methadone users and problematic drug users is somewhat out  of date. We will therefore devote considerable time and effort to improving how we garner and record data. On targets, we are working closely with COSLA and the third sector to develop single outcome agreements. The way in which the Government can assist by providing national support capacity will be key. That is the main task that SACDM will undertake over the next six months. I look forward to working closely with Richard Simpson in fulfilling that task, because it will be key to the strategy's success. In autumn last year, Shona Robison and I brought together the leaders of the ADATs from all over Scotland. It was the first time that they had met for some years. They recognise that there is a lack of clarity in the teams' function and a lack of clear lines of accountability. It is early days yet, but SACDM is addressing that as its key priority over the coming months. That work is necessary in order to achieve the success for which we aim.

Mary Scanlon is right: there is a close connection between those who have a mental health problem and those who have an addiction problem. The authorities are very often dealing with the same cohort of people. There are clear links between drug addiction and homelessness and a lack of housing. That has been a particular problem in Inverness, and I know that Mary Scanlon has pursued that issue energetically. Mary Scanlon asked how Government directorates are working together. I have worked closely at all times with Shona Robison and Adam Ingram, and I have had several meetings during the development of the strategy with interested parties across the board. It is equally important that those who are involved at the local level work closely together. It is encouraging that we have seen excellent examples of that. For example, throughcare services in Edinburgh are leading the way by providing housing to those who have come out of prison and thereby offering them some chance that they will not relapse. There are many more examples of such provision throughout  Scotland, but if Mary Scanlon has specific examples of where more needs to be done, I will be happy to examine them.

The Government will release the funding that I mentioned to health boards over the next three years to fund drug treatment and rehabilitation services. As I said, the increase will be 14 per cent over three years, and 3.8 per cent this year. Health boards will receive £24.6 million in 2008-09 to provide services, which is a 3.8 per cent increase on the 2007-08 allocation of £23.7 million. In addition, money is going to the health boards to support alcohol and drug action teams. Jamie Stone mentions local government, which is a topic that has been well canvassed in the chamber. Local authorities have received a fair settlement from the Government. Our removing the shackles of more than 60 ring-fenced funds will allow local authorities to tackle local priorities more effectively—without 60 little piggy banks to administer, to do bookkeeping for, to make journal entries for and to account for. Local authorities can now devote their efforts to tackling problems directly. Of course, they will have tough choices to make and, like this Government, they will not always be Mr Popular. However, we are working closely with local government, which is why Ronnie McColl and I will make a statement on these topics at a press conference later today.

We must emphasise that treatment for drug misuse can be effective. It is not all doom and gloom. I have seen many examples  of young people in particular who have succeeded in achieving abstinence. In my statement I mentioned the orange guidelines, which set out expert advice to clinicians who deal with drugs management in Scotland. The guidelines make it clear that a significant proportion of people who enter treatment—between a quarter and a third of them—achieve long-term, sustained abstinence. However, we believe that a new approach is required—a new approach of recovery, of encouraging abstinence and of finding ways of helping people to get off methadone. Those people may have been on methadone for many years. Drugs ruin lives. For people to recover their self-respect, their self-esteem and their confidence so that they can obtain a job or a house, they may need many different types of intervention. That is why we are absolutely committed to the task. If we can achieve success, I do not think that there will be resentment of the type that the member mentions.

If it can be demonstrated that legislation is necessary, that route will always be considered. Much progress has been made, with agencies working together, in identifying children at risk. Duncan McNeil has raised the topic consistently in the Parliament for many years, as have many others. Just last week, Adam Ingram and I met a number of charities involved in providing intervention assistance to the most vulnerable children in Scotland. We have adopted the approach of the getting it right for every child agenda. The needs of children are at the heart of the issue. General practitioners must share information about children if they believe that they are at risk. That is in the orange guidelines; the Hippocratic oath is overridden where the interests of children at risk are concerned.  However, I must sound a cautionary note. When Adam Ingram and I met the children's charities last week, some of them said that placing too much focus on identification can detract from the work that those charities have to do every day to provide help and support services for children who have already been identified as being at risk. We need to consider information sharing in the round. This Government has taken the step of providing a line that people in communities can call if they believe that a child is at risk. We hope that, with that additional mechanism, we will be able to tackle the problems that Duncan McNeil correctly raises.

The Scottish Government's plans for working with partners to support children who are  affected by parental substance misuse will be set out as part of the new national drugs strategy to be published before the summer recess. That will focus on improving outcomes through prevention, early intervention and building the capacity and quality of support services, as well as effective responses to children who are at immediate risk. Underpinning that will be a commitment to strengthened partnership working, which includes those working in the criminal justice system, along with other sectors engaging with vulnerable children and families.

I am aware of the work that has been done over the years by Duncan McNeil—and, indeed, by members of all parties—on this most serious issue. As the minister responsible for the draft strategy, I assure him that I have had numerous meetings with my ministerial colleagues on the matter. In fact, they have probably seen far more of me than they might have wished. I am extremely excited by the challenge of ensuring that more and more people whose lives have been plagued by drugs succeed in getting rid of that scourge. That is what Scotland wants. On Monday in Glasgow, I was delighted to hand out 12 certificates to young people who had been abstinent from drugs for a year. Those young people, and those who helped them get off drugs, are the pride of Scotland, and we should all congratulate them on their excellent work.

The Scottish Government aims to bring into force different parts of the Bankruptcy and Diligence etc (Scotland) Act 2007 under a rolling programme over the next two years. The majority of the changes that will affect bankruptcy and a number of important changes to diligence will come into force on 1 April 2008.

I am aware that Mr O'Donnell has been pursuing on behalf of a constituent a case that is related to the issue that he has raised, and I understand his constituent's point. However, the Government does not believe that there is any confusion about the law. The provisions of the act will come into force on 1 April. They will not apply to existing sequestrations, but will apply only to new sequestrations. The duration of new sequestrations will be shorter, but debtors will pay contributions for up to three years from the date on which the payment plan is agreed. I would be happy to consider any further detailed points that the member wishes to raise with me. However, the Government is not confused.

I join other members in congratulating Gil Paterson on giving us the opportunity to debate human trafficking. As members from all round the chamber have said, he has a long record in campaigning against violence against women. I endorse the comments made by many members who have thought equally hard and long on these matters. Trish Godman secured a debate on human trafficking in May 2006, and Kenneth Gibson was first to the crease, as it were, back in 2000. Many members have campaigned vigorously on the issue over a long period. "Victims of trafficking, who are among the most marginalised groups in society, experience the most horrendous emotional, physical, mental and sexual abuse. I am glad to have an opportunity to reaffirm our view"— in the Government—  "that trafficking is intolerable and that those who perpetrate it should be dealt with severely.—[ Official Report , 25 May 2006; c 26123.] The former Minister for Communities, Malcolm Chisholm, uttered those words back in May 2006. It would be difficult to better them. We all share the sentiments that he expressed. The motion is right to equate trafficking with modern-day slavery. It is a vile and abhorrent practice that is difficult for many of us to conceive of and which has no place in a civilised society. I am therefore pleased to acknowledge the Home Secretary's announcement in January that the UK will ratify the Council of Europe's convention this year. That is a step forward and we are working to ensure that all the necessary arrangements in Scotland are put in place to support ratification. It might be helpful if I say a word about that process, because some members, including Gil Paterson and Pauline McNeill, have urged ratification of the convention. As I understand it, the practice in the UK is that there is a two-part process. The convention is first supported in principle and then ratified. Other countries go straight to ratification, but I am advised that the reason for the two-step process in the UK is that ratification is a process that follows compliance of the law and compliance of practice. Therefore, if the law needs to be changed—as I understand it does in relation to immigration—we must recognise that that process has to be undertaken. It is a sensible process that, like all others, must be thought out carefully and will take time. Far be it from me to defend the UK Government—I am not sure that it would assign that role to me—but we can all recognise that there is a reason why ratification has not been carried out. I think that it was Margo MacDonald who said that ratification would not in itself significantly advance matters. The question is what action should be taken in Scotland, particularly with regard to those matters for which we as a Government are responsible. We are working closely with the UK Government to ensure that action is co-ordinated at a UK level. That work is underpinned by the Scottish Government's representation on the UK interdepartmental ministerial group on human trafficking and by the joint Scottish-Home Office action plan that was published last year on the day on which the UK signed the convention. The action plan sets out 60 measures that will be delivered in the four key areas of enforcement, prevention, victim support and child trafficking. The action plan was reinforced by the launch in October 2007 of the police operation pentameter 2, which will run to the end of this month and which was mentioned by various members, including Sandra White. Intelligence from  pentameter 2 is already further developing understanding of the nature and scale of trafficking in Scotland and its links to trafficking elsewhere in the UK and abroad. The evaluation of the operation at a Scottish and UK level will help us to respond more accurately to the threat posed by trafficking. Many members—notably Christine Grahame and Margo MacDonald, who spoke at the end of the debate—referred to the lack of data. By its nature, human trafficking is a trade, a crime and an activity that is carried out in a clandestine way, so it is difficult to obtain reliable data. However, the lack of evidence that trafficking is taking place does not mean that it is not taking place, and we must proceed on the basis that it is. The Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency, in collaboration with other law enforcement partners, has been tasked with producing a comprehensive intelligence picture of the extent and impact of human trafficking in Scotland. I have had the pleasure of working with Gordon Meldrum, the new chief of the SCDEA, and I know that he is bringing immense vigour and focus to his duties. I want to address two of Hugh O'Donnell's comments, the first of which was on the removal of the UK reservation to the United Nations Convention of the Rights of the Child. I understand that the Home Secretary has announced that the UK will reconsider the reservation. Secondly, on a national reporting system, the current proposal is for a UK rapporteur. I would be happy to consider those matters further with Mr O'Donnell.  We have recently provided increased funding to the trafficking awareness-raising alliance in Glasgow, to which many members have referred. The project provides specialist support to adult females who have been trafficked for the purpose of commercial sexual exploitation. Members have mentioned the extension of the reflection period from 30 to 90 days. I undertake to convey the Official Report of this debate to the Home Secretary so that we can give further and careful consideration to that matter. A key commitment in the "UK Action Plan on Tackling Human Trafficking" is to provide targeted guidance to meet the needs of children. The Scottish Government has circulated a model protocol, which will be issued for consultation shortly. I thank all members for their contributions, which have been sincere, heartfelt and passionate. I hope that we can work together towards the eradication of such a vile and abominable trade.  Meeting closed at 17:59.

The member is adopting the year zero approach.

Will Paul Martin give way on that point?

No I have not.

I will answer it for Paul Martin now, if he wants.

Will the member give way?

No, I will not, actually.

At least Bill Aitken had a solution, which was that the governor of Barlinnie should do his job, although as it is judges and not governors who send people to prison, that is completely irrelevant. Aside from the rhetoric and the point scoring, what on earth would the Conservatives do about the crisis that is facing us right now?

Mr Aitken recognises the level that overcrowding in prisons has reached. The Government has come forward with the solution that is needed to address the problem. If the Conservatives do not accept our solution, what solution do they propose? If Parliament votes against our proposal today, what will the member say and do if the warnings of governors of prisons such as Barlinnie come true?

The Scottish Prison Service invests  considerable resources to reduce supply and demand and the harm that is caused by the misuse of illegal drugs in prisons. Drug testing is undertaken in all prisons to identify incidence and prevalence rates and to support the management of prisoner health and progression. All prisoners who have a drug misuse problem are offered advice, support, education and health interventions. Prisoners who serve more than 31 days can access enhanced addiction services and wider wrap-around support by engaging in the integrated case management system. Intelligence, drug detection dogs and new technology are used to detect and deter the trafficking of drugs in prisons.

I give the member that assurance. On detection, I have visited five prisons in the past three months and, in every case, huge efforts are devoted to detecting drugs coming in. I discovered that that is the case at Saughton, Polmont, Castle Huntly and Porterfield as well as at Barlinnie. There is no end to some people's ingenuity in finding ways to try to take drugs into prison. However, I assure the member that a massive and unrelenting effort is devoted to tackling that problem. The member also mentioned rehabilitation and treatment. Some 1,059 prisoners completed drugs courses and more than 30,000 hours were devoted to delivering treatment to try to help rehabilitation. Two thirds of prisoners go to prison with a drugs problem. Finally, there is a particular problem that is not widely appreciated. For prisoners who serve less than 31 days, there is insufficient time to provide a proper course and support. That is another reason why the Government's approach—that those who have a health problem are best dealt with outwith prison—is the right one. That approach will help both society and the prisoners who are involved.

The Government is committed to the promotion of community safety throughout Scotland.

Although, as members will appreciate, I am entirely impartial in such matters, I commend Northern Constabulary for its exemplary record, which provides a lead throughout Scotland. I have always felt that that is the case, and I warmly endorse the comments and judgment of Jamie McGrigor, with whom I agree in this matter. Northern Constabulary has pioneered community policing, and the closer the links are between the police and the community, the safer the community tends to be.

The Scottish Government is committed to providing access to debt relief to Scots who are unable to pay their debts. However, we must balance that by ensuring that there are effective and appropriate diligences for creditors to enforce payment from people who can afford to pay. We are also committed to ensuring that people are not losing their home or being forced into bankruptcy for relatively small debts if there are reasonable alternatives.

I think that members of all parties are concerned about the excessive rates of interest that are sometimes charged by providers of store cards or other credit card facilities. Some interest rates are around 30 per cent, which seems excessive. I agree with the member that more progress could be made if such matters were devolved to this place. In the meantime, I hope that people will make informed choices and become aware of the interest rates that institutions will charge before they incur serious debt.

The Scottish Government has not given any further consideration to the licensing and regulation of Mosquito ultrasonic youth deterrents.

Plainly, the use of the devices is contentious. Local authorities are best placed to decide what measures should be taken locally to tackle antisocial behaviour. I would welcome representations from Bill Kidd and any other member who wishes to contribute to the national review of our antisocial behaviour strategy, so that we can build up a consensual approach to tackling that serious matter.

I am at the moment.

The information that is requested is not collected.

The member raises two issues. When any sheriff or judge considers a custodial sentence for an accused who has been convicted of a serious offence, the accused's personal circumstances will be considered with absolute thoroughness and care. In my experience, that issue was considered extremely closely by every sheriff whom I ever appeared before in those circumstances. Plainly, in some circumstances, because of the gravity of the crime that is involved, the public must be protected by a custodial sentence. Nonetheless, the arrangements for children are to the fore in the Government's considerations. We are considering that work extremely carefully in the early years strategy. The second issue that the member raised was about visits by families. From my recent visits to Saughton prison, Porterfield prison, which is in my constituency, and Polmont, I know that prison officers go to great lengths to try to ensure that families receive every support. That is perhaps particularly true with families of prisoners who are  in prison for the first time, for whom the experience of going to prison is new and intimidating. Although the member is correct to raise the issues, they are taken seriously and dealt with sensitively by all who work in our courts and in our prisons.

The Scottish Government is implementing a range of measures that have the potential to reduce the number of female accused and offenders who are sent to custody. For example, as part of the package of summary justice reforms, we will shortly pilot fiscal work orders in a number of areas. Those will provide fiscals with an additional option for dealing with persons who are accused of minor offences but may not have the financial means to pay a fiscal fine, by requiring them to undertake between 10 and 50 hours of reparative activity. In late November, we published the report of the review of community sentences, which is strongly focused on delivering tough, credible community sentences as an alternative to short prison sentences. In the review, we propose to pilot a mentoring/link worker scheme for adult female offenders who have been given community sentences. We anticipate that the work of the prisons commission, which is due to report in June, will contribute to our development of a coherent penal policy and assist in ensuring that prisons focus on serious and dangerous offenders.

The member makes a serious and sensible point. We are willing to look again at the matter and are disappointed that the pilot had shortcomings and defects. We are cognisant of the fact that those serving on the bench in Scotland, in however senior a capacity, are not always entirely convinced of the efficacy of community disposals. The wider issue is for us to ensure that those disposals are effective. That is why we are devoting an additional £500,000 to increasing the capacity of bail supervision schemes and why we are piloting drug treatment and testing orders for low-tariff offenders, especially female offenders. I know that Dr Simpson has raised that issue on many occasions and has done a power of work for Scotland on it. There will also be a review of community penalties, with a proposal to pilot a mentoring/link worker scheme for adult female offenders who have been given a community penalty. We want to keep out of prison as many women as possible who should not be there. We are determined to achieve that objective and we are pleased that we have the support in that task of people with the experience and track record of Dr Simpson.

This has been an interesting debate and I am pleased to close for the Scottish Government. I think that there is more consensus than was immediately apparent during the debate. Let me start by pointing out to members the legal definition of firearm. It is "a lethal barrelled weapon of any description from which any shot, bullet or other missile can be discharged". Members should note the word "lethal". We are talking not about harmless objects but about guns that kill people. I agree with the members who have expressed the view that this is an extremely serious topic and therefore not one for undue levity. We should remember that, as many members have said, we are here to recognise that we can do more to protect individuals and communities against the misuse of firearms. I am sure that Jacqui Smith would agree with that as a general proposition, as would any politician from any democratically elected party, and it would be churlish of me not to accept that. I wanted to set out that general view because it is one with which we can all agree. Many members—Nigel Don, Bill Wilson and Mike Pringle, to name three from memory—have referred to the statistics about crime in which guns were involved, and it is worth focusing on them. In 2006-07, the Scottish police recorded 1,245 crimes and offences in which a firearm was alleged to have been used, which was an increase of 17 per cent from 2005-06. That is a huge increase and a huge number of offences. In 2006-07, there were 247 crimes and offences in which a firearm was fired and it either killed or caused serious injury. That is not one or two but 247 cases of death or serious injury. One life lost of a child is surely a basis for a Government to take an issue seriously and, if necessary, legislate, but the statistics show a growing problem in which hundreds of people are being killed or injured by lethal weapons. We come to the debate in that context. With the Cabinet Secretary for Justice, I met some people who have lost a loved one—they are here in the public gallery to listen to the debate. We should think about them and other communities that are or may be affected by such crimes. Nigel Don said that Grampian has a good record, yet not only are people there not complacent, they are concerned about a growing incidence of gun possession. That is not such a  problem in Grampian as it has been in Glasgow, for example, but it is perceived to be growing—I know that from discussions with senior police officers, particularly in relation to the dealing of drugs. Setting the context is important, because it brings us back to the gravity of the problem and to the justification for the Government's approach. As I have rather more time than I expected, I will set out our approach at more length than I had expected to just a few moments ago. It is important to say that of course the Scottish Government wants gun control and regulation of the misuse of firearms to be tightened, in so far as the law can do that, throughout the UK. We are Scottish nationalists, but we want the people of England, Wales and Northern Ireland to benefit from the best and most effective laws possible. We want communities in England to be protected by more effective laws and we do not want toddlers in England to be shot by air-guns or other firearms, so of course it is preferable to improve the law throughout the UK. I said that the Government's position is that it is preferable for the issue to be dealt with across the UK, as Hugh Henry said, because that is the ideal approach, but that is not where we find ourselves. It may be useful to members, now that I have a prolonged opportunity to set out the position—

I thank Mike Pringle for that. It may be useful to take time to set out where we are at present. Many members approach the topic as if the debate is of recent vintage, but it is not. I have the Home Office consultation paper "Controls on Firearms", which dates back to May 2004, when David Blunkett was the Home Secretary.

I will take an intervention in a minute. In that paper, David Blunkett helpfully said: "We want to minimise bureaucracy" and "we don't want to impose unnecessary burdens ... But the legislation has been amended a number of times, and as a result the framework of controls can be difficult to understand and enforce." That was the Home Secretary admitting that the law is difficult to understand and to enforce. His saying that the law was defective in that way is a telling admission that the law must be reformed. He admitted that four years ago.

In a second—we have plenty of time. The law must be reformed because, for the law to work, people must know what it is. The more complicated a law is, the fewer people can understand it. For example, page 11 of the consultation paper says that it is an offence to trespass with an air-gun and fire one "within 50 feet of a public road". I did not know of that offence before I read the paper. To enforce that law, police officers must go round Scotland with a tape measure that is capable of measuring 50ft, because if someone is within 51ft of the road, they will not commit an offence. That is ridiculous, outmoded and antiquated and needs to be changed. It is not me who says that, but David Blunkett. The SNP agrees with him.

I give way to Pauline McNeill.

That is an incorrect characterisation of the position. The cabinet secretary has met the Home Secretary, and there have been discussions with Jack Straw. Discussions did not begin in the past week or so—they have gone on for a long time.

I am not easily offended, Presiding Officer. I will be serious. There can be very few people in Scotland who have not heard Kenny MacAskill campaigning on firearms issues. The idea that we did not contribute to the debate in 2004 is flawed.  No one can accuse Kenny MacAskill of not being vocal. [ Interruption. ] I am getting hints to get to the root of things. The Home Office said in the consultation paper that it was not in favour of licensing air-guns, and it admitted that it had been estimated that there were 7 million air-guns in the UK, although no one really knew how many there were, as they were unlicensed. The statistical chances of misusing those guns are massive and unacceptable but, despite that, the Home Office was opposed to licensing them in 2004. I come to the kernel of the debate. In her opening speech, Pauline McNeill stated that the Labour Party believes that no one should possess or own an air-gun unless they have a legitimate reason for doing so and a legitimate purpose. Paul Martin confirmed that. I welcome that statement; there is a degree of consensus in that respect. However, it is now incumbent on the Labour Party to say how that desirable aim should be achieved. We believe that licensing is the way to do that. How else can it be determined and decided that somebody has a legitimate purpose for possessing or owning an air-gun? I have many constituents who are gamekeepers. Gamekeepers plainly need firearms to do their work. If they do not have a licence, they cannot be a gamekeeper. I have a long e-mail that relates to people with sporting interests—

Thank you, Presiding Officer.

That is not a correct characterisation or interpretation of our motion, but we will have to disagree about that. We are clearly saying that only those who need a gun of some sort for their work or who desire to have a gun to pursue their sporting interests should be allowed to own a gun. Both reasons for having a gun are legitimate, although the first is probably more pressing than the second. We support, for example, what the Scottish Clay Target Association has said. It has recommended that a person should have safety tuition before they get a shotgun certificate. At the moment, a person can have an air-gun or another gun without having had  any safety tuition. That does not seem to me to be sensible. I return to the main issues. The Labour Party has progressed. It says that before a person can own or possess an air-gun, they must demonstrate that they have a purpose for it. Having admitted that, Labour has no defence against the argument that licensing is the only method of ensuring that. The Home Office clearly said in its 2004 consultation paper that it was opposed to licensing. That raises the second core issue of the debate: how do we make progress? The unfortunate position—I say this in reply to Hugh Henry—is that the UK Government in 2004 indicated that there would be a firearms consultative committee between the two Governments. We await the formation of that committee. Were Westminster to say again that that committee would be formed, of course the Scottish Government would serve on it, but it has not. It promised to form the committee, but it has not done so. Nor has it indicated any change from its position in 2004, when it said that it was opposed to the licensing of air-guns. We have reached the clear situation in which perhaps the majority of members in the chamber agree that no one should have an air-gun unless they need it and can prove that they need it. That is the Labour position. I believe that it might be the Liberal Democrat position, although that is not always easy to determine—I hope that it is the Liberal Democrat position.

As there is consensus on the issue, the question is how we transform that consensus into action and into law. That brings us to the question that Canon Kenyon Wright posed: what happens when Westminster says no? The SNP says that we should not simply lie down and do nothing—we should legislate to protect our communities. That is our position, which I believe is supported by the vast majority of people in Scotland. We will continue to try to work with the Home Office. We are planning to hold a summit and have asked the Home Secretary to convene that summit jointly with the cabinet secretary. I very much hope that the Home Secretary will accept that invitation and that we can move forward. The Scottish Government is clear that we need to legislate to protect our communities, and we will do that in so far as we can.

We agree strongly with the sentiment, which Pauline McNeill expressed and Paul Martin repeated, that those who wish to possess an air-gun should demonstrate why they need to do so. My question to the Labour Party—I ask this not knowing the answer—is how we can achieve that without some system of licensing. Given that we have quite a lot of time, I invite Paul Martin to opine on that at great length.

Does the member therefore agree that it would be sensible to ensure that, as Pauline McNeill argued earlier, before anyone in Scotland can lawfully own or possess an air-gun, they should have to demonstrate a legitimate purpose?

Will the member take an intervention?

Pauline McNeill said that anyone who wants an air-gun should be able to demonstrate the purpose for which it is required. Does Bill Butler agree with us that that can only really be done if we have a licensing system for air-guns in Scotland?

Mike Pringle argues that legislation in Scotland that did not exist throughout the UK would be unenforceable. We would prefer UK-wide legislation, but if that is not possible and we have legislation requiring the licensing of air-guns in Scotland, surely it would be perfectly easy to enforce it, just as the separate legislation on knives is enforceable?

We accept the point that the law in itself is never a total solution to any problem. That applies in this case. However, does Bill Aitken accept—given that the former Home Secretary thought there were 7 million air-guns in the UK—that to require a licence for those air-guns would be a sensible step that would be likely to afford a serious measure of protection to our communities?

A central question is whether all members agree that air-guns should be licensed. Does the Labour Party in Scotland support that position?

I fully understand the concern in local communities about antisocial driving. A number of remedies are available, including the power to seize vehicles under antisocial behaviour legislation. In addition, police forces have powers to address excessive noise caused by defective or modified exhausts. I am keen to ascertain what more might need to be done to address antisocial driving. That is why I have specifically included the matter in the review of how we tackle antisocial behaviour, which I announced recently.

Mr Morgan touches on a difficulty that the police face in protecting communities from the driving of vehicles in a way that causes excessive noise. The issue has been the subject of discussions between Dumfries and Galloway Constabulary and the procurator fiscal, and I am aware that the fiscal recently met Mr Morgan. We are specifically including the issue in the antisocial behaviour review because there might be a case for reforming the law, if the police think that it is not possible to bring a prosecution because of the technical difficulty of scientifically measuring the noise that vehicles make. I understand that local police and fiscals are carefully considering that and other points, including the suggestion that Mr Morgan rightly made. The use of the catch-all, common-law offence of breach of the peace must be a possibility when evidence exists.

The same general provisions apply to the issue that Elaine Smith raises, which might well cause considerable inconvenience to many people, especially during the hours of darkness, when they are trying to get to sleep so  that they can go to work the next day. That is precisely why I specifically directed that the antisocial behaviour review, which is under way, should include the issue. I am delighted that the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, the police and all other stakeholders are working with us towards that end.

Lewis Macdonald makes an excellent point, for which I commend him and his positive approach to the matter. Dispersal orders have a role to play, as do the powers to seize vehicles in certain circumstances. I praise the pioneering work that was done initially in a pilot by Chief Constable John Vine in Tayside, which was recently rolled out throughout Scotland. Vehicle seizure is a successful and effective tool, but it can be applied only where there is a basis for an antisocial behaviour order, which requires an antisocial behaviour element to the offence, and a breach of the road traffic law. That is precisely why we are looking at the issue again. It might be that we need to do even more to protect communities from excessive noise and disturbance.

The Government is committed to tackling antisocial behaviour. We would like more emphasis to be placed on prevention and earlier intervention. In particular, we would like our young people to be provided with more positive opportunities that help to instil a sense of personal and collective responsibility.

I am pleased to provide Johann Lamont with the absolute assurance that we take very seriously the need to take appropriate and effective action on enforcement. On consultation, I recently addressed a conference of community safety partnership representatives in Edinburgh  and a conference of community wardens in Dunblane. I am happy to meet members who have a particular point to make. However, I suggest to Johann Lamont that we all want to work together to build consensus and to provide our young people—a very small minority of whom cause problems—with more choices and chances, so that we prevent them from undertaking criminal activity and lead them towards a more productive life, rather than simply hand out bits of paper called antisocial behaviour orders, which plainly do not get to the root cause of the problem.

The debate has been helpful and entertaining. At least all members share common aims. We want to ensure that data are secure and we have a common view on the importance of protecting civil liberties. We in Scotland can do things differently at the heart of services that are designed and delivered to protect people's privacy. I particularly enjoyed the spirited speeches that have been made. Bill Wilson did a good demolition job on some fundamental ideas behind the notion that ID cards will combat terrorism. People always want to feel safe, but the idea that ID cards will deliver that safety is not proven. I may be the first minister in this Government to mention the fictitious Jim Hacker in "Yes, Minister". If stories were to be written about him now, he might be undone by someone using his surname as an occupation. Data protection is inherently more difficult and challenging than it was before the age of electronic communication. Professor Fraser's report on the DNA review is expected in 2008. It will be published and it will help to inform future policy development. The Scottish Government's strategic board has set up a team, which is led by the justice and communities director general, to support and co-ordinate a data security review. If Patrick Harvie is concerned about whether that review will go far enough and he has specific suggestions to make, he should write to the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth—we would like to take his ideas into account. All bodies under Scottish central Government, including the national health service, have been asked to confirm their compliance with existing information security policies, to complete a detailed data-handling questionnaire and to offer any practical recommendations for improvements or better risk management. In addition, all Scottish Government staff have been reminded of the need to adhere to data protection rules. The review team is currently collating responses to the questionnaires and is due to report soon to the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth. Members are keen to see greater independent data protection audits and greater accountability. We share their objectives, but we need to take a proportionate approach. Consultants do not come cheap—and how. We will consider carefully how to involve an independent element in reviewing data security, particularly in areas of greater risk. I want to say a bit more about DNA because I did not have the opportunity to expand much on the issue in my opening remarks. We are not persuaded that it would be correct for the police to retain fingerprints and DNA samples from  everyone who is detained but not convicted or even prosecuted. Margaret Smith made a fairly strong case for that view. I hope that no one would argue that the DNA of every UK citizen should be retained on record, although the logic of those who argue that the police should retain fingerprints and DNA samples is that that should be the case. I think that Labour has retreated from that position, although I am not certain. However, we look forward to the report.

I had not intended to comment on the emerging differences between the former Scottish Executive partners. However, as the matter has been raised, it seems that there will be interesting times ahead in view of their diametrically opposed views on biometrics when the constitutional commission is set up to consider whether powers over ID data protection and powers that relate to DNA that are not entirely devolved should be devolved. We believe that all such powers should be devolved, but the Labour Party apparently does not. I am not sure what the Liberals' and the Conservatives' positions are, although I think Helen Eadie reminded members that the Tories' position has changed. They used to be in favour of ID cards, or were in favour of them in principle—I am not quite sure what their position was. I think that she mentioned that the Conservatives are now no longer prepared to dance—they are no longer prepared to do the tango together as they used to. All I can say is: "There may be trouble ahead", so, "Let's face the music and dance". In this debate, we are happy just to hold the jackets of the dancing partners—Labour, Liberal and Conservative—as they enter the new sunlit uplands of the commission and decide whether any, all or some of these matters should or should not be devolved.

I welcome the debate, which is timely in the light of recent events that have affected the UK Government and which raises serious issues of which we must all be aware. The debate provides an opportunity for the Scottish Government to state where we stand on the issues. Our civil liberties are extremely important to each and every one of us, so Margaret Smith is right to make the case for safeguarding them, as is Patrick Harvie, who made a typically spirited speech. Identify theft is a growing problem. People need to regain their confidence that the Government can keep private details safe, which they have lost in recent weeks. Margaret Smith rightly pointed to the difference between the UK Government's policies on identity cards and how those issues have been addressed in this Parliament. All parties in the previous and current parliamentary sessions have shared a commitment to embedding good practice on data protection in such matters. That reflects the wider and deeply held values in Scotland. The Scottish Government  shares members' desire to ensure that Scotland is not and never can be a surveillance state. The Scottish Government takes issues of data protection extremely seriously and has in place standards on the storage and transmission of, and access to, data of a sensitive nature. In the light of the problems that have been encountered by HM Revenue and Customs, John Swinney announced that we would conduct a co-ordinated review of information security policies and data-handling arrangements in Scotland. There is no room for complacency on such issues in the days of e-mail correspondence, when matters that were intended to remain private are inherently more susceptible to being leaked or inadvertently published than any of us would wish. The fact that many politicians have discovered that fundamental truth to their cost has served only to increase public entertainment and amusement. The review, which is now well under way, is considering existing procedures for the protection of data, their consistency with Government-wide standards and policies, and arrangements for ensuring that policies and procedures are being fully and correctly implemented. That assessment will allow the Government to establish whether there is a need for further measures to improve the security of sensitive information. We take such matters extremely seriously—we are not talking about a paper review. In the early days of our Government, we need to find out whether existing procedures are acceptable and whether they have been effective.

I support that call. The powers of the information commissioner are, of course, a reserved matter; I am delighted that the Lib Dems presumably want them to become a devolved matter. I wait with interest to find out whether that is the position of their future potential coalition and commission partners.

I am sorry, but I cannot. The Government shares Margaret Smith's concerns about the UK ID card, which we have consistently opposed, on the grounds that it will be costly, will infringe civil liberties and will not  achieve its primary stated objective. The methodology seems foggy and opaque, to put it kindly. I reassure members of all parties and the people of Scotland that the UK ID card will not be required to access devolved services. On DNA, the Government has made it clear that it does not support the blanket retention of all forensic information that is taken from innocent people. I hope to expand on that in my summing-up comments. I await the rest of the debate with interest.

The Scottish Government has much sympathy with the idea that ID cards will be costly. However, the Conservative amendment states that the money should instead be spent on other matters, including "more prison places". Will Bill Aitken clarify whether the Tories are arguing that we should build more prisons in Scotland than the Scottish Government is already committed to  building? If that is the argument, how many additional prisons should be built using the ID card money?

This has been an excellent debate, with a remarkable degree of consensus—uncharacteristic of this place, if I may say so. The debate illustrates that we are all committed to improving the system of summary justice in Scotland. We all accept that it needs to operate more quickly and to become more efficient and effective. The speeches have tended—rightly—to focus on the practical aspects and problems and on the need to monitor the operation and implementation of the 2007 act. It has been extremely useful for the Government to hear contributions from all parties. I should declare an interest in that, like the cabinet secretary, I was a criminal solicitor, although I had far less wide-ranging experience: most of my clients pled guilty—and most of those who did not were found guilty. There is a tendency in human nature, which I detected among the clients who were unwise enough to select me as their defender, to procrastinate. They would often leave things until the last possible minute and defer changing their plea until the fateful day when they appeared in court. We all recognise that the right to a trial is fundamental. It is a right that, despite some commentary to the contrary, is not eroded by the new system. As we have heard from Mr Aitken and others, courts operate in very different ways. The system is a trundling vehicle that we need to transform somehow into a sleek, shiny and new Ferrari. I want to respond to as many of the points that were raised in the debate as possible. Resources were mentioned by several members, including Paul Martin and Bill Butler. The financial settlement resulted in a significant increase in the amount allocated to the Scottish Court Service. That reflects the additional demands of summary justice reform, including the creation of fine enforcement officers. To answer Margaret Smith's question, I can say that fine enforcement officers will be introduced on 10 March 2008.  Margaret Smith also mentioned legal aid—the Liberals were right to mention that issue, because it has been raised widely outside Parliament. She repeated the statement that law firms would lose 20 per cent of their business, a figure that some have paraded in the press. We cannot know the effect of measures when that has not yet been gauged, but the estimated average savings to the legal aid fund will be about 7 per cent. Against that, solemn fees are to rise by 7 per cent. On eligibility for legal aid, which is as important, Margaret Smith asked whether a working man would qualify for assistance, given a limit on income of £208 a week. We understand that the shift of some cases from legal aid to ABWOR may remove eligibility in perhaps only 1 per cent of cases. In fact, I have information that suggests that, in 2005-06, the changes would have affected 290 out of 78,677 cases, which is 0.36 per cent. I do not know whether Mr Stevenson provided that information, but it sounds like he did. Stuart McMillan raised the issue of summary appeal courts. High Court reform has delivered improvements in efficiency, so we hope that, to some extent, the need for a summary appeal court will be reduced. Margaret Smith made the point that we often hear elsewhere that solicitors are under pressure to enter guilty pleas because of higher payment. The payment for not guilty pleas is not being reduced—the standard fee for a not guilty plea is being raised from £500 to £525—and we are paying more to solicitors who enter early guilty pleas, which I believe are better for everyone. Pauline McNeill and Margaret Smith raised the treatment of fine defaulters, which has been a perennial problem for the justice system. I am sure that they will be pleased to know that mandatory supervised attendance orders have now been rolled out nationally by an order made in September. An SAO, rather than imprisonment, will be imposed on someone who defaults on the payment of a fine of under £500. We will have to see how that works out. The message about that, and about so many other aspects of the implementation and delivery of the 2007 act, is that we have an open mind. If things are not working as we would all hope, we are willing to listen to reasoned argument—which we are about to get from Mr Aitken.

We recognise that that problem exists in some—perhaps even many—cases. However, we have information that tends to suggest that rigorous, regular and regulated court appearances, as happens under drug treatment and testing orders or supervised bail orders, are having some success. Nigel Don referred to supervised bail orders, about which I heard a great deal when I visited Sacro at the new community link offices in Edinburgh, which I opened this week—there is a nice brass plaque to evidence that. I do not want to duck the question of the proposed strike action, which Pauline McNeill, Cathie Craigie and Bill Butler raised. We all hope that there will not be a need for industrial action and that such action will not take place. However, that is a matter for the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service to negotiate and it would be inappropriate for us to intervene. We hope that the matter will be resolved, but it is freestanding and separate from the implementation of the summary justice reforms.

I am just about in my last minute. I am very sorry. I have been to jail a lot recently—[ Interruption. ] Not enough, I hear. [ Interruption. ]

Members might think that I am over the upper age limit for Polmont, but I was there more than a week ago. I was at Saughton this week and I am visiting Porterfield later this month. Next year I hope to visit Barlinnie and Cornton Vale—I have a vista of pleasure ahead of me. One of the issues that prison officers raise is the sheer frustration of dealing with prisoners on short sentences; it is not easy to deal with them, which bolsters the Liberal Democrats' arguments that support our case for more effective community disposals. I welcome the contributions made in the debate. Many people have claimed credit for the Criminal Proceedings etc (Reform) (Scotland) Act 2007: Sheriff Principal McInnes and his committee; the former Administration and ministers, to whom I pay tribute; the former Justice 1 Committee; and many other individuals. It is a baby with many parents. My name might not be on the birth certificate, but I find myself thrust into the locus of having responsibility for the upbringing of this infant. Our aim is to ensure that summary justice is just that: short and effective. We want to ensure that it is not a long, interminable tale, as though written by Count Leo Tolstoy, but, rather, that it proceeds  swiftly from offence to disposal with the least possible expense. It is a great privilege to take part in this debate, which has been excellent. As always, the Scottish Government has listened to and will learn from the contributions of all parties in the Parliament.

I am familiar with the arguments that the member has advanced. However, are the Liberal Democrats opposed to the court unification process?

I rise to the challenge that Mary Scanlon set early on. She asked the Scottish Government to demonstrate that it exemplifies political consensus and tolerance. In that spirit, I congratulate Margaret Curran on her closing speech and echo the sentiments that she expressed. We have heard largely a commonality of view, almost free from partisan party politics, and that has been welcome. The debate has been extremely wide ranging because the motion permitted it to be so in addressing all forms of discrimination. However, it is right that many members have focused on one particular topic. I pay tribute to the work that is done throughout Scotland by disability access panels. I visited one of the panels in my constituency, in Lochaber, just over a week ago. The panels are run by volunteers who have great knowledge of the nitty-gritty of the discrimination that is faced by people with disabilities of all kinds. They made the excellent suggestion that, although the Equality and Human Rights Commission does not have a locus to investigate claims that a building does not comply with the DDA, it might be useful if the commission were to send out a pro forma letter when it receives an allegation of non-compliance from the public. In that way, although the commission could not investigate every case, bodies such as reputable banks that received such a pro forma letter from the commission would feel obliged to investigate the matter. I was also pleased to hear Johann Lamont focus on the needs of children with a disability. On behalf of the Scottish Government, I say that the issue transcends politics and that we want to do everything we can for those children. We all know from our constituency work that the parents of children with a disability often face great difficulty obtaining appropriate provision for their child, especially in education. Mary Scanlon rightly paid tribute to the work that is done at Drummond school. She was also correct in stating that it is often when children leave school that there is an almost complete lack of further provision. It is difficult to tackle that problem, which is no doubt a matter of resources. However, I hope that we all recognise the problem that Mary Scanlon identified. I know that it exists in my constituency. I will tackle head on the issue that Johann Lamont and Margaret Curran raised about the £34 million. It is known, from a parliamentary question that was only recently posed and answered, that that £34 million is consequentials that are available to the Scottish Government. The Cabinet  Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, Fiona Hyslop, is considering the matter carefully.

I confirm that the Government is absolutely determined to meet the needs of children with a disability. Currently, we are engaged in a range of positive activity to support disabled children and their families. That includes sponsorship of the Scottish portion of the Family Fund, which is the key provider of short breaks and other necessary non-statutory support through flexible small grants to families. I know how important that is because I have many constituents who cannot get any respite from spending their whole lives—24/7—looking after a disabled child. The Badaguish Centre, which is in my constituency, is an excellent facility that John Swinney visited recently. It is a long-established facility that provides outstanding opportunities for young people with special needs or a disability to participate in and experience the pleasures of the outdoors. I hope that it will continue to be supported by other councils as it is supported, I am pleased to say, by Highland Council. Many members made wide-ranging speeches. All were interesting and some were valuable. I want to reply specifically to Elaine Smith, who has campaigned long and hard on violence against women. I apologise to other members who, quite rightly, raised issues on the same theme. Elaine Smith pointed out that pornography is part of the continuum of violence against women. We in the Scottish Government agree, and we share the concerns about the impact of pornography, especially on the young. Many measures are in place at present—I will spare the chamber my reading them out—but we are currently considering proposals to create a Scottish offence of possession of extreme pornographic material, in light of the joint consultation that was undertaken with the Home Office in 2005. Today's debate was useful in that Elaine Smith rightly raised the issue once again. Albeit in passing, reference was made to sectarianism and religious intolerance. I am charged with portfolio responsibility for tackling sectarianism. Today's debate has been another useful opportunity to reiterate that the work on tackling sectarianism was led by the former First Minister and Cathy Jamieson. I always make that  point when I am making speeches on this theme, and I took the opportunity to do so on Monday this week at a useful conference in Glasgow, which sought to explore how the churches can contribute towards tackling sectarianism. I am also pleased that the First Minister recently attended an event at Hampden for the signing up of Scottish Premier League clubs to the kick out bigotry pledge, which sends out a strong message that religious hatred is completely unacceptable and will not be tolerated in football grounds or anywhere else in Scotland. I hoped that the motion and today's debate would provide us with the opportunity to unite as one Parliament behind one motion.

We will certainly support the amendment tonight and business managers will discuss ways to implement it. I hope that that is clear. I hope that the Liberal Democrats will unite and speak with one voice from the Parliament. In his opening remarks, Mr Maxwell pointed out that the Liberal Democrat amendment is factually incorrect.

I am sorry; I do not think that I can take an intervention. The Liberal Democrat amendment says that there is an "absence of a commitment to the mainstreaming of equality in the Scottish budget", but as Mr Maxwell pointed out it is on pages 4 and 107 of the document. The amendment then goes on to say that equalities funding is rolled up into the local government settlement, but it is not.

I get the sense that my plea for unity will not be favourably received by my Liberal Democrat friends. That is unfortunate. Not only have they no leader at the present time, they seem to have no positive alternatives by way of policies. The amendment is perhaps just another exemplification of that. I am happy to second Mr Maxwell in calling for a fairer Scotland that is free from discrimination.

That is my forte.

I hope that I will be able to cover all the many issues raised in the debate in the limited time that now remains. [ Laughter. ] I am a solicitor, if that is a declarable interest, and I am of such vintage, dating back to 1976 at the University of Glasgow, as to have been a contemporary of Michael Clancy, director of law reform at the Law Society of Scotland, who is here today listening to the debate. In fact, we are now in such a state of veteranship and vintage that most of our contemporaries no longer aspire to be president of the Law Society, but already have been. Today's debate is an important one. It has been consensual, and I do not believe that there will be a division at the end of the day. We welcome the contributions that have been made. Matters started from what I suppose we would call the terminus a quo, from the super-complaint of Which?. I am not aware of just how many of my constituents urged Which?  to make that super-complaint; certainly nobody I met in the 700 surgeries that I have held over the past eight years has raised the topic, but perhaps it is the talk of the steamie in the Which? offices. Nonetheless, a super-complaint was made and the OFT has opined. Let us remind ourselves of the super-complaint. It stated that there have been restrictions that "significantly harm the interests of consumers", namely  "the restrictions on advocates' business structures... the restrictions on solicitors and advocates providing services jointly ... the restrictions on third party entry, and ... the restrictions on direct access to advocates." All those matters have been touched on by various speakers in today's debate. There was united support for inviting the Law Society to take the matter forward by consultation, which it has done, publishing a paper the first part of whose title is "Delivering Scottish Legal Services"—not serving lawyers or looking after their own interests but delivering legal services for the public, which many speakers today have said should be the starting point. It is the starting point for the Law Society, and we welcome that. The Law Society is balancing different interests, between large firms and sole practitioners and between rural and urban practices. Many members have referred to that balancing act. We welcome the fact that the Law Society has taken a lead and we look forward to continuing to work with it and to reading its report. The Law Society has recently consulted on shaping the future of legal education and training in Scotland, which is important if we are to widen audiences and remove monopolies, because whoever appears in court requires some sort of rudimentary training, even if they are employed by Tesco. It has been a major consultation; we await its results with interest and our work will be informed by it. Great changes have taken place since I was admitted as a member of the Law Society some generations ago. Some barriers have been removed, which has helped consumers. For example, it used to be the case that in order to obtain a divorce one had to raise the action in the Court of Session. That was an incredibly outmoded and old-fashioned, not to mention extraordinarily expensive, procedure. Until fairly recently, one had to raise various bankruptcy issues in the Court of Session. Again, that was completely unjustifiable. The biggest barrier to access to justice has been expense and I would argue that that has been caused by the privative jurisdiction of the Court of Session. The work that Lord Gill is now doing to reform the Court of Session further might well make as significant a contribution to serving Scotland as anything that emerges from the process that we are discussing today, so we welcome Lord Gill's work. Much has been made of the arguments about whether there should be MDPs and how they should be regulated. Members were quite right to point out, as Bill Aitken did, that the starting point for anyone practising law must be the standards of scrupulous integrity and high quality, and of attending to the client, responding to the client and keeping the client involved and informed. The failure to do that has been the greatest source of complaints to the Law Society over the years. High  standards will always be the key. Other members, including Mike Pringle, dwelt at some length on the importance of the guarantee fund to protect against fraud and of the master indemnity policy, which provides the consumer with fairly substantial protection against negligence. If there is any complaint against a lawyer, it tends to be an extremely difficult and harrowing experience for the complainer. The complainer is not always right, of course, but whether they are right or wrong, no one can gainsay that it is an extremely long and painstaking process. The complaints commission is being established and should be in place next year. That is arguably a step forward and I hope that it works out well. Solicitors will continue to fund dealing with complaints about their own members. That is quite right. It is a financial burden, but it is one that solicitors have borne over the years, although we enjoy grumbling about it. The argument for having a one-stop shop has illusory attractions. There are few solicitors I would wish to see complete a tax return, and few chartered accountants I would wish to see conduct litigation. I do not think that I am maligning either profession when I make that general, sweeping observation. I would have run a marathon rather than fill in a tax return for a client who had any business of any complexity. The attractions of a one-stop shop can be overstated. We heard from Paul Martin that Pauline McNeill pays regular visits to the Buchanan Galleries shopping emporium; I very much doubt that she would prefer to have an amalgamation of all those shops into one. I do not think that we can argue that specialisms are interchangeable, because they are not. However, there are strong arguments for having practices where a range of services can be obtained within one business from men or women who profess the expertise that one requires for one's affairs. Rightly, the debate's other main focus has been on the arguments that are raised in principle in the amendment. Many members mentioned the importance of access to justice. Call me a nit-picker, but perhaps it is really access to the possibility of justice. I do not want to be unduly gloomy, but it is an undeniable fact that, when there are two parties to a litigation, at least one of them—perhaps both—will emerge unhappy after the experience is over. Serious points have been raised about access to a lawyer to take on one's case, particularly in family cases and in rural parts of Scotland. A comparison can be made conceptually—we are not really getting into specifics in the debate—between the provision of legal services and the provision of dental services. The dental profession has the same difficulties, in a different way. A gulf is growing between private fees and fees for state- funded dental treatment. Similarly, in the legal profession, a gulf has been growing over a very long time between private fees and legal aid fees. Legal aid fees have been almost static over the past two decades, with few increases having been granted—I state for the record that I make no complaint about that. The gulf means that it is difficult for anyone, whether he or she has a law degree or whether he or she is a member of a commercial attorney organisation, to conduct a case at legal aid rates and make a living out of it. With respect to Mr Whitton, the average newscaster probably earns a great deal more than the average civil legal aid lawyer and the average plumber probably also earns a great deal more. If one is looking for a career these days, one would make far more money as an electrician or a plumber than as a civil legal aid lawyer. That is a fact of life; it is not something that we can change. I agree with Rhoda Grant's point that it is particularly important that victims of domestic abuse should have access to justice. That is a principle on which we can all agree. We are considering that complex topic carefully. It is fair to point out that the vast majority of individuals who are the victim of domestic abuse and are in an horrendous situation obtain legal aid, if the abuse is provable—very few do not. I will raise one issue for members to consider. Let us assume that the victim of the domestic abuse is the spouse or partner of a pop star or—I will not name any names—of a newspaper magnate who faces trial for fraud. Let us also assume that the newspaper magnate or pop star happens to be a multimillionaire. Are we saying that we would extend legal aid to them? I think not. Some means testing must be available.

If they had no money, they would qualify for legal aid. My point is that it seems rather unlikely that that would be the case. Those who can afford legal fees should not have them paid for by the state. However, of course, if the Opposition wants to amend our budget in that respect, we could consider the matter in due course. Other members pointed to the important role of other players. I pay tribute to the work of citizens advice bureaux and all those involved in mediation and alternative dispute resolution, which we debated a couple of weeks ago. That includes organisations such as Sacro, whose Inverness office I visited on Monday. I was impressed by the range of mediation that it provides in various ways. There are therefore many others who provide  advocacy—they do not necessarily do so in court, but they help people to solve problems. That will rightly remain the case. I should bring my speech to a close. I am disappointed about that, because I would have liked to make a great deal of other comments over the next hour or so to respond in full to members who have made helpful and valuable contributions to the debate. Pauline McNeill referred to arcane and quaint legal practices. As a notary public, I had to have a Latin motto when I took the oath. My Latin motto is nunc aut nunquam—now or never. I fear that the end of my speech is nunc, not nunquam.

I am indebted to Stuart McMillan for lodging a motion on the House of Lords ruling on pleural plaques. The fact that members of all parties have stayed on for the debate in greater  numbers than is often the case for members' business debates speaks volumes about the concern that exists across Scotland on the issue since the House of Lords ruling was issued on 17 October. I welcome this early opportunity to hear members' views. We have heard from many members who have campaigned on behalf of people who have suffered from exposure to asbestos, and I pay tribute to the efforts that Des McNulty, Duncan McNeil, Pauline McNeill and Stewart Stevenson, among many others, have made over the years. I also thank the members who have participated in this evening's debate. I assure members that the Scottish Government is acutely aware of concerns about the judgment, which members have eloquently and passionately expressed on behalf of their constituents. There is no doubt that the history of Scottish industry is littered with cases of negligence. Campaigns have had to be waged decade after decade, while the law followed on far too late in far too many cases. That has been the sad history of industrial injury in Scotland. I pay tribute to Clydeside Action on Asbestos, which has been to the fore and without which I doubt whether we would have seen the substantial progress on the issue, to which Hugh Henry and others alluded, that was made in the previous parliamentary session. I also pay tribute to the work of Hugh Henry and Cathy Jamieson when they occupied this particular piece of ministerial turf. We fully understand that a person who has pleural plaques has been exposed to asbestos. I have a copy of the judgment that has caused the difficulties. Paragraph 84, which is part of Lord Rodger of Earlsferry's opinion, says: "The asbestos fibres cannot be removed from the claimants' lungs." Cathy Peattie spoke emotionally about her husband, who has pleural plaques, and Gil Paterson talked about the families of those who have pleural plaques. What is a family member supposed to think about a son, daughter, husband or wife whose lungs have been scarred by asbestos? Are they supposed to think, "That's okay, then. Let's forget about it", or will they worry for the rest of their lives that the pleural plaques will become mesothelioma or carcinoma? They will worry, and the worry will not diminish or fade away; it will remain, decade after decade. As Stuart McMillan said, the sufferer will have to make endless visits to their general practitioner for check-ups and scans. The worry will never go away; it will constantly be there. When the judgment came out, I took the step of asking the chief medical officer for Scotland, Harry  Burns, for his opinion about the degree to which those who have pleural plaques may be predisposed to go on to suffer from mesothelioma or other conditions. In relation to the general argument, rather than the particular individuals who pursued the case in the House of Lords, he said that pleural plaques associated with exposure to asbestos signify greatly increased lifetime risk of about ninefold of developing mesothelioma, and a small but significantly increased risk of developing bronchial carcinoma of about 1.4-fold. He also said that the plaques indicate that the appellants had been exposed to asbestos, but that he interpreted the decision to mean that, until they develop symptoms, they will not be eligible for damages. We received a briefing from Mr Maguire, who has more experience than anyone of dealing with clients who have various asbestos-related conditions. He points out that the mean time for survival for those who suffer from mesothelioma is 14 months. I think that it was Mr Brown or Mr Aitken who pointed out that it is the habitual practice of at least some insurance companies to delay the settlement of claims. Few serious claims are settled within 14 months. If someone with pleural plaques goes on to suffer from mesothelioma, it is unlikely that there will be a settlement before they die. I share the concerns that members have expressed and I want to leave members under no misapprehension: the Scottish Government treats this issue with the utmost seriousness. As has been alluded to, I believe that this afternoon the Cabinet Secretary for Justice met Clydeside Action on Asbestos and Mr Maguire. I had hoped to attend that meeting, had I not had to attend a much-postponed meeting with the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing about a hospital in my constituency that is facing closure. I apologise for not being able to attend the meeting to hear what was said at first hand. However, as I said, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice attended the meeting and I hope that we will be able to move as quickly as possible to consider what steps should be taken.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. We are considering the bill to which Mr McNeil referred, which has been sent to the cabinet secretary. We will make our intentions known when we have had time to reflect on this debate  and to consider in full the House of Lords judgment, which extends to 105 paragraphs. I have read parts of the judgment and think that the argument is not entirely without internal contradictions. It would be interesting to have an opportunity to study the judgment in more detail, as we need to do. I read with some disappointment Bridget Prentice's response to a written question lodged by Jim Sheridan in the House of Commons. She said that the UK Government has "decided that it would not be appropriate to legislate on the issue."—[ Official Report , House of Commons , 29 October 2007; Vol 465, c 798W.] However, as members pointed out, we are the Scottish Parliament—Scotland is no longer the only country in the world that has her own legal system but no legislature. As Hugh Henry argued, it is open to us to legislate on the issue. It is open to us to seek a political solution and to act.  I very much hope that after the Cabinet has had the opportunity to receive representations and, if appropriate, consider the issue, the cabinet secretary will return to the Parliament, having giving due consideration to all factors, and take appropriate action to address the grievance that has been expressed so clearly by so many members from all parties.  Meeting closed at 18:02.

We shall tackle crime in Scotland's communities through tackling the root causes of crime—drink, drugs and deprivation; through tackling organised crime through the work of the serious organised crime task force; and through delivering effective, visible front-line policing to address the fear of crime and to deter criminals.

This Government recognises that community wardens play a key role. I  witnessed that for myself when I met community wardens in Glasgow. I saw that they had created a better understanding of their role. Societies and communities throughout Scotland are beginning to appreciate the role of community wardens and the work that they do to reach out to communities and tackle crime, particularly minor crime. Patricia Ferguson asks whether I agree with the First Minister. I regularly agree with the First Minister and very rarely disagree with him.

Although I warmly congratulate Hearts on their success, I am struggling with the unaccountable exit from the competition of Inverness Caledonian Thistle. That aside, I welcome members' contributions to the debate. The motion has received broad support. We recognise the need to develop a broad range of appropriate dispute resolution schemes as alternatives to going to court. We accept that such schemes can offer flexibility, quicker resolution, less stress and reduced expense for citizens. Recently, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice and I had the opportunity to meet a number of figures who are active in promoting the case for Scotland to become recognised throughout the world as offering top-quality forms of alternative dispute resolution. I noticed that present today in the gallery were John Campbell QC—who, we remember, helped us through the Fraser inquiry, which we might loosely say was a form of dispute resolution—and Jane Irvine, the Scottish Legal Services Ombudsman. In addition, I met Brandon Malone and representatives of the Chartered Institute of Arbitrators, and the cabinet secretary met other distinguished lawyers who are determined to promote Scotland, with its own legal system, as a centre of excellence throughout the  world. We want to promote Scotland not only as a place where people can do business easily but as a place where business disputes can be resolved using the high-quality legal minds, talents and experience that we have. I make it clear that the Government, in some respects continuing the work that we inherited, wishes to take forward the process of reform. To tackle Paul Martin's point about the establishment of a dispute resolution centre, we argue that the first step is to reform the law. Until that is done, it would be premature to establish a centre. For avoidance of doubt, I state that we plan to introduce a draft bill for consultation. Today's debate has given us some useful pointers to the possible content of the bill.

I say to Pauline McNeill that I am actually not short of material. Like Bob Hope, I have plenty of it, although not all of it should necessarily be aired in public. In answer to Pauline McNeill's question, I say that we think that the draft bill that Lord Dervaird produced is a useful model on which to base our proposals. In response to Gavin Brown's point, I confirm that important work is being done on development of the code. The code needs to be improved to deal with certain problematic aspects. It is not being used to the fullest extent. We understand that the work, which is being done by the Chartered Institute of Arbitrators, will be completed soon—possibly this month. It will pave the way for us to move forward with draft legislation based on Lord Dervaird's proposals. As the cabinet secretary pointed out, some of the law on the matter dates back to 1695, so the case for modernisation is robust. Our manifesto contained a commitment to work with the legal professions towards the establishment in Scotland of an international centre for arbitration. However, a centre that offers a range of methods of alternative dispute  resolution might be a better option. That option is being investigated by officials. Numerous members, including Lord Foulkes, who is not here—perhaps he has gone to another place—mentioned the matter. Plainly, we wish a centre to be established. The idea has many benefits. There would be fees for use of the centre, fees for the arbitrators, legal fees for the legal petitioners, and spin-off benefits in that people who would come to Scotland would use hotels and other facilities. No decision has been made on the centre's location, but I gather that Edinburgh has been mentioned as making a pitch for it, although other candidates are free to come forward and make their cases. The establishment of a centre would also provide a focus for the take up of ADR, which is promoted by a wide variety of sources including CABx, lawyers, various people in public services, councils and their service points, and even MSPs. The other day, I discovered somewhat to my surprise that I am about to take part in my 700 th constituency surgery. Much of the work that MSPs do is in trying to conciliate, mediate and find solutions—we provide a sympathetic ear but we also try to resolve complaints that can often be extremely taxing and challenging. There is a great deal of support for ADR, and many members have mentioned different aspects of it. Many of the most interesting contributions have come from the non-learned friends. Stuart McMillan was right to highlight that mediation can be far less expensive than court action or, indeed, ASBOs. He gave us some useful statistical information to prove his point. We have also heard about the application of ADR to many circumstances, including family mediation. Let me make it clear that, at present, sheriff court rules entitle a sheriff at any stage of an action involving parental rights and children to refer a case to mediation. That is extremely important, and I understand that the Sheriff Court Rules Council has agreed that that principle—namely, reference to mediation—should be extended beyond family actions. John Wilson mentioned medical negligence cases. Those are some of the most taxing and troubling cases that will concern any constituent. In them, they feel alone, vulnerable and as if they are in a David and Goliath challenge. I should mention that every local authority must make available independent mediation for additional support for learning disputes under the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Act 2004. My experience is that there are few more challenged people than parents who are struggling to fight for justice for children who have special needs. It is an unequal and difficult struggle. If there is anything we can do to help  them to feel that they are not in some sort of ghastly Kafkaesque plot, we should do so.

That is a useful point. I was going to answer Margaret Smith's earlier comments by pointing out, in relation to supervision of tribunals, that the new Scottish committee of the Administrative Justice and Tribunals Council has been set up under the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007. It has the power to submit a report to Parliament if it has concerns about how devolved tribunals operate. Bill Aitken spoke about the enforceability of decrees arbitral. Of course, it is a facet of arbitration that the parties voluntarily agree to it and consequently deny themselves recourse to other forms of resolution. I understand that the parties normally enter into a contract to be bound by the outcome of the arbitration. In that respect, they agree that arbitration should be binding. However, we are undertaking research to ascertain whether there have been problems with enforcement, which will inform the consultation process later in the year. In addition, the New York convention to which we adhere governs enforcements of awards in other countries, so Scottish awards can be enforced abroad and vice versa. The debate has had its moments of levity, some of which I will touch on briefly. We heard somewhat unexpectedly about the British empire from Margaret Smith—I was not aware that the British empire was famed for mediation and conciliation throughout the world. We then learned from Gavin Brown, again unexpectedly, that Bill Aitken has a "fat wallet". Many of us did not know that the said article exists or if it does—I do not concede the point—whether it has been spotted in public any more frequently than the Loch Ness monster. I bow to Mr Brown on his research. It might be useful for Mr Aitken to help Christine Grahame, who is anxious to have a return trip on what she called "a journey of the willing" to Baltimore. Perhaps some financial assistance could be provided. Christine Grahame kindly invited the cabinet secretary and me to accompany her on that trip, but I must tell her that our ministerial diaries are full until 2011—or they certainly will be now. Lord Foulkes made a pawky and persistently irrelevant speech, which I thought was an inadvertent advert for the abolition of the House of  Lords—or at least the transfer of its proceedings to some remote cable channel for insomniacs. In conclusion, I commend the motion to the chamber.

On 12 September, I was pleased to attend Port Glasgow town hall to launch the police public reassurance strategy. Just yesterday, I was pleased to attend the Scottish business crime centre in Stirling to launch the new crime prevention strategy. Those are the sorts of measures that the Government is supporting fully, as we fully support the excellent work that the police do throughout Scotland. Nigel Don got to the heart of the matter in his remarks about what the public expect from the police. They expect a visible police presence; they expect to see police on the beat; they expect to see police on the street; they expect to see police in the community. The Government is determined not to get involved in the knockabout stuff that has taken place today, but rather to deliver what the public want—what Nigel Don so rightly argued for in his speech.  I want to get straight to the heart of the issue, because I do not have much time. As members will recall from my days in opposition—sadly, they were far too long—I was not prone to making specific spending commitments. The Conservative motion makes not just an unequivocal spending commitment, but a spending commitment that follows the fiscal school of Jackson Carlaw—it is completely open ended. Let me explain why I say that. Over the rest of this parliamentary session—over the next three years—more than 2,000 police officers will be eligible to retire. It is absurd to suggest, as Paul Martin has done, that Government ministers can somehow bar police officers from retiring. What an absolutely absurd suggestion. Police officers have their rights, under their contracts of employment. It is therefore up to the police officers—2,000 of them—whether or not they retire. By definition, it is not possible for any Government to know exactly how many officers will retire. Ergo, as David McLetchie will shortly argue that there should be 17,234 officers by the end of the session—and as Conservative members have been arguing already, with support from some unexpected quarters during the debate, most surprisingly from the new Tory convert, Helen Eadie—the other parties are clearly making a spending commitment. It will be interesting to hear where they would find the money. To get that number, they have to know how many police are going to retire—but they cannot know that. Therefore, the other parties are signing a blank cheque and asking their friend Mr Carlaw to revisit his car-selling days to fill in the numbers and write out the blank cheque, to be signed on the taxpayers' account.

The school's motto is Spartam nactus est—I think that we puruse that prudent approach to public spending. Let me make some more serious points about the matter. As the cabinet secretary said, we will deliver 1,000 more police, but we shall deliver what the public want—the police will be in the community, on the beat and on the street. As Mr Don argued, that may be on patrol in vehicles, or it may be on foot. We will deliver what the public want and expect, by introducing efficiencies. Helen Eadie is simply wrong that it is not possible to make efficiencies. The cabinet secretary knows that she is wrong, from his discussions with Fife Constabulary.

I am in my last minute. As the cabinet secretary said, we will consider ways in which to introduce efficiencies through the adoption of technology, the centralised arrangement of some back-office functions, the efficient operation of the summary justice system and the effective operation of the Scottish Police Services Authority. We will deliver the pledge in the most effective way, not by signing a blank cheque, which is the new approach of the Conservative party, supported by its new fan, Helen Eadie. We will not pursue that approach; we will be prudent, not profligate; we will be effective, not negligent; and we will deliver for Scotland the 1,000 extra police to which the public are entitled, on the beat, where they are needed by the public, as we promised.

Given that Margaret Smith has said that this is a numbers game and that she will  apparently support Mr Aitken's motion, which states that there should be "17,234" police officers "by the end of this Parliamentary session", how many more police officers do the Lib Dems believe should be recruited and how much will it cost?

I am grateful to Bob Doris for bringing this issue to Parliament's attention and for ensuring that none of us forget the brave and committed actions that local people are taking and—as we have heard—have taken, not just in Glasgow but throughout the country, to make their communities safer and stronger. It is important to stress that most of Scotland's communities are safe, but too many are blighted by antisocial behaviour, and some are plagued by serious crime. Many of our most disadvantaged areas are hit hardest. Bob Doris and other members from across the party divide have made those points loud and clear. It is imperative that we reclaim our streets and communities from a thuggish minority who cause so much misery for the law-abiding majority. Other members, such as Margaret Smith, have made the point before that, in the work that the police do, it is essential that all local communities share their concerns with the police and work with them. The police will investigate and take action on evidence that is provided to substantiate any allegations that are put to them. That is not a matter for a minister, it is a matter for the police, therefore I will not comment on any of the individuals who have—appropriately—been mentioned by members. That would not be appropriate for me, as a minister. A safe and strong community is not just one that is safe from crime and free from antisocial behaviour; it is also one that has a secure and welcoming environment and that has access to high-quality services and amenities. I am pleased that Glasgow City Council has apparently agreed to continue to explore ways in which to support the Chirnsyde initiative. Bill Wilson and Patricia Ferguson touched on that during the debate, and Patricia Ferguson mentioned the issue of vandalism to the property, which suggests that the problems have not yet been solved. I understand that the local community planning partnership has ring fenced funding to address that, although there are still challenges. I congratulate all the local activists on their efforts, and I encourage them to do all that they can to send out a clear message to criminal groups that it is the local residents who will win the battle, not gangs of thugs. Bob Doris mentioned disclosure. I think that it is correct that Glasgow City Council is responsible for ensuring that an individual is a suitable person to be in charge of children and young people. Many members have mentioned organised crime. I will share some facts with the chamber. The first meeting of the serious organised crime  task force will take place on 22 October, and its membership will include the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency, the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland, HM Revenue and Customs, the Serious Organised Crime Agency and the Lord Advocate. The task force's remit will include the identification of priorities for tackling serious organised crime in Scotland and improving co-ordination between the law enforcement agencies and others, such as the Security Industry Authority, which regulates the private security industry. That will come into effect from 1 November and will, I believe, make its mark. There has been success for the Scottish police forces. There were nearly 25,000 seizures of drugs in 2005—an increase of 50 per cent since 1999. The number of arrests has also risen substantially. I pay tribute to every person who has been involved in bringing drug dealers to justice. That is, by no means, a political point, as all parties are united in their desire to ensure that those efforts are repeated and improved on as time goes on. Combating serious organised crime and tackling organised crime groups is a top priority for the Government and the Scottish police service. The Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 allows the Crown to recover profits from people with a criminal lifestyle and, since its implementation in 2003, £16 million has been recovered from criminals. I was interested in Margaret Smith's suggestion at the end of her speech—which was, of necessity, short—that those who are convicted and who have been in receipt of legal aid should be subject to a clawback. I give Margaret Smith an undertaking that if that cannot already be done, I will look into it and see whether we can explore it as a possibility. I will get back to her on that. We are determined to track down illegal assets and to deprive criminals of their cash and possessions. I recall raising that issue some years ago. To be fair, the Government took action on it, with support from across the political divide. Bill Wilson quite rightly mentioned the underlying causes of crime and their relation to poverty. We have made it clear that the three Ds—drink, drugs and deprivation—are the root causes of a great deal of our crime. Everyone would admit that the Cabinet Secretary for Justice has been extremely active in promoting that message, and I hope and believe that his action is helping to change attitudes in Scotland. I add my voice to those of members who have congratulated specific individuals. Although I will not name those people, they have plainly acted with courage, perhaps at some risk to their personal safety. We as a Government will  continue to place a high priority on promoting community safety and tackling antisocial behaviour. However, we want to give young people more choices and chances in life and thereby promote better behaviour. Prevention is surely better than cure. I thank Bob Doris for facilitating the debate. I am sure that the message that has been conveyed by members of all parties this evening will find its way to the authorities and will, I hope, contribute to the development of a stronger, safer Scotland.  Meeting closed at 17:46.

The Scottish Government is committed to tackling antisocial behaviour wherever it occurs. We fund community safety partnerships to deliver a range of services to protect their communities from unacceptable behaviour and to provide more choices and chances for young people to engage in positive rather than negative behaviour.

As the Cabinet Secretary for Justice has already indicated to Parliament, we are fully committed to implementing our pledge to continue and increase the visible police presence in Scotland. This Government is absolutely determined to promote community safety and to tackle antisocial behaviour. However, we wish to give a new emphasis in this policy area by trying to provide to young people in the poorest parts of Scotland the choices and chances that have been enjoyed in the richest parts of this country. Our emphasis should be on providing such chances to our young people and on promoting good behaviour, not just tackling bad behaviour.

Dumfries and Galloway Council has been allocated £880,000 for antisocial behaviour services in 2007-08. It is for each local authority to decide, with its community safety partners, on how best to use that funding. Future funding arrangements will be determined following the forthcoming spending review.

The current four-year funding package for antisocial behaviour runs until the end of March next year. Funding is not directed towards particular types of services: that is for partners to decide locally. The amount of spending for future years will, as the member knows, depend on the spending review. I have been made aware of the work of community wardens. I visited Glasgow fairly recently and spoke to community wardens there, and I recognise that the public increasingly understand and appreciate the role that they play. In implementing our plans, we will carefully consider the important role that community wardens have played and might continue to play.

I commend the member on his ingenuity. He managed somehow to bring his constituency into the confines of the question, which did not—as the Presiding Officer said—concern his part of the country. The member is right that we are extremely concerned about tackling antisocial behaviour, which is why we plan to review the strategy to see where it can be strengthened and improved. This Government is committed not only to tackling bad behaviour but to promoting good behaviour. We want to take a different approach from that of the previous Executive. That is why we want to use proceeds obtained under the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 to promote choices and chances for young people. We want them to have the choices and chances in the poorest parts of Scotland that they have in Milngavie, Bearsden and Morningside. That is what this Government wishes to do.

Patricia Ferguson eloquently described the tragic events of 11 May 2004 and the immediate aftermath. It is clear that she has discharged diligently and with dignity her duties as the constituency representative of many of those involved. It is appropriate for me to pay tribute,  too, to the member of Parliament, Ann McKechin, and to Ian Tasker of the STUC for the considerable work that they performed throughout and in the years subsequent to the tragic events. The tragedy appears, from the very fact of the guilty pleas, to have been avoidable. I join all other members in paying tribute to the outstanding work of the emergency services in the immediate aftermath—not only the fire, police and ambulance services but the health workers in Glasgow's hospitals, who I understand undertook a mammoth effort to deal with the human carnage. The First Minister stayed to hear Patricia Ferguson's speech. Unfortunately, he has had to leave to attend to other duties, but he told me that yesterday evening he personally met the families involved. As members would expect, he has taken a personal and very close interest in the outcome of these matters. Following the conclusion of the criminal proceedings, the Lord Advocate decided that it would be appropriate to hold an inquiry in public into the circumstances surrounding the explosion at the ICL factory on 11 May 2004. The Lord Advocate must decide on the type of inquiry. I know that Patricia Ferguson, along with Ann McKechin and others, has met the Lord Advocate and made representations about the inquiry's scope and remit. As Patricia Ferguson knows, the decision is not for me but for the Lord Advocate to take. I wanted to inform the Parliament about the decision clearly, so I can quote that "The Lord Advocate intends to make arrangements for the families to be notified of her decision on which type of Inquiry is to be held before any formal public announcement is made." As members may be aware, three kinds of inquiry are being considered. The first is an inquiry under the Health and Safety at Work etc Act 1974, which the relevant UK department would hold. The second is a fatal accident inquiry under the Fatal Accidents and Sudden Deaths Inquiry (Scotland) Act 1976, which the Crown would lead. The third option is to hold a joint inquiry with UK ministers under the Inquiries Act 2005. The Lord Advocate has met Lord McKenzie, the UK minister with responsibility for health and safety, to discuss the inquiry options that are available and to obtain his views on the possibility of inquiries under the 1974 act and the 2005 act. As Patricia Ferguson knows, the Lord Advocate has also met the families of victims and of survivors of the tragedy to listen to their views on the type of inquiry that they feel should be held and on the matters that they believe should be aired in public.  In preparing for the debate, I studied yesterday evening a report prepared by the Universities of Strathclyde and of Stirling on the ICL/Stockline disaster—Robert Brown and others referred to the report. It is correct for me as part of the Scottish Government to say that in referring to the report, I do not prejudge any of the issues that are involved or express any view on the Government's behalf on the report's contents. However, anyone whose heart is not made of stone could not but be moved by some of the report's contents and by the chilling narratives in it from some of the workers. As members have correctly identified, it is clear that a number of questions need to be pursued in the inquiry. They include questions about exposure to chemicals such as styrene and trichloroethylene, about ventilation—or the lack of it—in relation to exposure to hazardous chemicals and about the Health and Safety Executive's role. Having read the whole report yesterday evening, I had better say no more in that regard. It is clear that all those issues must be fully investigated. The explosion was one of the most serious industrial tragedies that Scotland has seen. The Government and the First Minister are determined that an inquiry should be held, which will provide a proper focus and a full opportunity to answer the questions that members have been right to raise in the debate and will ensure in so far as is possible that such an incident never occurs again.  Meeting closed at 17:49.

I warmly welcome Paul Martin to the Opposition benches. His desire to see the return of the Fergus Ewing of yesteryear did not seem to be shared by all members. This wide-ranging debate has been full of heat and light and darkness and shade. Thoughtful speeches have been made by members of all parties. There is a growing recognition inside and, in particular, outside the Parliament that we simply cannot continue with the existing system. Over the past 10 years, the level of crime in Scotland has remained largely static, but there has been a substantial rise in the daily average number of people in our prisons. If the rise in prisoner numbers that we have seen over the past few years were to continue, the main element of our penal policy would have to comprise the building of more and more prisons. There is agreement that it is clear that there are some people for whom prison is absolutely the right place. Despite the controversial tone of some speeches that have been made, it seems clear to me that there is little substantial disagreement between the parties about the types of crime for which a custodial sentence is appropriate. As Margaret Smith and Bill Aitken wisely said, it is clear that there are no easy answers. If there were, they would have been found long ago. The job of members of all parties is to try to find a better and more effective policy.  The Labour Opposition has based its arguments on a false premise, or a false interpretation of what has been said. Its starting point is that our approach is simply to scrap all sentences of under six months, but that is simply not true. Parliaments legislate; the courts sentence. It is not for legislators to interfere with judicial discretion and the work of the courts. We do not do so. The Cabinet Secretary for Justice gave that assurance during the opening speeches, and I see no reason to repeat what he said. It is unfortunate that the Labour contribution to the debate has proceeded on the basis of dancing across a pin on a false premise.

The facts are clear. At the moment, three out of four of those who are sentenced to six months or less in prison will reoffend within two years. The Labour Party may not like that, but that is the reality. If the current penal policy is so effective, why is there a failure rate of 75 per cent for those people? That fact alone has led most commentators inside and outside the chamber to believe that the right way forward is to have a fundamental look at the purpose of prisons and their effectiveness. Many members—notably Bill Aitken, Margaret Smith and Mike Pringle—underlined the fact that we need to come up with more effective and workable community options. That those options are not currently effective in the way that they should be is common ground. The question is how we can make them more effective. By working with politicians in other parties and with those who belong to no party, the Government has already agreed that we will develop drug treatment and testing orders, which are highly effective. From memory, where such orders are undertaken—voluntarily, as they must be—by drug addicts, nearly half of those addicts become clean of drugs. The Government believes that if something works, we should try to replicate its success. The Conservatives have campaigned for a long time to extend the use of DTTOs so that they can be used by other courts beyond the High Court and the sheriff courts, and they have said that more women drug addicts should have access to them and that drug addicts who have committed fewer offences should not be prevented from having access to them. It has been suggested that they  should be used by the district courts. We have said that we will develop a version of the orders. To be fair, I think that the Liberal Democrats agree with us, so there seems to be a majority. I hope that the Labour Party agrees that that would be one effective way in which we could tackle the real problems. Many thoughtful speeches have been made. In particular, I refer to what Elaine Smith, Bill Aitken, Nigel Don and Margaret Smith said about women offenders. We accept that extremely difficult cases are involved and that it is extremely difficult to provide effective help. Speeches touched on the difficulty of the issues, but also on some solutions. We recognise that the 218 time-out centre, which opened in 2003, works. We welcome that centre's existence and congratulate all who were involved in setting it up. Replication of that project throughout the country is plainly not in itself the answer, but we nonetheless want to develop and build on it. I thought that, when we announced that the commission on prisons would be chaired by Henry McLeish, there would be an unchurlish and unqualified welcome from the Labour Party for the fact that its former leader would lead that vital task. I say to Pauline McNeill that we have confidence in Henry McLeish's ability to undertake the task with which he is entrusted. The fact that he has agreed to undertake it without remuneration shows his continuing commitment to public life in Scotland. He will bring his experience and expertise to bear on the task. We are delighted that Henry McLeish will chair the commission and we hope that the Labour Party will support him when it comes to voting on the commission at decision time.

I am extremely grateful to Trish Godman for raising this issue. The fact that so many members representing constituencies from around Scotland have taken part in the debate, making strong points on behalf of their constituents, testifies to the anger that householders around Scotland feel. I share the concerns expressed by members of all parties about people's distress, which arises from poor service and, in some cases, from the level of charges. It might be helpful if I set out briefly the normal arrangement for managing and maintaining open spaces in housing estates, and show how that differs from cases involving Greenbelt. Normally in new housing estates, when houses are sold off by builders or developers they are conveyed to the  new owners with a right of common property to the open spaces in the estate. That means that each householder owns a share in the open spaces. The title deeds impose obligations on the owners to maintain the spaces or to pay their share of the costs of the maintenance. That is often done through the establishment of a residents association, which normally works well. If a manager who is employed by the owners does not carry out the work to their satisfaction, a new remedy is available, which the Parliament provided in 2003: a simple majority vote of all the owners in the estate can replace the manager. That law change had all-party support and I commend the Labour-Liberal Executive for introducing it. Unfortunately, the essential difference in estates that involve Greenbelt is that the original developers conveyed the open spaces not to the owners of the houses in the estate but to Greenbelt. For developers, that is a tidy way of ensuring that they retain no interest in a development once all the houses are sold. I believe—although I need further information on this—that some developers secure payments in the region of £10,000 for the common areas that are sold to Greenbelt.

I was going to turn to the member's recommendation later, but as he has raised it now, I will say that I intend to ask my officials to consider whether that is a feasible method of tackling the problem. I give the member my undertaking to do so—it will happen. The title deeds of houses in such estates are drafted in such a way as to purport to oblige the owners of houses to pay the costs of maintenance of the open spaces to the Greenbelt Group. In that regard, house purchasers and their legal advisers should always ensure that they are content with the arrangements for the maintenance of any open spaces and common areas before they sign the missives. That is what my speaking notes say and it is true, but, as I am a solicitor—I suppose that I should have declared that as an interest, although I hasten to add that I no longer undertake any conveyancing—I say that the choice that purchasers face is take it or leave it. The reality is that purchasers of modern houses in such estates do not have a chance to change a jot or comma of the title conditions. If, as Mary Mulligan and Mr Tolson suggested in their remarks, lawyers have not advised their clients that charges will apply, my  recommendation as a lawyer is that the clients should complain to the Law Society of Scotland, because that sounds to me like unprofessional conduct, which can result in an award of compensation. I recommend that members consider giving that advice when advising their constituents. The motion raises the question of common hold. Trish Godman's suggestion is sensible and, as members would expect, we have looked into it, but the advice that I have received is that the common hold system is an English concept that cannot be applied here. The situation in most housing estates in Scotland is that the open spaces have been conveyed to all the owners in the estate as a matter of common property. The problem arises when the Greenbelt Group owns the open spaces. I have little time remaining so I will focus on the main points of my reply. When Angela Constance raised the matter at a question time before the summer, I undertook to convey to the Greenbelt Group the strong feelings of members from all parties. I duly did that by writing to the managing director on 24 July, drawing to his attention the parliamentary proceedings that had taken place. I have recently received a reply from the managing director in which he indicates that the company regrets that it has not always met the customer communication and service standards to which it aspires. The company says that it is committed to improving the standard of its services to house owners. I will add a personal remark: I deprecate the sending of heavy-handed debt collection letters, especially when they come from England and there is no right to sue in Scottish courts anyway. That latter point tends not to be pointed out in the letters. My office has arranged a meeting with the managing director of Greenbelt next week. I will meet the company, and if I sound angry about this topic it is because I am angry about it. I think that my anger reflects the anger of MSPs throughout the chamber. I will be asking the company what it proposes to do. We should not have to consider legislative change, although we will consider it if necessary. Mr Jim Devine MP is in the gallery today, and I acknowledge that he has played a considerable role. The media have reported that Greenbelt has said that if 70 per cent of residents in an estate voted to dismiss the company as the manager of the open space, Greenbelt would accept that decision and leave. My officials have been in touch with Greenbelt and it has said that, although the report was not accurate, the company is considering providing residents with the opportunity to manage and maintain open spaces within their estates. However, that proposal is still  under review by the company. I will, of course, be seeking clarification from Greenbelt when I meet the managing director next week.

Yes, I will.

I am happy to consider any thought out and detailed proposal from any member who cares to write to me. Of necessity, these are complex issues.  It is abundantly clear to me that the publicity generated by the question that Angela Constance raised in the chamber has already borne fruit, as will the publicity that will be generated by this evening's debate, which Trish Godman has rightly brought before us. The publicity has already had an impact on the thinking of Greenbelt. I endorse what has been said and I congratulate all members who have taken up the issue on behalf of their constituents. I hope that members are reassured that I am seeking a solution to this problem. In addition, I am looking into other matters, although I am not raising them today. I hope to report back to members in due course. I shall be happy to let every interested member know of the outcome of my meeting with the managing director of Greenbelt. This new Scottish Government is determined to do everything that it can to protect our citizens from sharp practice, profiteering and unacceptable conduct whenever it occurs.  Meeting closed at 17:48.

We will review the national antisocial behaviour strategy to see where it can be strengthened and improved. As part of that review, we will consider the effectiveness of the key elements of the antisocial behaviour legislation.

I thank the member for his question and confirm that we are absolutely committed to continuing to tackle antisocial behaviour. We want to hear the fullest range of opinions in the review that is ahead. As I said in my initial answer, that will include a review of the legislation. Police officers and community wardens are doing much successful work in communities throughout Scotland to tackle antisocial behaviour. The Executive wants to work with people in other parties, such as Mr Whitton, and I am sure that the cabinet secretary and/or I will accept as many invitations as possible to learn more about the consequences for victims of such behaviour. We wish to have a new focus not only on cracking down on antisocial behaviour, but on promoting good behaviour, by giving young people better things to do with their time, such as participating in sport, outdoor activities, arts and other pursuits.

I confirm that the review will, of course, cover the efficacy of ASBOs. We are all aware of the relative infrequency with which ASBOs have been granted, and of the long process that is needed to persuade a local authority to apply for an ASBO, during which time the victims continue to suffer from antisocial behaviour. I am happy to confirm to Bill Aitken that that will form part of the review. We want a new strategy that will be more effective in tackling antisocial behaviour. We should all recognise that foremost in that strategy will be the police's good work throughout Scotland in tackling antisocial behaviour using their professional skills but not necessarily legal orders.

No decision has yet been taken on  whether to introduce legislation to deal with high hedges. The Scottish Government is considering whether to deal with the issue as part of the review of the national antisocial behaviour strategy, which is in its early stages.

There is a long history of action—or inaction—on the issue, but we prefer to look forward and not back. I admit to Mr Rumbles that high hedges do not form part of one of the pledges on which we were determined to deliver during our first 100 days; I am sorry if that disappoints him. Nonetheless, as constituency MSPs, we are all aware that the issue is raised with us frequently. Mr Rumbles will know that, as a matter of land law, an owner of land owns the land a caelo usque ad centrum, which means that there is no way in which one can restrict the height of hedges under the existing law other than by pruning that part of the hedge that overhangs one's property. I do not doubt that during the antisocial behaviour strategy review, I will receive representations from Mr Rumbles and they will be considered most carefully.

It is fitting that the first Government debate of the new parliamentary year concerns an issue that is vital to the future of Scotland. If we are to realise our aspirations for a safer, stronger and healthier Scotland, it is critical that, as a nation, we succeed in tackling perhaps the most pernicious social challenge of our time—the misuse of drugs. When we came to power in May, we said that we were committed to building a new national consensus on tackling drugs misuse. In June, we gave effect to an initiative that was developed by the previous Labour-Liberal Administration and which was based on proposals that were put forward in the chamber by the Conservatives—a new online directory of drugs services, which can be accessed at www.scottishdrugservices.com. I launched the initiative in Drumchapel and, to date, there have been more than 2,300 visitors to the website. In July, following discussions with Annabel Goldie, we announced that we would explore how the most successful features of the well-established and successful drug treatment and testing orders could be applied to those who are at an earlier stage in their drug addiction. Later that month, we published and publicised five reports that were commissioned by the previous Labour-Liberal Administration, including the findings and recommendations of an expert group that had investigated the use of methadone in Scotland. We made it clear at that time that we agreed strongly with the key conclusions of the group—that methadone has a vital part to play in reducing harm, but that it cannot be the only treatment that people receive. We need, at the same time, to place a much greater emphasis on promoting recovery. At the end of July, I chaired a meeting of the key experts and practitioners in the field—the Scottish Advisory Committee on Drug Misuse—who gave me their perspectives on the key challenges that we face in Scotland.  Today, it is the turn of Parliament to express the concerns of the people and communities of Scotland on this critical issue. All members will have experienced in their constituencies the devastating effects that drugs can have on people's lives, through tragic deaths from drugs misuse, the break-up of families and the crime that funds the desperate addictions that drugs misuse can bring. Those personal, local experiences add up to a dismal account. Only last week, we learned that the number of drug deaths in Scotland had hit a record high of 421 deaths in 2006. Earlier this week, we learned that more than 42,000 drug crimes were recorded by the police throughout Scotland—the second highest figure on record. The figures also showed a near 50 per cent increase in the illegal cultivation of drugs, to say nothing of the crimes of dishonesty that will have been driven by dependency on drugs. It is estimated that, throughout Scotland, there are around 52,000 problematic drug users, and some 10,000 to 19,000 children in Scotland live in households where at least one adult is a problematic drug user. It is a challenge that we can meet only by acting together. If ever there was a case of our needing to set aside party-political affiliations, this is surely it. Our aim today, therefore, is to build on the consensus that we believe exists and to shape it to take forward a national policy to tackle the scourge of drugs misuse. Today, I confirm that the Scottish Government is committed to taking forward a new strategy. For the next few months, all our work will be focused on discussing, designing and delivering a new approach to tackling the damage that drugs do to our people and our nation. It is for all members to play their part. I see around me many whom, I suppose, I could characterise as old hands—I had better not name them—but there are also many new members who I hope will take an active part and, developing that, be as active as some of the old hands in together fighting this national problem. First, we have already learned from the reports that have been published that we do not have the full range of services throughout Scotland to reach our goal of promoting recovery. Secondly, we need treatment and care to be more strongly focused on recovery. We need better information about what treatment people are getting and what the results of that treatment are. Thirdly, we need to improve quality and accountability across the board. As part of that strategy, we will set key national outcomes for tackling drugs misuse that are founded on promoting recovery. We will set out clearly the responsibilities and functions of  Government, local service commissioners and managers and other national and local bodies and how they should relate to one another in pursuing those outcomes. We will also ensure that funding for services is clearly aligned with those outcomes. We will develop the framework in consultation with those in the field and with SACDM. We will engage with our communities and with service users. In short, working together we will ensure that services are robust, focused and effective. As all members know, one of the most damaging aspects of drugs misuse is its effect on families and on the children in those families. It is imperative that we tackle the complex problems that are faced by children living in substance-misusing households. That means working with local agencies to improve the identification of children at risk to address their needs more effectively. A great deal of such work is already being carried out, but much more remains to be done. We want a renewed emphasis on prevention and early intervention, so that we support young people and families to make positive choices for safe and healthy lifestyles, and holistic support for substance misusers during pregnancy. We also want to strengthen drugs education in our schools. It is important that all who are involved in delivering drugs education to our children, including our teachers, should be confident in their ability and have suitable resources that are appropriate for each age group. We need to maximise the benefit of important and well-established initiatives such as choices for life—which, I believe, reaches out to 82 per cent of primary 7 children—by placing them within a more effective and more broadly based approach to drugs education. There will be no let-up on enforcement. Tackling the supply of all forms of illegal drugs remains an essential part of our strategy. We will be unstinting in our support of the police in disrupting the drug-dealing networks and the organised crime groups behind them. We will foster even closer co-operation, joint working and intelligence to produce results. Only recently, Strathclyde Police seized £12.5 million-worth of heroin. Those drugs are no longer on the streets as a result of the force's excellent efforts. On that point, I commend two Aviemore police officers—Sergeant Maggie Miller and Police Constable David McAlpine—who recently received commendations for their work, as a result of which a known drug dealer is now serving eight years in prison and a large quantity of class A drugs has been kept off our streets. Finally, as noted above, we need to continue to improve the link between the criminal justice system and treatment for offenders. I believe that  there is a real potential for adapting the current model of DTTOs to, for example, the needs of child and female offenders. Those two groups do not fit the current criteria for such orders. Our review of community disposals will explore that possibility. Our strategy will have five strands: first, better service delivery to promote recovery; second, early intervention to protect children; third, drugs education that works; fourth, effective enforcement; and, fifth, more appropriate court disposals. Our action on drugs will be embedded in an approach across the various directorates of Government. Shona Robison will lead a ministerial task force on health inequalities that will provide specific actions to be taken forward. We will offer more of our young people opportunities to do something positive and constructive with their lives. We have already announced a new approach to ensuring that the funds that have been recovered under the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 are invested in our communities. We will look to ensure that those funds are used to best effect in order to promote confidence and self-esteem among our young people. In tackling the challenges that we face, we must remember that there is hope. Thousands of people throughout Scotland are working day in and day out with those who are affected by drugs misuse. During my visit during the summer to south-east alternatives—at the Adelphi centre in the Gorbals in Glasgow—I saw at first hand the difference that the workers there were making to the lives of the people whom they help. They told me how disheartening it was when drugs issues become a political football. Although we must debate and agree on the course that we need to set, we owe it to those on the front line to recall that we need to work together for the nation to build consensus on the way ahead. Tomorrow, I will take the opportunity to thank staff at a project in Kingussie for the work that they do in assisting young people who are at risk of developing drug and alcohol problems. On Monday, Shona Robison and I will chair a meeting in Edinburgh of the alcohol and drug action teams. There is much more work to be done. In conclusion, there is success to build on but we have much to do. I look forward to today's debate. I am sure that all members will provide a valuable contribution to the policy that we all wish to develop. I move, That the Parliament recognises that tackling drugs misuse is one of the great social challenges of our time, requiring determined and sustained action; welcomes the Scottish Government's commitment to build consensus  around a new strategy for tackling drugs misuse; welcomes the recent publication of reports, commissioned by the previous administration, on key aspects of drugs services; supports the Government's determination to improve services to promote recovery from drug addiction, to ensure that children are protected from the drug addictions of their parents, to improve drugs education, to offer young people more opportunities to do something positive and constructive with their lives, to strengthen enforcement and to provide courts with more effective ways of dealing with those whose crimes are driven by addiction, and recognises that there will be resource implications in meeting this challenge.

It is clearly important for the amenity of housing developments that common areas of land are well managed and maintained. The Title Conditions (Scotland) Act 2003 provides a legal framework for the conditions found in title deeds, but house purchasers and their legal advisers should ensure that there are adequate arrangements in the title deeds for the management and maintenance of common areas when buying property. Similarly, home owners should seek legal advice as to whether land management companies are meeting their obligations under the title deeds or other contractual arrangements.

I am grateful to Angela Constance for raising the issue—she is quite right to do so. Although the Scottish Government cannot intervene in matters of private contract dispute, it is nonetheless absolutely clear from Angela Constance's representations and from sporadic complaints that the previous Scottish Executive received from members of various  parties that the problem is serious. The Scottish Government recognises that poorly managed or neglected open spaces not only fail to meet the needs of communities but can inhibit regeneration and development. I would be happy to meet the member to hear more specific details. If any other member of any party wants to make representations to me about Greenbelt, I would be happy to meet them.

As the member knows, those are, in essence, matters to be dealt with between the purchasers of properties, their lawyers and the developers. Mary Mulligan, like Angela Constance, highlights an issue of concern throughout Scotland. Therefore, although the Executive cannot intervene in individual cases, I am extremely concerned to explore exactly what the company is doing to discharge its obligations. The fact that two members of different parties have raised the issue indicates the strength of feeling about it. I will ensure that the company is made aware of this discussion and that the matter is taken forward.

The Government plans to take a fresh look at our antisocial behaviour strategy to see where it can be strengthened and improved and how we can ensure greater community involvement. We will feed the results of on-going evaluations of antisocial behaviour orders and dispersal powers into that wider review.

To ensure that the public are protected from the unacceptable behaviour of a minority of society in Scotland, interim antisocial behaviour orders can be obtained within 72 hours. The procedure to obtain a full ASBO requires 21 days' notice. The Government is taking a fresh look at the antisocial behaviour strategy, to ensure that it is strengthened and improved, and we expect to report back in due course, after we have had further examinations and meetings.

The review will, of course, consider what is working, what is not working and what is not working well. We have supported the use of enforcement measures in the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004. That is now  three years old, so it is appropriate to have a review. I say to Margaret Curran and the many other members who are rightly concerned about antisocial behaviour that the Executive's approach will focus not solely on tackling antisocial behaviour but on promoting good behaviour and providing opportunities for young people that show them a better life in the first instance. We will work towards promoting that good behaviour as firmly and determinedly as we will tackle antisocial behaviour after it has occurred.

Plainly, parenting orders have not been particularly successful thus far. In the course of the review, we will examine the enforcement measure to which Mr Lamont draws attention. I hope that the Conservatives will continue to work with us in tackling antisocial behaviour, in promoting good behaviour and on emphasising the inculcation of a sense of personal responsibility in Scotland. In that respect, it is worth noting that the cabinet secretary recently visited a project in Govan where youngsters are provided the opportunity to play football. Evaluation showed that youth disorder fell by 76 per cent. Surely we can agree across the parties that that is exactly the sort of scheme that we want to be replicated throughout Scotland.

The SNP Government was pleased to be able to bring forward a debate on the subject of sex offending very early in the Parliament's new session. Members of all parties in the Parliament have risen to the debate, which has been conducted in temperate terms. We have had an extremely useful discussion, from which the Government can and will learn. As Margaret Curran said, the debate has been consensual. We are here to listen and to learn from the sensible points that have been made. In that respect, there is a solid foundation of work on which to build, as Jackie Baillie mentioned. She asked me to comment on our approach to the 33 recommendations of the Justice 2 Sub-Committee. Although I did not serve on the sub-committee, I am happy to confirm the previous Administration's commitment to progress its work. I also pay tribute to the work that Paul Martin has done in his community; I know from working with him that he takes the issue very seriously. In the short time that is available, I will attempt to respond to as many of the points that have been made as possible. It was helpful of Mike Pringle to devote most of his speech to circles of support. This Government believes that communities have a role to play in helping with the resettlement and management of offenders, in the hope that they can be rehabilitated. Evidence suggests that, in some cases, those offenders who have been dealt with by a strong and effective community disposal have offended less frequently than those who have been disposed of by a custodial sentence. We should bear that in mind. We will take on board Angela Constance's point about the need to be clear about who is involved. We cannot put volunteers at further risk. I give an assurance that we will consider the proposal that  has been made, but first we want to ensure that the new MAPPAs—that stands for multi-agency public protection arrangements—are bedded in and are working because their primary function is to ensure the proper monitoring and management of sex offenders. That brings me rather neatly to Margaret Mitchell's speech, which she began by stating that the key issue was how sex offenders are managed and monitored after they have been released from a custodial sentence. That is the correct focus; it is the issue that we are here to discuss. We would all agree with the sentiments that were expressed by many members—notably, by Gil Paterson—that we regard with repugnance, revulsion and disgust sex offences that are committed against children, especially those that are committed against the very young. However, words are cheap—they are easy to utter and, by themselves, they do not bring about a solution. We will be judged on the practical arrangements that we deliver. We will best be able to secure the monitoring and management that Margaret Mitchell correctly identified as important as a result of the police, the local authorities and the Scottish Prison Service working together. Bill Aitken mentioned the meetings that he has had with the cabinet secretary and the First Minister and, as Margaret Curran pointed out, the cabinet secretary has agreed to meet her and Paul Martin. I hope that we can squeeze in a few meetings with our officials between all the consensual joint working, which exemplifies the extent to which the new Executive is trying to set a different tone and modus operandi. I hope that all members welcome that. I have some information to provide to the Parliament on the GPS satellite tracking system. The evaluation of the pilot recently completed in England and Wales is due to be published this summer and evidence is emerging from it to suggest that tracking has a role to play as a tool in offender management and that it offers certain advantages. Tracking can provide a means of monitoring compliance and of surveillance, and it can be used to provide location information to rule offenders in or out of criminal investigations. However, no satellite tracking has been piloted in England and Wales in which the offender is watched constantly in real time. It is important not to raise expectations that we cannot fulfil. There are limits to satellite tracking. It cannot prevent reoffending or prevent someone from entering an exclusion zone. It cannot provide complete and accurate 24-hour coverage of offenders' movements, nor can it always pinpoint an offender's location or tell agencies what an offender is doing. In addition, satellite tracking is extremely expensive. We will consider all those  factors in our discussions with Bill Aitken and other members who wish to be a party to them. Several members, but notably Sandra White, Marilyn Livingstone and Margaret Curran, expressed concern about resources. I inform members that the funding for post-release supervision, which includes sex offenders, was increased from £2 million to £9.5 million a year between 2002 and 2006. The funding for MAPPA co-ordinators is currently £685,000 a year and, if I remember correctly, there are now 11 MAPPA co-ordinators throughout Scotland. VISOR funding for local authorities is now £600,000 a year. VISOR is a UK database that provides information on sexual and violent offenders throughout the UK. We are ahead of the game in Scotland because VISOR has been rolled out in all Scotland's local authorities, so its information is available throughout Scotland. The police and all others involved in achieving that should be congratulated.

Johann Lamont's point is a fair one. I have been a minister for, I think, only 14 days, so of necessity we have had only a limited number of meetings. Jim Tolson concentrated earlier in the debate on the national accommodation strategy, which will offer a better deal. Roseanna Cunningham focused on SOPOs and I believe that it may be appropriate to evaluate them in due course. They are certainly available as an additional tool to those involved in dealing with sex offenders. The cabinet secretary outlined the importance that we place on tackling the problem of sex offenders. He pointed out that there are essentially two types of sex offenders: those who are on radar and those who are off radar. Sex offenders who do not co-operate with the police—by absenting themselves without saying where they are going, not reporting to the police and not abiding by the terms of their licence—will face the full panoply of the legal system. Sex offenders who have gone off radar will be subject to the new arrangements that came in on 20 April. Following Mr Martin's remarks earlier today on "Good Morning Scotland", I made it my business to get a more detailed briefing on  the issues that have been discussed in the debate. I assure members that the police, using their new guidelines, will take the most serious attitude to the problem. I believe that, in relation to the monitoring and management of sex offenders, this Parliament stands together—Scotland united against sex offenders.

I thank all those who have stayed to contribute to and listen to this evening's debate. In particular, I thank Roseanna Cunningham for initiating the first members' business debate of the third session of the Scottish Parliament. I am aware that Roseanna has pursued the issue as a result of a constituent's coming to see her about a problem, and that she has done so tenaciously and doggedly, as is her wont. I believe that that doggedness is not about to cease and I welcome the opportunity that her motion has given us to debate the issues that arise from it. The primary statutory duty for protecting life rests with the police, which is the main point that I made in response to the oral question that Roseanna Cunningham asked on the matter last week. However, out of respect for her and for the importance of the issue—given that lives are at stake—I decided to look up the relevant statutory provisions, which are contained in the Police (Scotland) Act 1967, as amended. The act sets out the overarching duty of the constables of a police force. It is: "to guard, patrol and watch so as— (i) to prevent the commission of offences. (ii) to preserve order, and (iii) to protect life and property". Plainly, this debate is concerned with the protection of life element of the duty. The motto of the police is "Semper vigilo", so it is important to set in context the fact that their overarching responsibility is to discharge that statutory function in Scotland. They might well carry out that duty in partnership with the fire and rescue services; with, as Elizabeth Smith pointed out, mountain rescue; with, as Jamie McGrigor mentioned, the coastguard; and with others. However, we must not forget that, under the law, the police alone have that primary statutory responsibility. Given that the duty already rests with the police, I am not convinced that there is a need to extend it to anyone else. Indeed, in ways that I hope to develop, it might be counterproductive to do so. Fire and rescue services can and do respond to requests for assistance from the police, and there is no question of their ever refusing to attend. Elizabeth Smith, in particular, highlighted the issue of flooding. As a result of an episode in Tayside, the Fire (Additional Function) (Scotland) Order 2005 placed a new responsibility on fire and rescue services to make provision for "rescuing people trapped, or likely to become trapped, by water ... in the event of" flooding. I can inform Parliament that more than £500,000 has been spent on equipping our eight  fire and rescue services with dry suits, boots, gloves, personal flotation devices, floating stretchers and rescue sleds to ensure that they comply with the terms of that order. I also know that thermal imaging equipment, which is particularly valuable in locating a body in moving water, has been purchased and is available. Each fire and rescue service now has such water rescue equipment, but the key point is that we need to distinguish between still and fast-moving water. The equipment that has been provided under the 2005 order is essentially for use in flooded areas that would under normal circumstances be classed as dry land. However, it is much more dangerous to effect a rescue in moving water. Indeed, that very fact was highlighted just this week with the sad death of a young boy in the River Ayr. I am sure that we would all want to emphasise the extreme danger of swimming in, or even entering, moving water. As I recall from my climbing days, the force of water even in very small burns can be huge and can take a person completely unawares. The point is that we must distinguish between flooding and rivers. I am duty bound to make it clear that Tom Brown, to whose courage I paid tribute last week, acted outwith the standing instructions. However, I have been informed by officials that no disciplinary action against him has been considered. Nevertheless, I say to Roseanna Cunningham that I seek further comments from each police constabulary and fire and rescue service to address the point that has been raised by various members about the need for more equipment and training.

I understand entirely the point that Roseanna Cunningham makes. In mountain rescue, although the legal duty rests with the police, many rescues are carried out by civilian mountain rescue teams—which are accountable through the Mountain Rescue Committee of Scotland—and the Royal Air Force. The police have the statutory duty and are ultimately in control, but Roseanna Cunningham is absolutely right to state that, in practice, it is often firefighters who are asked to attend incidents involving moving water.  I should say that the Executive has received no request from chief officers in respect of funding for training and that variation in provision is largely down to the varying geography of Scotland. It would be strange if it were not thus. More consideration needs to be given to the issue and I say to Roseanna Cunningham that that will be done, so I would be grateful if she would share with me the correspondence to which she referred. I undertake that my officials will give it proper and full consideration, given that lives are at risk.  Stefan Tymkewycz set out clearly the dilemma that faces everyone in such situations—firefighters, in particular—which is whether to attempt a rescue by entering moving water in a river. That is a very real human dilemma. In conclusion, I underscore the fact that the primary responsibility of every mountain rescue team member, every policeman and every firefighter is to have proper regard for their own safety. I know that all the members of those services take that obligation very seriously.  Meeting closed at 17:32.

I thank everyone who has contributed to the debate, especially the new members—as opposed to the old hands such as me and Mr Martin, if I may so characterise him. One of the good things about the third session of Parliament is that there is a different tone, by and large, to the debates—a tone based on moderation and consensus. I hope to use what abilities I have to carry on in that vein. Before I respond to individual members, I will underscore the Cabinet Secretary for Justice's  fundamental message: if we want a stronger, safer Scotland, responsibility for delivering that rests with every member of the Parliament and indeed every citizen of the country. We will tackle crime and antisocial behaviour and, as many members have emphasised in their speeches, work with communities to support their efforts to make communities stronger and safer. I agree with Margaret Curran that we have inherited a foundation of success. That success has been delivered by the tens of thousands of public servants—in the police, in the fire service, and in local authorities—who seek to make this country safe and strong. I pay tribute to them. It is a privilege to be a member of the Parliament and a pleasure to be able to pay tribute to their efforts.

I thank Jackie Baillie for her question and acknowledge her long-standing interest in and contribution to the topic. With the cabinet secretary, I will most certainly work closely with everyone who is involved over the coming months and years. Initially, I will meet the relevant players including the chief officers and the Fire Brigades Union, which represents the work force. I congratulate the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency on its efforts. We acknowledge that drugs are a scourge of our society, as Mr Aitken, Mr Lamont and others said, but sometimes we neglect to reflect on the great successes that have been delivered by the SCDEA, the police and others. In 2005-06, no less than 383kg of class A drugs with a total value of £22.3 million were prevented from finding their way into our communities. It is important to stifle supply, but we also have to deal with problems on the demand side. I acknowledge the efficacy of the drug treatment and testing orders, which was mentioned by Mr Aitken and recognised by Labour members in their contributions. In the year to March 2006, more than 2,300 DTTOs were made in Scottish courts, and the evaluations show that they are having a positive and dramatic impact on drug use and offending. For example, despite having extensive criminal histories, nearly half of those who completed DTTOs had no further convictions within two years. Even non-completers  demonstrated reduced reconviction rates, and the majority of new convictions were for relatively minor offences. Margaret Curran's central point related to the cabinet secretary's remarks about who should and who should not be in prison. I should perhaps point out—I hope that she agrees with me to this extent—that the development of DTTOs offers an effective, tried and tested way of providing an alternative to prison. It is also legitimate to point out that before the disposal was available, many of the 2,300 people whom I mentioned would have been in prison. Is anyone seriously arguing that it would be better to return to the status quo ante, before DTTOs were developed?

I am happy to accentuate the positive aspect of the first part of the member's remarks, when she agreed with me. I should perhaps gently say that Margaret Curran's comments do not reflect what Mr MacAskill actually said. In general, the member's thesis was somewhat undermined by Bill Butler, who said that he thinks that there are some people in prison who should not be there. To me, that seemed to be contrary to what Margaret Curran says. It is clear that, although there is consensus between ourselves and the former leading party in the Scottish Executive, it will never amount to a love-in.

I will turn to the contributions in the debate and ignore the comments from a sedentary position—that is a matter for you, Presiding Officer. You must feel tempted to ask for the powers of antisocial behaviour orders to deal with some members. We are not proposing to enact primary legislation to help you to deal with Duncan McNeil, for example, although we are sorely tempted. I welcome Margaret Smith's contribution on effective community sentencing, a theme which emerged in the debate. We recognise that many community sentences are not effective, which is why in the first two weeks that I have been a minister we have spent a great deal of time on  initiating work on that topic. We will come back to the Parliament on that at the appropriate time. I welcome Michael Matheson's contribution. We will discuss his ideas with the relevant police authority. To Bill Butler I say that youth diversion will form a central part of our approach to justice. As I have limited time left, I will focus on that, with apologies to those whose contributions I have not had the opportunity to address specifically, although those of Claire Baker, Jackson Carlaw and Bill Wilson fitted with the new mood of Parliament—to focus on reasoned argument and not unsubstantiated assertions. In the Scotland that we seek, we want to provide the opportunity to find a better way to the young people who may be minded to turn to a life of crime. There are many examples of effective diversionary schemes, such as the outreach project run by the Army Cadet Force Association, the programmes in Edinburgh that provide young people access to leisure centres at the weekend for 50p, and the Gorbals football programme that the cabinet secretary visited recently. We want to replicate that success all round Scotland. We want to provide opportunities so that our young people have the chances in life that we had. I am determined that that is exactly what we will aim to deliver in the next four years of an SNP Executive.

Responsibility for the co-ordination of land-based and inland water search and rescue rests with the police, given their duty to protect life and property. That responsibility is undertaken in partnership with others, such as the fire and rescue services and the Maritime and Coastguard Agency.

The police are ultimately responsible for search and rescue activity and work with fire and rescue services. The Fire (Additional Function) (Scotland) Order 2005 passed to fire and rescue services responsibility for serious flooding incidents. I think that Roseanna Cunningham's question was triggered by an act of bravery by a firefighter who rescued a 20-year-old woman from drowning in the River Tay. We want to record the courage of Tam Brown, who put his life at risk and rescued the young lady, saving her life. However, from my experience as a former mountain rescue team member, I know that it is ultimately the responsibility of everyone involved in rescue activity first to consider their personal safety. I am pleased to report that £550,000 has been allocated to the provision of equipment that firefighters need to secure their personal safety when carrying out rescues in water.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it considers that, over this session of the Parliament, a fair share of funding has been allocated to road and rail projects connecting the Highlands to the central belt that have been delivered, or are planned to be delivered by 2012, and which projects have been or are planned to be delivered. (S2O-12491)

Does the minister consider that it has been a great disappointment to people in the Highlands that, over the past eight years, there has been no single major improvement to the A82, the A96, the A9 or rail links; that Inverness, alone among Scotland's major cities, lacks dual-carriageway links to the rest of Scotland; and that it has only single-track rail links? Does not he feel that the Scottish Executive really must, in the next session, do a great deal better for the people of the Highlands?

In his party capacity, the Deputy First Minister has said that the Lib Dems are committed to scrapping red tape. Can he explain why representatives of his party voted just this week both for a new tenants tax—in the form of the business improvement district red tape—and for the closure of the Firth of Lorn, which will threaten the livelihoods of 30 to 40 fishermen in the west Highlands?

I endorse the comments that have been made by my colleagues, John Swinney  and Alex Neil. In the short time that is available to me, I wish to make one further point. Many cases—including one particular case that I dealt with for a constituent—are highly complex, and some of them are extremely serious. The case that I dealt with—I will obviously not name the constituent—involved a serious matter relating to possible medical negligence and severe deterioration in the health of the complainer's wife. It seems to me that the ombudswoman's office should have been willing to meet my constituent to ensure that the facts of the case were fully understood and correctly stated. A statement of the case was prepared, but my constituent and I believed that it contained errors and inaccuracies. No opportunity was afforded to my constituent to have a face-to-face meeting to discuss the highly complex and very tragic set of circumstances of the case. There was an abrupt and clear refusal to meet my constituent in his home in my constituency, which is a long distance from Edinburgh. He could not travel to Edinburgh because of his wife's ill-health. I wanted to put my point on the record, and I hope that it will be attended to in future.

I, too, wish Phil Gallie well for the future. His was a voice that was always heard in this Parliament—albeit sometimes from a sedentary position. We never had any difficulty in hearing Phil, but he has always been charitable and respectful to other members. While always putting across his points forcibly, he has been reasonable at the same time. We will miss him. We will also miss Janis Hughes. It is always rash to assume what a lady is going to do, so I am not sure whether this will be her last contribution to  this session of Parliament. Irrespective of whether that is the case, I also wish Janis well for the future. I believe that there will be an outbreak of consensus this afternoon in relation to the bill. That is not a frequent occurrence in this place. We should be pleased that, in our reconvened Scottish Parliament, we can unite behind a project that we all believe will bring considerable benefits to the people of Scotland, especially, of course, to the people who will be directly served by the Airdrie to Bathgate line. The line not only provides connections between those communities and Glasgow and Edinburgh, but connects to places such as Helensburgh. New stations will be provided, such as those at Caldercruix and Armadale, and other stations will be moved. We certainly support the work in progress on the possible additional stations on the line, namely those at Plains and Blackridge. The Scottish National Party has been persuaded that there should be a station at Blackridge. We believe that that should be a commitment. It is, of course, always difficult to make such decisions. We wish to study carefully, and with a positive approach, the findings on the potential stations at both Blackridge and Plains, which, as I understand it from the minister, will be available to us early in the next session. We are persuaded that the case is particularly strong in respect of Blackridge. I welcome the submissions that were made by my colleague Fiona Hyslop, who will speak about that possible additional station at more length. Efforts have been made by members of other parties, including Mary Mulligan and Karen Whitefield, who I expect also to participate in the debate. If I have not mentioned other members by name, I mean no offence. There has been a strong voice calling for a new station at Blackridge. As the SNP transport spokesman, I have been persuaded that, in relation to the range of figures that we have been discussing—they are of course indicative, not exhaustive—a new station would be a valuable investment for the people of Blackridge. I think that the facts, as they emerge, make the case stronger than it has been before. Therefore, we will suggest that, if we are able to earn the trust of the people of Scotland at the elections, that project should be supported. I am pleased to make that clear now, as I did in the previous debate on the subject. The Airdrie to Bathgate line will provide a much-needed economic boost to both areas. It will help to extend the travel-to-work zone, which will assist the economies in each area. People in Lanarkshire will find it much easier to travel to and work in Edinburgh, and people in the Bathgate area will find it much easier to travel to and work in Glasgow. In a real sense, that will bring together  the west and the east—something that has proved to be problematic from time to time in this country of ours, for reasons that I do not propose to go into. The new rail link will provide a means of giving an economic boost to both areas. It will also improve the environment, increase the opportunities for people in Airdrie and Bathgate to obtain other jobs in our cities and give them other opportunities, and achieve faster journey times. All in all, it will increase people's ability to travel by rail rather than by road. That will relieve some of the congestion on the M8, which can be a serious problem from time to time. For all those reasons, the SNP is happy to join other parties in supporting the bill. I noticed what the Minister for Transport said in the final remarks of his speech. I am not sure how long I have to cover this—do I have another five minutes, or 10 minutes, or one minute?

Thank you very much. I have no complaints about that whatsoever. The minister trespassed somewhat more widely than the confines of the Airdrie-Bathgate Railway and Linked Improvements Bill. My party and I would like to see more rail links in Scotland. We take a different approach, in that we do not believe that the proposal to establish an Edinburgh airport rail link by means of a tunnel under the live runway and two rivers is sensible, because a surface option could be considered—on which we ask Network Rail to deliver a study—nor do we think that the Edinburgh trams scheme, at a cost of more than £700 million, represents value for money. We believe that the £1,300 million—and rising—could be better used for other purposes, not least to extend Waverley from 28 to 32 paths per hour and to invest substantially in the network throughout Scotland. Inverness is the fastest-growing city in Scotland, but West Lothian is the fastest-growing county in Scotland. We wish the people of West Lothian and Lanarkshire well with this new line.

Will the minister acknowledge the valuable work that is performed by special constables in Scotland's policing? I hope that she will join me in welcoming the presence in the public gallery of a large number of special constables, although they have not been required to keep order this afternoon—

Indeed. Inverness, which I represent, is the fastest-growing city in Europe, so does the minister accept that its growth means that it needs extra police officers? Is she aware that we are currently about 20 officers short of the complement that is required to keep order in Inverness?

A substantial part of the Cairngorms national park lies in my constituency and in that of Mike Rumbles. From the south at Dalwhinnie to the north at Cromdale, the park includes the settlements of Newtonmore, Kingussie, Aviemore and Grantown-on-Spey. However, as members have pointed out, the park boundaries exclude the southern Cairngorms area. Alex Fergusson, Mike Rumbles and I were members of the Rural Development Committee when it considered the matter in great detail at various venues, including local meetings in Kingussie. I argued then—and argue now—that it is perverse to exclude the southern Cairngorms from the Cairngorms national park. I say that as someone who spent his later youth and earlier middle age tramping through much of the Cairngorms. In fact, other than Bynack More and one or two others, I have been to the top of most of the Munros in the area, and I cannot for the life of me understand how anyone can argue that An Sgarsoch, which, at more than 1,000m, sits just south of the boundary, should be outwith the national park. For that matter, I cannot understand why Glen Tilt and Beinn A'Ghlo are not in the national park while Braeriach, Cairn Toul, Mount Keen and Lochnagar are. They are all part of the Cairngorms, so why are they not all included in the Cairngorms national park? The arguments that we have heard today must be the thinnest from an Executive that likes to use anorexic arguments. First, the minister seemed to suggest that including in the national park the areas set out in my friend and colleague John Swinney's bill would lead to a loss of momentum. How would it? In fact, what does that mean? I respectfully suggest that that is simply an empty assertion. There might well be a loss of momentum if the area that John Swinney has proposed for inclusion in the national park contained settlements of 10,000 or 15,000 people. However, only 690 people live there and there is only one major settlement—Blair Atholl.  Secondly, the Executive has argued that the proposal will cause disruption. However, would simply replacing one Highland councillor with a councillor from Perth and Kinross disrupt anything? Would it be the end of the world? Who, indeed, would notice? The minister said that she received a letter from Duncan MacKellar, who is a friend of mine and someone whom I know extremely well. I have to say that, except for that letter from Mr MacKellar—who admittedly feels that the matter should be addressed later—I have received no letters from any of my 70,000 constituents.

I do not accept that that work would in any way be disrupted. Why should it? It would simply be supplemented in respect of an area with very few people and only one settlement area. As far as land management goes, Atholl Estates does a good job and, as a land manager, is well respected. Its efforts would enhance the national park. Much reference has been made by members to other areas that would like to join the national park, although those members did not bother to specify which areas. There has been some talk about Dava moor joining the national park, but that is not because it wants to be in a national park per se. Dava moor does not want the area—including Glen Kirk, Cairn Duhie, Tom nan Clach, Berrieburn, Farr and Paul's Hill—to become one continuous wind farm. Dava moor is fed up with SNH not standing up for Scotland's heritage. SNH has objected to only one in four of the wind farm applications in Scotland, a matter that I pursued with it at a meeting on 9 March at the house of one of the protestors. So, I can scotch the myth that other areas want to join the national park. If the minister is going to pursue that particular canard, perhaps she could enlighten me as to which of the areas in my constituency are enthusiastic, eager and thrusting candidates to be included in the national park, because I have yet to be made aware of them. I am delighted to support John Swinney's bill, but it is a shame that naked party politics from the Labour Party and its absent Lib Dem colleagues—with the exception of my friend Mike Rumbles—will do their dirty business later this afternoon.

Will the minister give way?

With regard to the number of deer on Rum, Andrew Thin, in an e-mail to the Scottish Gamekeepers Association dated 25 May 2005, said that he was not sure why stalking had been lost "as there have been good numbers of deer on Rum for decades without threatening any of the designations". Why has he changed his tune since becoming chairman of SNH?

No—

Has Sarah Boyack ever been to Rum?

The island of Rum contains one of the oldest-known sites of human habitation in Scotland and it was not so long ago that it had a population of well over 400. In the 19 th century, the cousin of the laird, Dr Lachlan Maclean, discovered that he could increase the island's rental value from £300 per annum to £800 by substituting sheep for people and about 400 souls were forcibly repatriated from Rum as a result. Today, the population of the island is very small. The matters that Jamie McGrigor has raised focus on another sad chapter in the beleaguered history of Rum. I support the motion and congratulate Jamie McGrigor on it, because I know that the proposed cull has caused a great deal of concern among a wide spectrum of people—it is wrong to say that the objections were stimulated by any one body. SNH's plans for a deer cull go well beyond what is reasonable. One is reminded of the slaughter of deer at Glenfeshie not so very long ago, which stimulated an outrage. Glenfeshie and Rum are both in my constituency and I am well aware of the strong emotions that are aroused. The fact that the deer is a symbol of Scotland has been brought home to a great many more people by the "Landward" programme. The idea that that animal, uniquely, should be subject to state slaughter seems to be at odds with the approach to animal welfare issues that is adopted with every other species. It seems that deer is not only the unprotected species, but the species that is picked out for state slaughter by SNH, with the connivance of the Executive and other state agencies. Quite frankly, that is simply wrong and I welcome the opportunity that the debate gives us to say so. The policy of not fencing forestry is misconceived and has been shown to fail. A recent expert report has highlighted that the conventional wisdom that is apparent among Deer Commission for Scotland and SNH ranks, according to which deer are the source of the problems on our landscape and our hills and the cause of overgrazing, is incorrect. Sheep and cattle have been found to be the main contributing factors. Any justification for the slaughters that have taken place has been removed by that recent report, which—we are told—was not published until it had been peer reviewed. I hope that SNH will change tack. Along with others, I raised the issue with Andrew Thin, who is the chairman of SNH. He replied stating that the deer cull this winter would be a normal maintenance cull—in other words, deer would be culled only to maintain a steady population. He said that he could not predict future culls until  there had been proper consultation on the new management plan, but that SNH would most certainly involve local people and all other interests in the process and would certainly make public the results. SNH's plans for forestry on Rum were put forward as part of a woodland grant scheme, which, initially, proposed blankets of forestation. I am informed by someone who was close to the situation that SNH then discovered something that one would have thought that it would have known—that a certain conservation designation applied, which stopped them from planting pine trees over the bogland that covers most of the island. In other words, SNH was aware that its own plans were incompetent because of the designation that applied to part of the land. It is a pretty rich irony that SNH, which is supposed to be in charge of designations, was apparently not aware of the consequences of a designation for its own forestry plans. The plans had to be changed. The real victims are the community of Rum. There should have been two plans for Rum: on forestry and on community development. SNH has been supposed to promote community and social development on the island since around 1997, but since then people have left Rum, an uninsured house has burned down and not been replaced, businesses have been stymied and the efforts of people such as Charles King—and Andrew Thin, before he became chairman of SNH—have come to nothing. The problem is that SNH has control over the island—Rum is a company island. I wrote to Ross Finnie to suggest that that should change, because SNH was set up not to control islands but to advise on the environment and natural heritage, but he dismissed my suggestion out of hand. Since then, more people have left the island and the community is insecure. It would be unfair to name people who live on the island, because there are so few of them, so I have chosen not to do so. The situation is a bloody tragedy for Scotland and the Executive has turned a blind eye to it. This most recent chapter in Rum's history is a sad one. The proposal for a cull has aroused anger, because it is not supported by the people of Scotland or by the experts. The advice of people who know about the subject, such as the Scottish Gamekeepers Association, has been consistently ignored, despite the fact that I suspect that SGA members have more knowledge of the Highlands' red deer population in the tips of their fingers than have all the so-called experts who are in charge. I hope that there will be a chance for a new start in May, so that we can listen to the experts and say no to the proposals for the cull of red deer. Jamie McGrigor was right to highlight the issue.

Will the minister give way?

Will the member give way?

David McLetchie knows that Kenny MacAskill has pointed out that, if the money for EARL were used for another purpose, it could replace every bus in Edinburgh and run the new buses for free for five years.

I will set out the SNP's position on EARL—I hope not in an insipid way. We offer a clear alternative to what all the other parties offer on the issue. We do not believe that the proposed project represents the best value for the taxpayers' money that we are entrusted to invest on their behalf. The minister said that the cost is estimated at £610 million. He did not say that that was the estimate in 2005. That estimate is already two years out of date. It is fair to say that there are few commentators who expect the project to be delivered for less than £1,000 million.

It is the SNP's view—despite the minister's habitual running commentary, which we enjoy during these debates—that the money can be better spent on other projects. For example, we urgently require to improve our rail and road systems. Just the other week, the Local Government and Transport Committee heard evidence from local authority roads engineers that the tally just to bring our roads up to standard is a cool £2,000 million and rising. From the excellent work that was carried out for the recently published route utilisation strategy, we know that Network Rail is proposing a series of changes that will benefit not simply an airport but all rail users in Scotland. Network Rail has identified gaps in the network around Scotland. We believe that our duty to invest the public's money wisely would be best discharged by addressing the needs that have been identified in Network Rail's route utilisation strategy.  We also need to tackle the second problem, which is the capacity of the rail network in the central belt—

In a moment. At present, our rail network is running at or near capacity. The SNP's view is that we must invest to increase that capacity. Otherwise, we will see gridlock early in the next decade, with no more room on trains and no more routes.

We do not believe that EARL is a pivotal part of Network Rail's route utilisation strategy. A more important part of the strategy is to reduce journey times between, for example, Inverness and the central belt by around 30 minutes. In discussions with Network Rail, the SNP believes that we can go further than that by cutting the journey time for that key route by around 45 minutes. I am quite sure that the Inverness chamber of commerce will welcome that SNP policy. We desperately need to bring our roads up to standard—

I will finish this point, if I may. We need to effect major improvements to our road network throughout Scotland. Plainly, it is not possible to make all improvements overnight, but I have never suggested that.

The minister says, "Yes you have," but the record will show that we have clearly stated that the SNP recognises that long-term objectives must include, for example, the upgrading of the A9 and A96 to dual carriageway. We always welcome converts to the cause, no matter how late, so I was delighted to read in this morning's edition of The Press and Journal —an excellent organ that, as we all know, publishes only the unvarnished truth—that the First Minister now agrees with the Scottish National Party that the A96 requires major upgrading. Politics is about making choices; government is about making hard choices. The SNP has made hard choices before the election. One of those hard choices is that, if we have the opportunity to form the next Government—if we are entrusted with that privilege by the people of Scotland at the next election—we will not proceed with the EARL  project but instead proceed with projects that will benefit the whole of Scotland. There remain a number of flaws and unanswered questions about the EARL project. Network Rail said that EARL will have an adverse impact on its timetable. Scott Barrie said that EARL will add only a few extra minutes to people's journeys. If those who travel from Edinburgh to Inverkeithing work 48 weeks per year, they will spend 40 hours more in the train each year even though they may want to go to the airport only once or twice a year. The rolling stock has not been included in the balance sheet. Perhaps that follows some of the curious accounting practices we learned about during the Holyrood project fiasco. They may have been okay for Sir Muir Russell, but they did not fool the public. The benefits that it is said will derive from the scheme have been calculated over a period of 60 years. How many projects in the commercial world are judged on not making a proper return for up to 60 years? Few of us, if any, will be around to carry out the audit in 60 years' time. I find the Conservatives' position rather curious. They support the project, but only if the costs are pegged and some kind of guarantee is sought. Well, they will wait as long for that guarantee as they will for a guarantee that there will be no rain in Fort William next year.

I accept that point in principle. Indeed, the SNP has developed policies to tackle that very problem. For example, we will provide substantial opportunities for businesses by setting corporation tax at a lower rate than it is in England. I will respond directly to Lord James Douglas-Hamilton's point. If the SNP earns the public's trust to form a Government in May, it will invite Network Rail to suggest alternative proposals for a surface rail link to Edinburgh airport. We made that clear in the previous debate on the bill. In fact, I have made that point consistently throughout the passage of the bill, and I am happy to repeat it again this afternoon. As I said earlier, I am grateful to the minister for his constant stream of remarks and comments. They have been very helpful to the debate.

Does the SNP support EARL? The answer is: no, no and no. Instead, we will  invest the money for the good of the whole of Scotland.

In the evidence that he gave on behalf of Network Rail, Ron McAulay said that, if the EARL project is constructed, "that will have an adverse impact and ... we will need to recast the timetable."—[ Official Report , Edinburgh Airport Rail Link Bill Committee , 19 December 2006; c 326.] Can Scott Barrie confirm that that is the case?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I have just received further information about a serious matter that arose during this debate. During his speech, Mr Arbuckle made a claim about the views of the Royal Bank of Scotland, asserting that the Royal Bank of Scotland has expressed a view that the SNP's sums do not add up. I want to make it clear that the position of the Royal Bank of Scotland is that it categorically denies that that is the case. It has not expressed any view on the sums or policies of any political parties. I seek your guidance on whether such a serious misrepresentation of a leading Scottish  institution should be dealt with by the member concerned withdrawing the accusation and issuing an apology to the Royal Bank of Scotland.

In the intervening period, before the Greens take power in Scotland, when we are still able to use the internal combustion engine to drive up the A9, I urge members to visit the Tomatin Distillery Company Limited in my  constituency, which is located conveniently off that road, 15 miles south of Inverness. I recently had the pleasure of visiting the distillery. At a meeting of Inverness churches thereafter, I was asked by constituents the question that is most frequently asked about independence and which is, I believe, the key question as far as a great many people are concerned. Can Scotland afford independence? Having just visited the distillery, I was able to give a different answer because I had found out that the value of the stock—including its value to the Exchequer—that is held in storage at that distillery alone is £640 million. The distillery is just off the A9, which will be lucky to have received 1 per cent of that figure for improvements, even though it is one of the most dangerous roads in Scotland, on which many people lose their lives. That sends a stark message—which the minister will now explain to us.

That is one of the minister's many suggestions that we will not take up. Can members think of any other country in the world that has a sustainable industry, such as the whisky industry, which produces so much wealth, which is exported throughout the world and which has almost unparalleled opportunities for growth in the century ahead, as the people of the world become more able to afford our national product? Every country in the world would give its eye teeth for such a product. The point that I am making is that Scotland has wealth in abundance, both in natural and human resources. At the beginning of this century, as we look forward to the next 100 years, we must ask ourselves what the nation most values. The answer is not oil—even though we still have it in abundance, to the tune of £6 billion or more a year—which was the gift of the last century, but it might well be water, natural resources or renewable energy, all of which Scotland has in abundance. I turn from Tomatin to Trident, which, surprisingly, Mr Chisholm failed to mention in his tour de table, although he spoke about the alleged financial deficit that there would under the SNP. Of course, the UK runs a deficit every year. If we take Scotland's share of it and then add back the oil revenues, there is either no deficit or it is very small. The deficit argument is simply an attempt to scare the Scottish people out of their birthright, which is independence. We hear about the deficit—as members know, we hear about it all too frequently—because it is designed deliberately and calculatedly to scare Scotland out of the  birthright that every other country in the world takes for granted. One of the benefits of independence will be that we will be able to make the right choices. I have always thought that tolerance is among the many pleasing qualities of the good people of England. They have a lot to tolerate, given the number of Scots members in the Cabinet who are misgoverning their country, as they have in the past and will do in the future. No doubt, Mr Chisholm will agree that, instead of spending money on a replacement for the Trident system, we could spend it on all kinds of alternatives. The Trident costs were originally estimated at £15 billion; now, the figure is over £100 billion. The Government at Westminster is also considering investing £9 billion in the London Olympics—originally, the figure was £3 billion. We can see that the choices that Scotland will have made for it if we remain in the union will be simply the wrong choices. With independence, we will have the ability to decide how our money will be spent.

I think that I have another minute, Presiding Officer. Mr Reid said that I would have six minutes.

I will wind up. The savings from not having Trident and the Olympics would be so large that they would, to be frank, more than cover any fiscal problems that we may have. The SNP's plans for business rates will end eight years of complete hypocrisy from both Labour and the Liberals—a period in which we have had higher business rates than England, despite the minister's having talked in his opening remarks about a "policy of equalisation". If the Executive's policy was about equalisation, why have we had higher business rates for the past eight years? It is bare-faced hypocrisy and the minister knows it. When we take power in May, we will bring that to a close.

Will the member take an intervention?

If the Conservatives are so against quangos, why does Murdo Fraser's amendment propose a new quango—a dedicated skills agency? How much would it cost? How many employees would it have?

I am pleased to support the bill, and I am pleased that more shop workers will be able to enjoy new year's day as a holiday. I recognise the great amount of work that members from all parties have put into the bill. We have had an extremely interesting debate this morning. I will make one specific suggestion to the minister, which I do not think has been made thus far. When he spoke to the amendments, Stewart Maxwell focused on the need to obtain evidence to inform the decision that ministers will make, as is referred to in amendment 2. The minister has said that, as part of that evidence-taking process, there shall be consulted large shops, their representatives and "such other persons as the Scottish Ministers think fit." Many members have alluded to the fact that pressure on workers can come in subtle forms. Pressure can be exerted without any explicit statement being made that a worker should work at a particular time on a given day. To get full evidence, would it be appropriate for the workers in shops that are open on new year's day to have the opportunity anonymously to provide a statement of how they feel about working on that day? I think that that would be a method by which genuine evidence could be obtained.  Like other members, I believe that the vast majority of people would like to enjoy new year's day as a family day and a holiday, away from the commercial pressures that put so much strain on families, especially families who do not have very much money coming in. I think that the vast majority of shop workers want the day as a holiday, but there may be a small minority who might like to work for, perhaps, a half day. I am thinking of younger people.

I have a lot of sympathy with that view. My main point is that, as part of the evidence-taking process, we should ensure that we do not omit to consult the workers as well as the representatives of the businesses. In consulting them, it is right that we ensure that they have the opportunity to give their views under the cloak of anonymity. Perhaps they can do so directly to the minister, rather than through their employer. I think that that would be sensible. Nevertheless, a small minority of people may want to work at a time when they would be paid overtime or double pay. We should recognise that.

I have only one minute left. I am sorry. Many arguments about tourism have been put forward. I agree with what John Swinney said in the debate on the amendments. The tourism industry will not collapse if shops are closed on new year's day—but I want to know the views of those in the tourism industry. They need to be more specific and give more evidence than they have so far on the impact of the bill on tourism. There are also inconsistencies in relation to the hospitality and retail industries. In the Aviemore centre, for example, a retail unit is part of a complex of hotel premises. What is the difference between a worker in the retail premises and a worker in the hotel? I want to know the impact of the bill on the Aviemore centre, which offers an all-round facility for tourists who come to Scotland for many reasons, one of which might be to do a little bit of shopping. We must hear to what extent there is evidence that that is an important factor. For those reasons, I welcome the minister's approach. I hope that she will respond to my suggestion in her closing remarks.

The minister continues to reject the case for a Nairn bypass, about which the Liberal Democrats locally are very enthusiastic. If we see a greater growth in population in the A96 corridor between Inverness and Nairn than in any other part of Scotland, should not that, of itself, dictate that the A96 be upgraded in the long term to proper dual carriageway status?

To ask the First Minister, in light of the Cumbria train crash, what action it will take within its responsibilities in the interests of passenger safety. (S2F-2760)

I thank the First Minister for that detailed answer and echo the sentiments that he expressed in respect of the lady who lost her life and the people who were injured. We have to await the outcome of the derailment investigation, but I want to look to the longer term. Seat belts have been mandatory for a long time in motor cars and aeroplanes. Surely a suggestion that is worthy of consideration is that three-point seat belts should be supplied on trains, particularly when new rolling stock is purchased.

Will the minister publish, in the Executive's analysis of the responses, the analysis in respect of each proposed candidate and, in particular, the views of the people who live in the west Highlands on the notion that there should be a park in that area? Will he confirm that he will not seek to foist national park status on any community that does not want it? Does he agree with me and the Scottish National Party that the money that will be spent on setting up a new bureaucracy—perhaps £5 million a year—would be better spent on creating more affordable housing in rural Scotland?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

I am curious about whether Mr Rumbles will explain why it is wrong for a man to purchase sex on the street, but right for him to do so in a sauna.

Will the member give way?

The bill will end the double standard whereby a prostitute can be charged with a criminal offence but the man who purchases sex cannot. We all welcome that. I am particularly pleased that the Executive changed tack significantly during the passage of the bill, in a way that I recommended on numerous occasions—on 3 October, 31   October and 7 November 2006, to be precise. In the bill as introduced, section 1(1) provided that men who buy sex would commit an offence only if their activity was "likely to cause alarm, offence or nuisance". During stage 1 I argued that the nuisance test should not be included and that there is a strong moral case for making the purchase of sex a criminal offence in itself. The Executive changed tack on that, which I welcome.

Under the provisions on kerb crawling in the bill as introduced, it would have been a defence that the person was driving in a car, whereas a person in a bus could commit an offence of kerb crawling. That was nonsense, as all members of the Local Government and Transport Committee pointed out. I am pleased that the nonsense has been removed from the bill and that the nuisance test has gone. However, I am slightly concerned that the Executive did not act on the advice of the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland, which was mentioned in the committee's stage 1 report. ACPOS was concerned that there is no definition of "loiter" in the bill—there is no definition of "solicit", either. We hope that the absence of such definitions will not pose a problem, but it remains to be seen whether it will do. Sanctions such as disqualification from driving and, in some cases, forfeiture of the vehicle, are necessary. Police and community witnesses agreed with me on that, so I am disappointed that other parties in Parliament did not support the Scottish National Party's amendment on the matter during the stage 3 debate this afternoon. The Conservatives like to pontificate about being tough on crime, but when they had an opportunity to be just that, they shied away, for the technical reason that they do not want to interfere with the powers of the imperial Parliament in Westminster and because they have accepted a half-baked assurance from officials about the possibility of legislation in the future. That is not good enough for the people from whom we heard evidence. The minister has given no clear position about when such sanctions will be introduced, if at all. In evidence, we heard that only four out of 383 kerb-crawlers who were arrested in Hampshire reoffended, so there is welcome evidence that the rigorous enforcement of a strong regime can significantly reduce kerb crawling. During stage 1, my colleague Maureen Watt asked the minister why the bill would not apply to saunas and brothels. The bill will tackle only part of the problem. We were told that we should not postpone an attempt to deal with street prostitution. That is correct and I welcome the fact that the bill addresses street prostitution to some extent. However, I hope that we will tackle the wider issue of prostitution in saunas and brothels. The SNP is pleased to have played an important part in persuading the Executive to change tack significantly. It could be argued that the bill is the first one that has been passed by the Scottish Parliament in eight years that is not politically correct. That might be so, but it is right that we  seek to protect women from the violence from dangerous men and drug dealers to which they are exposed daily and it is right that we will make the purchase of sex by men a crime in this country.

Can the minister give a little more detail about the announcement this afternoon of the additional £1 million? Can he say in what financial year it will be available and give some detail about how it will be spent and who will receive the funding?

The minister stated that, after stage 1, which was a considerable time ago—[ Interruption. ] I meant stage 2—sorry. After stage 2, which was some time ago, he wrote to Baroness Scotland and asked whether Westminster will change the law so that disqualification can be imposed. Can he tell us what response he received from Baroness Scotland and whether she has agreed to do that?

The purpose of these amendments is to deter men from going to prostitutes. Margo MacDonald says that the amendments would drive the problem underground, but is she really saying that we should not have effective sanctions, so that prostitution can just continue? That is an extremely odd argument, and not one that she put at stage 1, when she said: "I agree with the analysis that if we can bring about a drop in demand, supply will drop off, too."—[ Official Report , 31 October 2006; c 4184.] How can we reduce demand if men are not sufficiently deterred by the sanctions from committing the crime in the first place?

That fine might not be imposed. I hope that it will be a deterrent, but I do not believe that it will be an effective one, particularly for well-heeled men who drive around in Jaguars or other expensive cars—[ Interruption. ] Members think that what I have said is funny, but the witnesses who came to the committee did not think that the matter was funny. We can see that the Liberal Democrats are soft on crime and soft on the causes of crime. In response to David McLetchie, I say that no attempt is being made to fetter the discretion of prosecutors. Agreeing to amendment 3 would simply mean that the procurator fiscal would have to make a statement in which he explained why he was not using a power. How would that fetter a prosecutor? Surely it is about time that our prosecutors gave more explanations to ensure  that the public see that criminals get the sentences that they deserve. Such explanations are important. Finally, the minister assured us that there have been discussions with officials. That is some assurance.

I hope that, this afternoon, we will make a welcome change to the law. At present, a prostitute can be a criminal but the man who uses the services is not. That double standard is hypocritical and wrong, and I am sure that we will vote to end it later this afternoon. In the evidence that the Local Government and Transport Committee received at stage 1, the most compelling was from ladies who live in a community in Glasgow where, at all hours of the day, they are subjected to kerb-crawlers driving round their area seeking to purchase sex. The evidence of Jennifer McCarey was particularly compelling. She said: "men—middle-class men, working-class men and upper-class men—come into our community looking for street sex. They think that that is acceptable behaviour ... Our community group says that that is unacceptable ... There is a whole layer of dangerous men who partake in that activity for their own reasons. The women and children in our community are more likely to be exposed to those dangerous men." Jennifer McCarey then described what kerb crawling is like: "It is a car slowly following you and creeping along beside you. Often you are the only person in the street. The car stops until you catch up, then it drives slowly beside you and stops. It is tremendously intimidating behaviour, which does not involve rolling down a window and talking to you."—[ Official Report , Local Government and Transport Committee , 24 October 2006; c 4148-49.] The purpose of the amendments is to introduce sanctions that would be an effective deterrent to  the men in question. They would bring down the full force of the law on those men in order to tackle the behaviour, to reduce it and, as much as possible, to stamp it out. The Scottish National Party believes that two particular measures should be taken. At stage 1, I raised them with many of the witnesses—members of the community, representatives of Glasgow City Council and senior representatives of the police—and almost every witness agreed. The first sanction is that a punter should face disqualification from holding a driving licence. Secondly, if a burglar's tools can be confiscated because they assist him in committing crime, I would argue that for persistent offenders—men who continually kerb crawl and abuse women in this way, often using violence—the sanction of confiscation of motor vehicle should also be applicable.

Margo MacDonald is quite wrong. If she had heard the evidence that I read out, she would know that it was from a lady who is not a prostitute but who simply lives in a certain part of Glasgow. Like the rest of the women in that community, she has to put up with that behaviour. On the committee, members from all parties took the view that that was entirely wrong, so the measures of disqualification and confiscation are appropriate. When I raised the matters in committee, the minister stated: "we are considering seeking an order at Westminster that would make disqualification available to the Scottish courts. We are in active dialogue with Home Office officials about that."—[ Official Report , Local Government and Transport Committee , 6 February 2007; c 4546.] That does not constitute an assurance; it simply states that the matter is under consideration. Therefore, we have not had any clear assurance from the minister that the sanction of disqualification will be available to the courts to use as they think appropriate.  If the minister can provide a categoric assurance that disqualification will be available and if he can explain when it will be available and whether the Scottish courts will have the power to disqualify from driving punters who are convicted of the offences in the bill, I will consider whether to press the amendment. However, my first point is that the minister has not given us an unequivocal assurance, which I would welcome in his  response. My second and last point is that I would like the provision of forfeiture to be used where appropriate. It would be appropriate only for a repeat offender—someone who had not learned a lesson having been convicted. I make that clear in case it was not made clear at the committee. I would welcome assurance from the minister that the sanction of forfeiture—of confiscation of a punter's car—will be available to the Scottish courts to tackle this appalling crime and to deter men from committing it. I move amendment 1.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I gave notice of this point of order yesterday evening. I understand that ministers are currently considering the business case that was submitted to them in respect of the Edinburgh trams scheme. Page 11 of the draft business case states: "It is a fundamental assumption that TEL bus and tram will both participate in the national concessionary ticketing scheme." The business case, therefore, assumes that revenue of 73.6p in the pound compensation would accrue to the tram operators and that 20 per cent of the passengers would be concessionary passengers. Therefore, a substantial proportion of the income to the trams—the revenue—would come from public money, under the concessionary travel scheme. However, the concessionary travel scheme requires to be approved by Parliament and the existing scheme, which was approved by Parliament, applies not to trams but only to buses. Therefore, if the ministers approve the business case—and I am informed that a decision is imminent—they will be taking a decision on which Parliament should be consulted but on which Parliament has not been consulted. Indeed, if the minister makes the decision, a statutory instrument would require to be made under the Transport (Scotland) Act 2005 in order to extend the concessionary scheme. At the same time, the ministers have stated, in a parliamentary answer, that the scheme will be reviewed in a year or so. Therefore, if the business case for the trams is approved, it will rely on public money, the spending of which has not been approved by Parliament. I seek your guidance in two respects, Presiding Officer. First, would it not be appropriate—and, indeed, necessary—for there to be a ministerial statement on this issue to make clear whether ministers are prepared to expend public money in a way in which Parliament does not approve? Secondly, is it not outwith the powers of the Scottish Executive to act in this way, as its actions would bypass Parliament on an issue on which Parliament should, clearly, be consulted?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will meet me and representatives of the communities served by Glencoe hospital to discuss the future provision of services for elderly people in south Lochaber. (S2O-12076)

On behalf of the communities of Duror and Kentallen, Glencoe, Ballachulish, Onich and Kinlochleven, I thank the minister for his prompt response to that request. Will he provide reassurance to those communities today that Glencoe hospital will remain open until such time as the alternative plan is fully detailed, worked out and accepted by the local community? In preparation for the meeting next week, I urge the minister to look specifically at the projections for the number of elderly people in the area, particularly people aged over 75, which is set to double by 2024. That suggests to me and my constituents that the current proposals might need to be enhanced considerably if they are to meet the needs of our elderly people in the decades that lie ahead.

Does the minister agree that the problem is that unless we go ahead with phase 2 of the Waverley improvements, which the Executive used to support, we will not see the increase in the hourly paths maximum from 28 to 32 that is essential if we are to have expansion, more rail routes and more frequent routes in the next decade?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

The SNP is opposed to a system of road tolls. Over the past few weeks, a debate has been led by the Prime Minister and by Mr Scott, in which a total lack of any detailed policy has come from either source. The Prime Minister, in response to the 1.8 million people who have signed the online petition, stated that "stories about possible costs are simply not credible, since they depend on so many variables yet to be investigated, never mind decided." The Prime Minister does not have a clue what the road pricing policy would mean in practice and the Liberal Democrats, who wish to pilot such a scheme in Scotland, have not begun to spell out what it would mean in practice. The technology and logistical problems cannot be addressed for 10 years, so the policy cannot be introduced for 10 years. I thought that Governments were supposed to govern for the period for which they were elected, not to concentrate on a time five years after that. They may as well pilot space travel for the general public. The SNP would tackle congestion in practical and effective ways, two of which are spelled out in our amendment. First, we would build on the existing park-and-ride schemes and establish more of them, particularly around cities—around Edinburgh and, in particular, around the ring road. We would also establish park-and-ride schemes at stations. That is happening. Only in that way will we encourage motorists to leave their cars at home. Secondly, we would encourage flexible working and home working. The total distance travelled on Scotland's roads for the past two years has been 43,000 million kilometres. Some commentators estimate that we could cut between 5 and 10 per cent of that figure if we were to establish effective flexible working and home working. That could lead to between 2,000 million and 4,000 million kilometres of journeys by car being taken off our road. That is a practical and effective measure that we can put in place. That is why the SNP, unlike the Prime Minister, the Executive and the Liberal Democrats, will establish that policy.

Absolutely not; we want to go further. This evening, I shall travel to Glasgow to speak at a posh dinner. [ Interruption. ] For some reason, minister, I was invited as the keynote speaker. I will be taking the train.

Thank you. I will take the train precisely because, having driven that road many times this year, I know what a problem congestion can be. Part of the problem is the unpredictability—one does not know whether the journey to Glasgow will take about an hour and a half or two or three hours. Therefore, if one has to attend a function or go to a meeting, the train is more effective. That is why the SNP wants to establish the Waverley phase 2 programme, which the Executive has ditched. Experts have established that unless we go ahead with phase 2 of Waverley, our rail system, if all the plans were to go ahead, will be at gridlock very soon—early in the next decade. We want more people to follow my example and take the train. We also want to have more capacity on the train between Glasgow and Edinburgh. In contrast, the Scottish Executive's policy will effectively create gridlock on Scotland's rail system in the next decade at the very time when more drivers will wish to follow my example and take the train.

Do I have time, Presiding Officer?

The SNP is wholly opposed to additional taxation on the roads and to road tolls. When we are in government, we will scrap the Forth road bridge tolls. We are not prepared to allow a piece of legislation to remain on the statute book that could be used to put a charge of £4 or £10 on the Forth road bridge by the back door, as is reported in the Dunfermline papers today. We are not willing or prepared to see that happen, which is why we will support the deletion of that part of the 2001 act. The Tories gave Scotland the poll tax, and the Liberal Democrats would give Scotland the poll tax on wheels, but the SNP is against Scotland being used as a testing and experimentation ground. I am therefore happy to move the amendment in my name. I move amendment S2M-5598.1, to insert at end: "believes further that full fiscal powers should be transferred to the Scottish Parliament in respect of taxation of motorists; notes that levels of taxation levied on motorists by successive Labour and Conservative  governments have consistently been, or been among, the highest in Europe; considers that a variety of measures is needed to tackle levels of congestion, including more use of park and ride schemes as well as the use of flexible working and home working, and supports the further expansion of public transport in Scotland to provide people in Scotland with more alternatives to car use."

Since we are intent on historical accuracy, am I right in saying that the Tories voted for the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001?

Does the minister agree that there is a chronic shortage of affordable housing in Lochaber, and does she agree that public money should be used for real priorities? Does she agree with George Lyon and me, who have both argued that there should not be a marine national park, which would cost several million pounds a year, and that that money would be far better spent on providing affordable housing in Lochaber?

NHS Highland has recently agreed to submit a proposal to the Minister for Health and Community Care seeking legal permission to close Glencoe hospital, which is a small cottage-type hospital serving south Lochaber. It has provided valuable and excellent services to its community for decades. I have sought to play a role in advising members of the affected community about changes. I have met community council representatives and arranged for them to meet Garry Coutts and Roger Gibbons, the chairman and chief executive of NHS Highland, on 5 February—last Monday. The community is not saying that the hospital must at all costs stay open for ever, but the community wants any alternative arrangements to be as good as, or better than, the existing arrangements, even if a different model of provision is required from that offered by the old-style cottage hospital. We are working with the members of the health board management team, who have been willing to meet us, and I hope that they will agree to meet the community council representatives again. Between them, those representatives have more than a century of public service. They know their area. We wait to hear whether the health board management team will meet the representatives again. I suspect that they will. It is the detail of the alternative plan that is hard to put in place. Arrangements are having to be made with a private home, which needs to be converted to provide nursing care in addition to the residential care that it provides at the moment. I am referring to the Abbeyfield home in Ballachulish, which requires adaptations to be made to the building. The car park is not big enough. Planning permission is required. Nurses who work in Glencoe hospital need training to provide a different type of nursing care. That all takes time. The ambulances that are now housed at the cottage hospital will have to be moved.  Premises will have to be found, and planning permission will have to be obtained for that, too. In addition to those difficulties—all of which can be addressed—there is the question whether the alternative arrangements will be robust in the long term. Looking at the wider picture, the population of Lochaber is set to remain the same—between 18,000 and 19,000—over the next 20 years. However, over the same period, the population of over-75-year-olds is set to double, from about 1,300 to 2,600. Plainly, the need for nursing places will be greater in years to come, yet the provision is to remain at the same level. We all want care to be provided in the community and at home, of course, but that brings problems with it. The financial responsibility for that rests largely with the local authority, which requires joint work between the local authority and the local health board. Ministers will be well aware of all those matters, and I do not want to make this speech too parochial, but I suspect that the difficulties that apply to the situation at Glencoe will apply in many other parts of Scotland. My plea to the minister, when he considers the proposal, is that he should be willing to consult the local communities about the details and the minutiae of the change and that, before considering the application, he should ensure that he is absolutely satisfied that the alternative proposals satisfy the legitimate needs and aspirations of the people whom Glencoe hospital serves. I urge the minister to consider the recommendations of the Health Committee about the difficulty of finding medical personnel, especially consultants, including at the Belford hospital, and even at Raigmore hospital. That is perhaps the greatest problem of all. The colleges must be more flexible in relation to the ways in which we can encourage people from Lochaber to become doctors. They are far more likely to want to go back and follow such examples as David Sedgwick, who is so respected as a rural general surgeon. I know that the minister is sympathetic to those ideas. I hope that, together, we can all work towards implementing them, so that the NHS can be delivered locally in my area and throughout Scotland.

The minister will be aware of the approach that NHS Highland has taken to the proposed closure of Glencoe hospital. Does he agree that, in general, any such proposal should be attached to a detailed and robust plan that sets out clearly the alternatives that are to be put in place? Does he agree that communities require such a detailed plan, in which the long-term arrangements for care of the elderly in particular are provided for, before it is reasonable to expect an application to close an existing hospital to be considered properly?

I commend the campaign that has been mounted by The Courier , which has given a clear lead to the communities that that newspaper serves. The SNP's position has been consistent, principled and informed by the need to make tough choices as we prepare to be the next Government in a few months' time.

I know that the minister is impatient, but I ask him to bear with me. I will give way to him in a little while. An SNP Government will abolish tolls on the Tay road bridge and the Forth road bridge. As my colleague Tricia Marwick said, after March last year, when tolls on the Erskine bridge were abolished, no case could be made for retaining tolls on the two other road bridges, which serve cities in the east of Scotland and the Highlands. The debate entirely changed at that point, and the SNP took the view that, on the ground of equity, it was wholly unfair for some people in Scotland to be penalised by having to pay tolls while people in the west would not have to pay them. The matter is absolutely straightforward. Iain Smith said that the SNP's motion is defective, but it sets out a clear principle. Parliaments set out principles; it is for Governments to put those principles into practice. When the SNP is in Government next year, it will put the principle in the motion into practice. The Greens have initiated a serious debate on congestion, but it will not surprise Green members to learn that I do not agree with everything that they have said. My good friend Mark Ballard  knows, because we have debated the issue many times, that we believe that many wider measures can be taken against congestion. For example, we believe that home working and the use of flexitime should be encouraged to prevent people from having to travel to work during peak periods, which can be highly unnecessary. As the Greens know—if not the minister—it has been calculated that such measures could prevent people from travelling up to a tenth of the 43 billion kilometres that are travelled on our roads each year. Perhaps that is the most significant thing to do to tackle congestion. Furthermore, I say to the Greens that we will support the expansion of public transport and park-and-ride schemes.

Thank you, Presiding Officer, but I was addressing my remarks to our friends in the Green party. Wider points of principle are involved. However, I gently ask Mark Ballard and his colleagues how having tolls on some bridges but not on all bridges can be consistent. As we know, the Greens are a party of principle. If they have a policy that states that tolls should be charged, surely they should say that tolls should be charged on all bridges and crossings, of which there are 30 in Scotland. I hope that the Greens see that there is a lot of common ground between them and the SNP in the wider picture. Mark Ballard knows that what I am saying is exactly what I said in a previous debate, in which we both extolled the virtues of cycling. [ Interruption. ] That took members by surprise—it took me by surprise, too. I turn to costs. The Executive's amendment states: "the SNP's sums do not add up". I asked Bristow Muldoon how much the new crossing on the Forth would cost, but he did not give me an answer. My information is that the minister is not only sitting on a draft report that was supposed to have been published last December and which he has suppressed—indeed, that report should have been published to inform the debate—but that he knows that it has been estimated that a Forth crossing will cost more than £1 billion. That will come as no great surprise to those of us who have followed the matter closely. The SNP makes tough choices and has decided that we will rapidly move to provide a further Forth crossing when we are in Government. Whether there should be a bridge or a tunnel can be determined only after full and rational analysis. We will carry out such an analysis, but we will not proceed with the Edinburgh tram scheme, or the Edinburgh airport rail link that would involve  tunnelling under a live runway and two rivers. We have taken those decisions for clear and straightforward reasons. I hear the minister's not-very-sotto-voce commentary, which gives us a slight indication that he is not too comfortable with the position that he has adopted, especially when all the signs are that he will flip-flop in a few weeks' time and say exactly the opposite of what he said today. I ask the minister how he and Bristow Muldoon's party plan to pay for a Forth crossing when the strategic projects budget is already overstretched.

Unfortunately for Bristow Muldoon, I can read out the cost of some of the commitments that he will have to pay for. EARL will cost £650 million; Edinburgh trams will cost £550 million; the council tax recycling pledge will cost £200 million; the council tax reduction proposal will cost £346 million; a new Forth crossing will cost £1,000 million; the Glasgow Housing Association second-stage transfer will cost £500 million; 100 skills academies will cost £100 million; 150 new and refurbished schools will cost £738 million. I could go on. Let us have a bit of honesty in the debate. The SNP's transport portfolio clearly sets out that the Forth crossing is the number 1 priority for Scotland and we will pay for it by not going ahead with the Edinburgh airport rail link and the Edinburgh tram scheme. Everyone in Scotland knows that we cannot afford to do everything. I believe that there is a growing feeling in the country that people can respect the SNP for making tough choices, for taking a realistic approach to strategic projects and, if I may say so, for being able to distinguish between the desirable and the essential. To govern involves making choices. To govern is to choose and to govern well is to choose wisely.

In his opening speech, the minister said that the Executive had not yet received the study. However, is it not correct that it has received it, but in draft form?

Will the member take an intervention?

The motion in the name of the minister says that the SNP's sums do not add up. It also says that the Executive is committing itself to providing a second crossing across the Forth. How much will that cost?

To ask the First Minister what additional measures the Scottish Executive considers should be taken to improve road safety, in light of recent fatalities in road accidents. (S2F-2689)

I entirely endorse the First Minister's sentiments. Fourteen lives were lost on Scotland's roads last weekend alone. Does the First Minister agree that there should be a national debate about the measures that we can take to improve road safety and that, although prime responsibility must always rest with the driver, education—particularly of our young people, given the disproportionate number of young people dying in these accidents—is key? Does he agree that one suggestion, which might help in the long term to make a significant contribution to tackling the scourge of these deaths, would be to give 16 and 17-year-olds the option to study the highway code—and, perhaps even take the theoretical part of the driving test? That would enable them to equip themselves with the knowledge of road safety that they will need in later life?

I heartily endorse the minister's stated objective that people should visit the Highlands, not just this year but in future years. Does she agree that the proposed new degree in adventure tourism at Lochaber College would contribute significantly to that objective? Does she also agree that the proposal to offer the degree under the umbrella of the UHI Millennium Institute is unique in the United Kingdom, and that it is important to give every assistance to the people who are developing the degree and to the students who might want to participate in it, such as the pupils from Grantown grammar school whom I met on Monday?

I, too, thank the Scottish  Crofting Foundation for its help and support throughout the bill and pay tribute to the cross-party group on crofting. Of all the cross-party groups in the Parliament, few can have played as significant a role as the one that is chaired by John Farquhar Munro. I also thank the staff of the Crofters Commission. Due to their position, they were not able to speak out, yet they are the people who deal with crofting issues every day and they possess among them great expertise. They no doubt experienced tensions at some points, but rather than dwell on those I want to look forward. I express gratitude to the former Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development, Rhona Brankin, for taking the decision that Crofters Commission staff will retain their civil service status. That is to be welcomed. As the minister said, the terms of reference of the committee of inquiry will include looking at the role and function of the Crofters Commission. We accept that. I hope that, as part of its work, Professor Shucksmith's committee will consult in detail the individual Crofters Commission members of staff, who basically keep crofting on the road. I hope that the committee will go out of its way to do that so that it can put right the wrongs of the past, when failure of consultation led to the tensions to which I alluded. The major power in the bill is the capacity to create new crofts. When I attend the opening of Forest Enterprise's new offices in Inverness on Monday, I will discuss with its staff the huge potential that that power has. I know that forestry staff are up for it. They want to be able to use the new powers, alongside their existing powers, to create new housing in the Highlands. If any landowner has the capacity to do that, it is the Forestry Commission. However, one problem that must be overcome is that the existing schemes by which the Forestry Commission is encouraged to create new housing are, in my view, incredibly complex and unnecessarily bureaucratic. Another problem that is perhaps more pertinent than the rules of the schemes—those could be changed—is, to speak directly, the difficulty of nimbyism, which is always with us wherever we try to create new housing. If the Forestry Commission could designate parts of its forests for housing, that would go a substantial way to overcoming nimbyism, which is—let us face it—a facet of human nature. According to the old story, the difference between the conservationist and the developer is simply that the developer wants to build a house in the woods whereas the conservationist already has one. I hope that the Forestry Commission will be able to create many more such conservationists.  I pay particular tribute to the former Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development, Rhona Brankin, for the way in which she took some difficult decisions. Crofting has many friends. The fact that substantial changes were made to the bill as introduced is proof positive of the influence and power of those friends, who are to be found across the political spectrum. For her decision to make fundamental changes to the bill, she should be commended. Rather than crow over what might be said to be a climbdown or U-turn, we should congratulate her. I can assure Rhona Brankin that she has many friends on this side of the chamber. Personally, I hope that the committee of inquiry will look carefully at the situation in Strathspey. The concerns of the Strathspey farmers, who were led ably by Hamish Jack, were not fully considered by the committee. I recognise that the committee did a good job in giving careful consideration to the problems in Arran, but I think that the problems in Strathspey have not yet been fully addressed. I agree with Jamie McGrigor, Maureen Macmillan and others that SEERAD must take a more proactive approach to enabling crofters to access the loans scheme. Like Mr McGrigor, I think that the bull hire scheme is perhaps the most complex scheme with the least money available to it that God has ever invented in the public service. The scheme must be sorted out. I suspect that ministers want to do that, so I hope that positive progress will be made. A fundamental problem that the Parliament is still to address—although I do not believe in any of the conspiracy theories about venal or malign forces at work subverting decisions—is the treatment of inadvertent errors that farmers and crofters make in filling out their forms. Genuine mistakes in integrated administration and control system forms are still being penalised. The tribunal that Mr Finnie set up was somehow supposed to address that. At the time, I argued that setting up a tribunal would not of itself alter the rules that had to be enforced. I understand that, in a recent case, two members of the three-member panel found that a crofter should not have been penalised for a mistake, but the minister overruled the majority decision and supported the SEERAD member on the panel. I am perplexed as to why that should have happened—

I will in just a minute. I am genuinely perplexed about that and I am profoundly concerned about the implications of the decision.

I am grateful to the minister for that clarification, but I am still unclear about why he felt bound to take the decision that he did. Perhaps he and I can pursue the issue at a meeting. I welcome the fact that the terms of reference of the committee of inquiry are extremely wide ranging. It is clear from those terms of reference that the committee can consider all the problems that members from various parts of Scotland, especially the Highlands, have brought to the debate.

No one disagrees that that is a major issue for the committee. I am sure that it will examine the matter thoroughly, as Jamie Stone has advocated. I would prefer to see an elected board. At a meeting that the Scottish Crofting Foundation arranged at Lochaber in my constituency, the only topic on which there appeared to be clear agreement was that there should be an elected Crofters Commission. I do not think that the objections to that proposal are insuperable; they are largely legalistic and technical—the sort of objections that the civil service might come up with on a quiet day. I hope that in future we can have an elected Crofters Commission and that Professor Shucksmith will heed the cross-party pleas for one that have been made in the debate.

Can the minister clarify a matter in the interests of the staff who work for the Crofters Commission? Originally, the bill proposed that the commission should become a quango, which would mean that the staff would lose the civil service status that they treasure and do not wish to lose. Will the issue of whether the civil servants would lose their status be considered by the committee of inquiry?

If the minister is arguing that ministers will have the power to give "directions of a general or specific character"  and that, in carrying out its functions, the commission shall have regard to local circumstances and conditions, will he give such directions?

I have two very simple questions for the minister. First, when—on what date—will the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine rail line be opened? Secondly, are the Scottish Executive and Transport Scotland considering making charges to any rail franchise operators for using the line?

Will the minister advise us whether he will seek further information from the Home Office about the extent to which disqualification from driving has been used as a punishment for kerb-crawlers and about the use of forfeiture of vehicles, which apparently has not been used? Does he agree that it would be extremely useful to find that out, as there appears to be no information at all from the Home Office on the issue, perhaps because that department is not fit for purpose?

I apologise to members for not being here at the beginning of the debate, which was brought forward by 10 minutes. I could not be here at that time. Every woman who has to turn to prostitution does so as a last resort. I suggest that every such case involves an individual human tragedy. Every prostitute faces a life of constant exposure to danger and to the ever-present risk of physical attack and abuse. We all know that what often drives women to prostitution is an addiction to drugs. We acknowledge that that is an extremely serious problem and that the bill, which the Scottish National Party will support, does not address the problems of trying to find an exit strategy for those women directly. However, the bill is absolutely necessary, as I believe all parties recognised during the work that Local Government and Transport Committee members undertook. That work was fairly successful, as the assurances that we received from the minister yesterday evening tell us that the bill will now be something that I hope we can all support. Originally, the bill sought to tackle loitering and created two new offences of soliciting and loitering. It sought to tackle kerb crawling. The committee heard powerful evidence, particularly from ladies from Glasgow. I will quote briefly Jennifer McCarey from the Calton area of Glasgow, who told us about her direct experience of exposure to kerb crawling. She said that kerb crawling  "is a car slowly following you and creeping along beside you. Often you are the only person in the street. The car stops until you catch up, then it drives slowly beside you and stops. It is tremendously intimidating behaviour, which does not involve rolling down a window and talking to you."—[ Official Report , Local Government and Transport Committee , 24 October 2006; c 4149.] Those witnesses also described the task of explaining to their young daughters what those men are doing. It is fair to say that the evidence that we heard from them was extremely powerful and persuasive, as was all the other evidence that the committee received. However, the problem that many members found was that, although we all wanted to tackle kerb crawling—the problem that was so graphically and effectively described—the bill appeared to offer an absolute defence to it. Section 1(6) states: "No offence ... is committed... if B"— that is, the person who is seeking to buy sex— "is in a motor vehicle which is not public transport." The bill says that it would be a defence to prove that somebody was driving round in a car, which seemed to me to mean that it was not so much the Prostitution (Public Places) (Scotland) Bill as the kerb crawling (enabling) (Scotland) bill, and I said so in committee. However, the work that all parties on the committee carried out culminated in persuading the Scottish Executive that the initial approach was flawed. I will deal with one point of principle that I raised in committee and which I am delighted, if somewhat surprised, that the Executive appears to have accepted—perhaps it reread my evidence from the course of the committee's inquiry.

That is also a possibility. Paragraph 2 of the policy memorandum, under "Policy Objectives", states: "The current law in Scotland is focused on those (predominately women) who sell sex on the street and not on those (predominately men) who purchase. There is a need to redress this balance in order to protect communities from the nuisance, alarm or offence arising from street prostitution-related activities in or near public places, whether caused by seller or purchaser." It is necessary to redress the balance—why is it that the women are prosecuted by the full force of the law and the men escape scot free? However, the reason why it is necessary to redress the balance is not that nuisance is caused. The nuisance is a consequence of kerb crawling and the behaviour of the men. The need to prevent kerb crawling and make it a crime is a need to redress the balance between men and women full stop. I am therefore delighted that the minister has said that he will lodge amendments at stage 2 to remove the reference to nuisance and the  requirement that, for an offence to be committed, a nuisance must be caused.

No. I thought that Margo MacDonald would raise that point and I looked at the paperwork again in preparation for answering it. The expert group specifically said that it was not its aim to criminalise people on the basis of morality, but I do not view prostitution simply as a moral issue. It is a moral issue but, as the witnesses from Glasgow City Council said, it is mainly about violence to women. For that reason, we must ensure that the men are prosecuted, are turned into criminals and face the full force of the law. We must ensure that men who persistently and repeatedly offend face the possibility of their driving licences being removed and of forfeiting their motor cars. It is time to target the men. I say to Margo MacDonald that we must do that not simply for morality but to protect the women who are involved. Therefore, I am delighted to be in the position of warmly congratulating the Scottish Executive—which is somewhat unusual for me—on its most welcome U-turn. A man of Mr McCabe's abilities, with Mr Lyon assisting, is well able to execute a U-turn in such a way that no one really notices and, in a spirit of generosity, I am delighted to welcome the U-turn that he has carried out so adroitly today. Accordingly, the Scottish National Party will support the bill at decision time.

Is the minister aware that the Clyde Fishermen's Association, the Mallaig and North West Fishermen's Association and the Western Isles Fishermen's Association have this week submitted a joint submission, in which they state that "the respondents are resolutely opposed to the creation of a Marine Park"? From the correspondence that I have had with him, the minister will be aware that I have received numerous and substantial representations against—and barely any in favour of—the designation of the west Highlands as a coastal and marine national park. Given that the minister has undertaken not to foist marine national park status on any community but has set his face  against holding a referendum in which he could ask the people, how will he gauge local opinion in any meaningful way?

Is the minister aware of the 17 November communication from the assessor of the Lothian Valuation Joint Board that said that rates relief has been agreed for businesses that will be affected by the construction of the proposed tram system, and that it has been estimated that that relief will cost £18 million? Does he agree that that figure does not appear in any of the costings or in the business case; that  the cost would be borne by the Scottish taxpayer; and that, until now, the Executive, although it has been informed of the issue, has chosen to keep quiet about it? Does his predecessor's undertaking that the Executive's contribution to the scheme will not be increased still stand, or will there be hidden extra costs to the taxpayer, as was the case with the Parliament building?

I thank Colin Fox for giving us the opportunity to discuss the issues in ensuring that people have access to bus services and the general topic of regulation, as set out in the motion. I hope that my remarks will not stray too  widely from specific services in Edinburgh, which have been well covered today. Margaret Smith made an extremely telling point about the importance of access to bus services to those who have been widowed and therefore find themselves in a new situation without a driver. That argument also applies to those who wish to travel intercity. Many people in Inverness wish to travel to meet their friends in Blackhall and no doubt partake in the 13, 18 or 38 routes once they get there. Unfortunately, their ability to do so may be put at risk by another aspect of regulation, which just fits into the text of the motion. The excellent service operated in a joint venture by Megabus and Scottish Citylink has been taken to the Competition Commission, which has suggested that there should be a divestment and that the service should be split up. It has no support in that. I believe that the Scottish Executive has objected to the suggestion, and I have had no complaints from constituents about unduly high fares. I know that the service has been successful in attracting 41 per cent more passengers. I also know that it allows connectivity and access for marginalised communities to travel to Aberdeen and Dundee, for example, and to do so hourly from Aberdeen and half-hourly from Dundee to Edinburgh and Glasgow. That is all subject to the regulatory impact of the Competition Commission, referred to in Colin Fox's motion. I believe that we and the Scottish Executive can make common cause on the issue. I have made lengthy representations to the commission, as a result of which the commission has announced that it plans to come to Scotland to meet me. I imagine that the minister has made his own representations. At risk are excellent services. Another risk is that the huge number of extra bus passengers will return to driving on the A9. At risk is the investment that Stagecoach plans in new buses and services. Other risks are the reduction of services, the discouragement of innovation, an increase in costs and higher fares. It is extremely strange that the Competition Commission saw fit to accept behavioural undertakings by First ScotRail when it was awarded the ScotRail franchise but to spurn and ignore the undertakings that Megabus and Citylink gave not to increase fares beyond a rate that is broadly in line with inflation. The bus companies said that they would not inflate the fares and gave undertakings, yet the Competition Commission ignored those undertakings, although it accepted them in a previous case. I hope that I am not straying too widely from the topic. I have used the opportunity to put on record another consequence—unintended, I think—of  regulation. The cost in legal expenses has been more than £1 million. What is happening in the Competition Commission? To be serious, to whom is the commission accountable? Transport is devolved, but competition is reserved. I make my speech in the hope that I will make common cause with the minister and that today, or in the next week or so, we might meet to consider how we can protect and preserve the success story that connects cities and allows people to travel to Edinburgh to take advantage of the local routes that Colin Fox identified in his motion.

In the interests of candour, will Mr Lyon state whether he, as a Lib Dem MSP, believes that Scotland should receive no share of the council tax benefit if the Lib Dems were to fund their local income tax plans?

Over the festive period, it struck me that the mood of the people of Scotland is one of curiosity and growing interest in the possibilities of the May elections. They wish to know what parties' plans are and what they will do. I thought that the most revealing aspect of this debate was that the Executive, which chose the ground of the debate, chose not to explain its plans, policies, hopes and programmes for the future; instead, it chose to engage in a shabby and, ultimately, arid and sterile exercise, with a blizzard of statistics flowing each way. Members would expect me to say this, but I thought that Mr Swinney demolished the GERS case. He proved that the most significant items in the GERS analysis have to be treated with caution. To ignore that, as every speaker on the Executive benches has done, is not good enough. That is the sort of attitude that creates the impression of politicians that leads to the kind of opinion polls that have been reported today.

Not just yet.  The Economist has stated: "The SNP claims the Scottish Office figures are distorted. The party has a point", and Alf Young—not a noted nationalist—said: "Nationalists have a point when they allege the whole GERS exercise was designed to engender fear". For my part, I have always believed that Scotland and England are about as wealthy as each other. From year to year, their relative strengths will, of course, change as the tide comes in and out. However, it is clear that, in comparison with hundreds of countries in the world, Scotland has riches beyond imagining. I do not want to have a debate in which we compare Scotland interminably with England and during which the members on the Executive benches grimly maintain the position that Scotland is too poor for independence. Instead, I want to compare Scotland with other medium-sized countries in the world and ask how we can be as successful as they are. I want to explain to the people of Scotland that we have plans—I thought that the First Minister would support them, because he said that education is his priority—to restore the criteria for obtaining a full tertiary education so that they are based not on ability to pay but on ability to learn. That is the basis on which members of the Cabinet got their education, and I would like it to come back. Frankly, the argument about the figures does not stack up. If members read Nicola Sturgeon's letter in The Herald today, they will get all the answers that they need on that point. On business rates, our policies could be criticised as too modest, but business rates as a form of tax are plainly outmoded in the case of smaller premises.

Because of the internet, many businesses do not operate from premises, so they do not pay tax for the occupation of premises. For that reason alone, we need to raise our game—to use a phrase that we no longer hear often. I happily give way to Wendy Alexander in the hope that that is what will now happen.

The £100 million for education and the more than £100 million for business rates  are relatively modest sums when we consider the scale of the Scottish budget. If we were not wasting money on the PFI contracts that Mr Neil mentioned, on the uncontrolled operations of quangos and on the duplication of work throughout Scotland by, for example, Scottish Enterprise, it would be possible to help businesses directly in the way that we propose. If Wendy Alexander asks any small business in Scotland whether there is waste among the quangocracy, she and I know what the answer will be. I want to raise the game a wee bit. Last week, it was reported in The Times of London that global companies are shunning the UK. Kraft has decided to leave Britain and take 200 jobs to Zurich, following Procter & Gamble and Colgate-Palmolive. If the minister wants to listen to companies—new Labour generally does—he should listen to ICI, AstraZeneca or KPMG. He should listen to those who advise that London is pricing itself out of the international market. Kraft cited tax as one of the reasons for its move, the other being transport infrastructure and accommodation. In that respect, Scotland has relative wealth, because we do not have to sit on the tube for four hours a day to get to and from work and, unlike in Dublin, it does not cost an arm and a leg to get a house here. We in the SNP would like to establish a high-speed rail link to London.

Unlike Bristow Muldoon, I happily give way to Mark Ballard.

Spain and France can work together as well as Mr Ballard and I will be able to, I very much hope. Gordon Brown appointed Rod Eddington, the former head of British Airways, to consider a high-speed rail link, but the sad truth is that, not surprisingly, he said that it should stop in the north of England. We are often accused of being separatists, but what could, in a concrete sense, separate the people of Scotland from England more than stopping the service that allows us to get to England? Who are the separatists now? It was Gordon Brown's man who ruled out the high-speed rail link that would be good for the environment—Mark Ballard and I agree on that—and good for the economy and the ever-closer links that the SNP wishes to forge with our good friends in England.

Will the member give way?

Mr Brownlee says that the estimates of Scotland's share of the tax revenues are best estimates. Does that apply to the estimates of VAT, which the Office for National Statistics apparently makes by collecting information from households, some of which is extracted from diaries kept by seven to 12-year-olds? Does that represent the best estimates?

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive now believes that an additional crossing of the Forth for motor vehicles should be constructed. (S2F-2638)

Is it not disappointing, therefore, that the Executive has not even now made a decision to include a Forth crossing on the strategic transport projects list? In the spirit of festive good will and inter-party co-operation, I offer two Christmas gifts to the Deputy First Minister. The first is the SNP policy to commit now to a new Forth crossing for Scotland. The second is the SNP policy to abandon the grossly expensive, complex and risky trams and Edinburgh airport rail link schemes. Would the Deputy First Minister not be more comfortable in his role as junior in my party, which is prepared to make the tough and right choices for Scotland?

The minister's comments are all welcome. Does he agree that the police are under strength in Inverness city centre and that the rise in the population in Inverness during the day, because of people travelling to the city to work, and in the evening, because of people travelling to the city to play, is proportionately far larger than that in any other city in Scotland, and that it is not taken into account in the calculation of police numbers? Will he therefore agree to consult colleagues in the Justice Department about  whether there are enough police officers on the beat in Inverness to deal with the problems that are the consequences of excess drink being taken, which members have described?

I am grateful to the member for allowing me to make a short intervention, which will be my only contribution to the debate on account of a disappearing voice. Does Maureen Macmillan agree that the pressures that she accurately describes about the effects of excess drink having been taken—especially in the city centre of Inverness at the weekends, when huge numbers of people are on the streets—put a huge strain on the police force, and that it is believed, locally, that the complement of police officers is about 20 officers short of the number that is needed to deal with the strains that excessive consumption of alcohol cause?

Alex Neil has initiated an extremely important debate. Different speeches have highlighted different aspects of the safety of  our children on the buses that take them to school each day of the school year. In an accident in 1997, a school double-decker bus toppled over an embankment on the B9161 Munlochy road, resulting in some injuries to pupils. Perhaps as a consequence, Highland Council tightened the rules on buses. Robbie Roberts, a constituent of mine who was involved in operating buses at the time, wrote to me in September to draw attention to a particular problem that I want to highlight in the debate. Side-facing seats on buses cannot have seat belts fitted properly, even though, since 2003, the law has required seat belts to be fitted to all bus seats that are used in school buses. Since 2001, Mr Roberts has been pursuing in lengthy correspondence with Highland Council the use of buses with side-facing seats to transport children to school in the council area. Children being children, from time to time they will use the side-facing seats, despite the fact that they have no seat belts. Ultimately, Mr Roberts pursued the matter with me. The process culminated in my raising the issue in the good columns of the Inverness Courier , which highlighted the issue, as a result of which Hugh Fraser, the council's head of support services, asked all area managers to get written confirmation from bus operators that they do not use the side-facing seats. I believe that the bus companies and the council have great concern for the safety of children. Bus companies such as Rapsons Coaches, Stagecoach and many others and their drivers have a good reputation in the Highlands. I do not criticise them, but it appears that buses with side-facing seats—they are mostly double-decker buses—are being used for school transport, despite the fact that it is perfectly clear that safety belts are not being used. That is not acceptable. If the same thing happened on an aircraft, the Civil Aviation Authority would immediately ground it. Given that it was not exactly yesterday when we discovered that safety belts are a good idea, why are such buses still being allowed to be used? Ultimately, the Executive must be responsible. It really is astonishing that not one member of the Labour Party is here to debate the issue. That is unfortunate, because I am sure that many of them have had such issues raised with them and may have knowledge to bring to bear on the topic. Members' business debates are extremely important. The Official Report of the debate will be read by people throughout the country. Legislation on health and safety is often developed as a result of tragedies. Would it not be better to think ahead, take account of advice and learn from the experience that members of all parties, except the Labour Party—the members of  which are completely absent from the debate—have talked about? I hope that the minister will address the specific issue of side-facing seats and say whether he believes that they should be banned and, if so, what the timescale for doing so would be. If he agrees with Alex Neil's call for an action plan, I ask him to say whether it will take account of that particular aspect.

I begin by recognising the work that the committee has done. Of course, its work will continue, and we all welcome that. There is undoubtedly a consensus in support of the project, and it includes the Greens. I did not realise that Robin Harper was here, but I am always delighted when the Greens are here because we agree about so much in transport policy. One of the truisms about creating new stations and rail routes is that, the greater the number of stations on a route, the longer the train journey takes. It is reasonable to point out that any rational, dispassionate analysis shows that the likely patronage on a route is determined to some extent by the length of the journey, which in turn is determined by the number of stations. We must take that factor into account. We all recognise that the proposed line will not be a rival to, or significantly detract from, the main line between Scotland's two major cities of Glasgow and Edinburgh. The journey time between Glasgow and Edinburgh via Airdrie and Bathgate will be longer. We can see that the main benefits are likely to be not so much intercity as interregion and that it will become easier for people in the east to travel to the west and for  citizens in the west outwith Glasgow to travel to the east. Conceptually, that seems to be the primary benefit from the bill.

I am happy to give way, if I have time, Presiding Officer.

I am happy to agree once again with another member. Indeed, I commend the work carried out by many MSPs from all parties in reaching this stage. I have mentioned the constituency MSPs and Fiona Hyslop, and I should also have mentioned Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, whose role was pointed out earlier by his party spokesman, David Davidson. A substantial body of work has been carried out on a cross-party basis by elected representatives to put forward the interests of people in the area. Mary Mulligan alluded to the fact that community representatives are present to listen to the debate. It is fair to say that the main controversy has been on whether there should be additional stations. The SNP is happy to replicate precisely the commitments made by the minister today, but we believe that we can go further on Blackridge, as I have said already. Let me put the issue in a wider context. We know that it has taken a long time to reach this stage. The Network Rail briefing points out that the project timeline began in 2001, which does not take into account the substantial political lobbying that took place before. The briefing takes us through the Scottish Executive's commission of the central Scotland transport corridor study and then the announcement in 2003—just before the election, as it happens—of the project. There was also detailed economic activity and location impacts analysis in 2004-05, environmental consultation from 2003 to 2006, and consultation with the public, local interest groups and stakeholders from 2003 to date. Given the length of time that it takes to establish any major project—plainly the Airdrie to Bathgate line is a major project for Scotland—if there are to be additional stations, we need to decide sooner rather than later which ones they should be.  We support the STAG appraisal for both stations, and it is true that the work must be done independently of the Executive. I have indicated that the SNP is committed to a station at Blackridge. That does not mean that—as has been suggested by some—we are not committed to the STAG appraisal of Plains or that we do not agree with the minister's commitment to further discussions. We are clearly committed to that. However, we believe that it is important not to delay decisions further, given the considerable time that it inevitably takes to introduce proposals. The committee alluded to the fact that the location of the station at Blackridge would not necessarily be fixed.

I have already made our position clear. We have exactly replicated the commitment that has been made by Karen Whitefield's party, so I presume that she is pleased about that. We are following the committee's recommendation, cognisant of the strong economic case in favour of a station at Blackridge. As I pointed out, the key factor is that it takes a long time to create new rail routes. The time to decide what stations to have is not near the end of a project. My concern is that the absence of a commitment from the Labour-Liberal Executive today on a station at Blackridge may threaten its inclusion in the new line.

The minister is giving a running commentary, as is his wont. Perhaps rather than giving a running commentary from a sedentary position, he could reply.

I hope that that means that the Executive is moving towards the SNP position of a commitment to Blackridge. I suspect that that is what is happening. I decided to home in on controversy—departing from my characteristic mode, I must say—and as the debate has developed, we have seen a shifting in position of the Scottish Executive towards the SNP position. One can almost sense the electoral fear that underlies that creeping but inexorable movement  towards the SNP position, which I have set out today. I welcome the minister's movement towards it. Perhaps I should point out—I do not know how long I have, but I am happy to oblige—that it is not difficult to make the modest spending commitment that the SNP has made to help the people of West Lothian achieve their potential, which Fiona Hyslop talked about in her excellent speech, when we have made the clear decision to say no to a project that is not in Scotland's best interests and does not represent the best value for money—the EARL project. I am pleased to agree with the Green party that the project to spend £609 million on establishing a link between Edinburgh and its airport is not only hugely costly but unnecessary. A surface option would be much cheaper. It is much easier to invest in all our railway network in Scotland if we do not spend £609 million—and rising—on building a tunnel underneath a live runway and two rivers to establish a rail link between our capital city and its airport. Government is about taking tough decisions. The SNP has indicated clearly how we would take one decision, on EARL, and we also believe that the Edinburgh trams project—one and a half trams now, rather than the network of three that was initially promised—does not represent value for money. We have demonstrated that we will create the financial capacity so that the whole of Scotland's rail network benefits, not just the fancy frills promised by the Executive.

I do not quite see the relevance of those remarks to the Airdrie to Bathgate line. Perhaps Bristow Muldoon was simply rehearsing his speech for the conference in Oban next week. I am sorry, but I will not pay too much attention to his intervention. The SNP believes that investment in the whole of the rail network in Scotland is what is important. If we want the next decade to be one in which more people travel by train, more capacity is provided on our rail network and those of us who are in Parliament debate the opening of other new railway lines, we need to make the right decisions now. We genuinely believe that, as a party that is ready and waiting for government next May, we have made the right decisions. We recognise that there is merit in most proposals, but government is about creating priorities and making tough decisions. We are often lectured—usually by the  First Minister—for being prepared to be profligate with the public purse. In respect of the transport budget, the opposite is the case because the Labour-Liberal Executive seems to be thirled to the EARL scheme, which many believe may cost £1,000 million—

Sorry, Presiding Officer. I did not realise how many more "10 minutes" I had. In closing, I am happy to state that the SNP is delighted to support the Airdrie to Bathgate line, with the addition of Blackridge station.

I will continue in the spirit of consensus that Phil Gallie set at the beginning of the debate. I hope that members of all parties will condemn the absurd remarks that have been made by Andrew MacKinlay, who is an Essex member of the United Kingdom Parliament who suggested yesterday that Scottish people should pay a £1.50 toll to travel to England. That shows—certainly in his case—that middle-aged men from Essex can be really stupid. I commend the Airdrie-Bathgate Railway and Linked Improvements Bill Committee's work on the bill. The Scottish National Party fully supports the proposed line. The Bathgate to Edinburgh line was reopened in the 1980s. Despite initial scepticism, it has proved to be one of the most popular and profitable routes in Scotland. Perhaps it needs double-tracking—indeed, that has been signalled as an early part of the works on the project that we are discussing—and platforms on the line have already had to be lengthened as a result of overcrowding. The current Helensburgh line will be extended across to Edinburgh. Although Bathgate is popular, the new station at Armadale is expected to be even busier than the station at Bathgate.  West Lothian is the fastest-growing county in Scotland—Fiona Hyslop will talk about that later. It has lots of overspill from Edinburgh, and there is extensive house building in the Armadale and Whitburn area. The bill is intended to ease M8 congestion, but the route will not be the fastest end-to-end route between Glasgow and Edinburgh. The journey will take 75 minutes, which is plainly much longer than a journey on the main line would take. As other people have said, the new line will have more of an impact on commuting journeys from North Lanarkshire to Edinburgh and from West Lothian to Glasgow. As a result, it could be said that the bill will bring together the east of Scotland and the west of Scotland. People who live in West Lothian and work in Glasgow will find it much easier to get to work by rail; it is virtually impossible for such people to get to work by rail at the moment. Likewise, people who live in North Lanarkshire and work in Edinburgh will be able to travel to Edinburgh by rail. That is the most significant idea in the bill, and should be warmly welcomed. Fiona Hyslop made a submission on the bill, gave evidence as a witness in Airdrie and attended the committee meeting in Whitburn. Mary Mulligan MSP and Karen Whitefield MSP, both of whom have formally objected to the bill and made the case for a Blackridge station, will speak later. They also gave evidence in Airdrie. It is right to pay tribute to everyone who has made the case that they have made. The SNP believes that there is an extremely strong case for having a station at Blackridge. I am the SNP's transport spokesperson and have discussed the matter with our finance spokesman. As a result, I can say that the SNP supports having a station at Blackridge and, unlike the Executive, we can say right now that we would be prepared to contribute national funding for that station. The costings of the pledge that we make today—[ Interruption. ] I see that it causes jocularity among some members of the Liberal party. It is extremely important that the people of West Lothian, which is the fastest-growing county in Scotland, are not denied the benefits of the new rail line. If we do not accept the case to establish new stations when we build the line, how much more will it cost when somebody suddenly realises years later that it was folly not to have constructed those stations? [ Interruption. ] The apparent hilarity among the Liberals is not particularly edifying. I understand that the official line is that a Scottish transport appraisal guidance exercise is to be conducted at Blackridge, which I support. It is obvious that Plains should also be the subject of a STAG appraisal. The SNP believes that it is necessary to give a clear lead on the matter and  this is another occasion when we do not hesitate about or shirk from so doing. With Mr Davidson, I had the pleasure of being one of the participants in a hustings debate organised by Spokes this week. It would be remiss of me not to press the case for the cycle path upon which the committee commented. The economic benefits of the cycle path have been mentioned by the minister and we generally support its case. The minister touched on the wider transport picture, on which I will share two reflections. As we look towards the next decade in Scotland, all of us, even the Greens who I am pleased to see have finally arrived in the chamber for the debate, wish to see more expansion of rail services. However, there is a threat to that expansion, as has been outlined by some Labour back benchers from Edinburgh, who do not appear to be here this morning. Without the Waverley phase 2 upgrade, the parts of the Scottish rail network that depend on Waverley will be at full capacity early in the next decade. Should all the current plans go ahead, it would not be possible or easy to extend the Airdrie to Bathgate line to North Berwick. Unless we follow the SNP line—which I have suggested to the Minister for Transport—of pledging ourselves not to proceed with a highly expensive and unnecessarily risky scheme to create a tunnel under the runway and two bridges to provide the capital city with a connection to its airport, we will be unable to afford what we really require, which is to upgrade Waverley in phase 2 and expand hourly train paths from 28 to 32. If we do not do that, I and industry experts believe that the rail network in Scotland will be at full capacity early in the next decade. That is why the SNP would scrap the Edinburgh airport rail link, as set out by the Executive, consider with Network Rail a surface station option and proceed with Waverley phase 2. Unless we do that we will not see expansion of the rail net into the next decade. The SNP will set an exciting and appealing manifesto at the next election, including provision for a station at Blackridge on the Airdrie to Bathgate line.

To ask the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body what sums it will seek to recover in legal claims associated with the Holyrood building project, which breaches of contract are involved in such actions and whether it will seek to recover from the construction managers the losses incurred as a result of the trades package that was awarded to Flour City Architectural Metals (UK) Ltd. (S2O-11317)

As the chamber knows, I have pursued this matter for five years. The large folder that I have with me is the second file of 2006 on the topic. Why was a contract worth £7 million awarded to a company that had assets of £2, no United Kingdom directors, no track record, no work experience, no Scottish employees and no bank account in Scotland? Is the SPCB concerned that the fact that five years have elapsed might mean that any legal claim based on a breach of the general duty set out in the contract applicable by Bovis Construction has now prescribed? Finally, is the matter not of sufficient seriousness that the Presiding Officer should now make a detailed statement to explain what on earth the SPCB is doing in respect of the fiasco relating to the engagement of this contract and the selection as a contractor of Flour City, a company that, quite patently, was never going to be able to perform the work?

Finally, I stress that the decision has cost the taxpayer £4 million.

Obviously, voluntary schemes whereby businesses contribute towards city centres have played a part in Scottish civic life and will continue to do so, as in Inverness and Bathgate. However, the so-called pilot BID schemes that the Executive has discussed throughout the passage of the bill are not BIDs at all, because businesses pay nothing. They are bungs of public money, designed to win the support of business. That is straightforward. Let me come directly to the point. The SNP campaigned against the higher business tax that was imposed by the First Minister when he was Minister for Finance, which was called—eponymously and, I thought, rather generously—Jack's tax. Since then, we have had seven years of higher tax in Scotland than in England. Eventually, the Executive recognised that it had got it wrong, and it is scrapping it. It is too late, though—that will not apply until the year after the current Executive has demitted office. Once we get rid of Jack's tax, we will find it replaced by Lamont's levy, Malcolm's money or Chisholm's cash. The point about BIDs is simple. Whether they want to or not, businesses that have voted against the proposal will have to pay a higher tax. This morning, the First Minister, in full rattled mode, was talking about the perceived impact on business of things that might happen. Is he really saying that those higher taxes on small businesses in Scotland are welcomed by small businesses? They are not welcomed by the Federation of Small Businesses. Let me move to the revelation from today's debate. The Executive that brought us higher taxation now brings us double taxation. The Minister for Communities has just indicated that nothing in the bill will prevent a business from paying twice. It is very simple—if the First Minister  understands commercial life. The tenant will have to pay—because they are the tenant—as is clear under any BID scheme. Anyone who has ever had contact with a commercial lease will know fine well that, in virtually every commercial lease that exists in this country, there is a provision that says that landowners are entitled to pass to tenants liability for any rates, impositions or taxes, whether national or local. What is this if not a local tax? There is a clear and present danger that businesses will have to pay double taxation. The minister was plainly hit by surprise by my rather simple, modest intervention. He did not appear to notice that it was not my idea—it was in the Local Government and Transport Committee's report, at paragraph 57.

Thank you. I can do a lot in a minute, Presiding Officer.

I hope it is always thus. I will quote from paragraph 57 of the Local Government and Transport Committee's report on the bill at stage 1, which has been out for months. One would expect the minister to have read that parliamentary report—ministers are always going on about how they listen to Parliament. It says: "There is a question as to whether landlords or property owners who pay a levy will recoup it from their tenants". However, the minister did not know about that today—sleeping on the job, not noticing it. Malcolm's money is coming to businesses, not once, but twice. That is double taxation. Who says the Executive is fit to run the country if its specialist subjects appear to be poor legislation and shambolic management of the public finances?

Given that the Executive appears to have implicitly admitted that it will be possible for businesses to be levied twice, does Mr McLetchie believe that it is prudent to press amendment 150, as it would assist the Executive in that purpose?

Will the minister give the Parliament an unequivocal assurance that there will be no circumstances in which one business would pay two levies, first as a tenant and secondly, because, under the commercial lease under which they occupy the premises, they are responsible for the owner's BID levy?

Will the member give way?

It is always a pleasure to follow my good friend Mark Ballard in a debate and to agree 100 per cent with what he has said. To amplify the point, it is relevant to mention that the Howat review cost the taxpayer £134,306.52. If Mr Arbuckle thinks that a humorous matter, he should come and speak to my constituents, who could use that amount of money to get a house, an operation or treatment for their special-needs children. This is a serious debate that goes to the heart of what is wrong with the Scottish Executive. Earlier, the minister tried to chastise my colleague Alex Neil for not studying the review's remit—which was rather like being savaged by a dead sheep. The experts were given a remit to consider the performance and outcomes of programmes, based on a performance assessment rating tool. They were asked to identify those Labour-Liberal programmes that do not match with the partnership agreement priorities or that are not performing well. The review is a report card for the Scottish Labour-Liberal Executive—it contains a judgment about its performance. After Mr McCabe received his report card, instead of showing it to his parents—the public, in this case—he decided to keep it secret. It is like a schoolchild being given his report card and deciding to tear it up and chuck it into the gutter on the way home, because he cannot bring himself to show his parents what the experts—the schoolmasters—have said about how well he has been doing. All the subterfuge, bluster and irrelevance that we have heard this morning are completely irrelevant. Moreover, what Government can bind its successors anyway? The present Executive is saying what the next Executive should do. Hang on a second—is there not something missing there? The people have a little bit of a say about who their next Government will be. Perhaps the  next Government will want to take its own decisions. Funny, that. It might actually be a different Government. We might have a different finance minister—one who turns up to debates. I must move on to freedom of information, on which I will quote two of my parliamentary colleagues whom I hold in the greatest esteem. Margaret Curran said: "The Executive enthusiastically introduced the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Bill because it is committed to ensuring that citizens have the means to call to account the people who make decisions that affect them."— [ Official Report , 2 November 2005; c 20191.]  That is rousing stuff. Des McNulty said: "we wanted to change the culture of Government acting in secret, to stop the routine withholding of information".— [ Official Report , 2 November 2005; c 20207.]  What has happened to Superman Des McNulty? He has reverted to Clark Kent this morning—what a shame. On Tuesday, Mr Swinney took his arguments to the Finance Committee, which Mr McNulty envisaged scrutinising and studying the review by now. Mr Swinney offered help to save the Labour-Liberal Executive from the error of its past ways and to try to move forward to a broader sunny fiscal upland. However, instead of supporting Mr Swinney and endorsing his proposal to take evidence from the Howat group, Mr McNulty and his colleagues—whom I hold in high regard—voted against that proposal by five votes to four.

Sadly, I cannot—

I have no doubt that we will debate that next summer. When President Reagan said that the 10 most frightening words in the English language are, "I'm from the Government and I'm here to help you," I now know what he meant.

On that point, I support inshore fisheries management, but paragraph 26 of section 3 of "SNH Advice on Coastal and Marine National Park—Advice to Ministers" advises that, in the event of a conflict between fishing interests and the park plan, the park plan should take precedence. Is that the Executive's view?

Were social and economic factors to be given the same weight as environmental factors, it would provide some relief to those who are presently opposed to coastal and marine national parks. However, that would require amendment of the 2000 act, which states plainly that the first aim—conservation—takes precedence, in accordance with the Sandford principle. Is the member proposing that primary legislation should be amended so that conservation is no longer given precedence?

I am sure that all members will wish to welcome the large party of people in the public gallery who have come down from Lochaber to listen to today's debate. Over a period earlier this year, one of their number carried out a survey of visitors to Lochaber. English-speaking visitors were asked whether marine national park status would encourage them to visit the area. In summary, of the 10,204 people who were asked the question, 8,366 said no, 1,015 said yes and 723 were not sure.

Not just yet. By contrast with that survey, which was conducted at no expense to the taxpayer by a citizen of Scotland who is genuinely motivated by a fear for the future of communities such as Mallaig and Arisaig, the supposed consultation that SNH carried out this week—which, incidentally, many of my constituents in places such as Lochaline could not find because it was not where it was supposed to be in Fort William—includes questions such as: "What benefits do you think a Coastal and Marine National Park could bring?" Many people feel that such a park would not bring any benefits, so that is a loaded question. A further question was:  "Which area would you like to see designated as Scotland's first Coastal and Marine National Park?" Again, that is a loaded question, because many people do not wish to see an area so designated. More specifically, they would prefer taxpayers' money—their money—to be spent on the real priorities that face rural Scotland.

I give way to the minister.

The question, which seems to me to have been perfectly open and fair, was whether marine national park status would encourage them to visit the area. The minister does not like the fact that the response from 82 per cent of a sample of 10,000, which is much larger than any sample that is used by MORI or other pollsters, signified clearly that the minister's main thesis—that the measure would help tourism—is flawed. Moreover, if it helped tourism in Lochaber, what about areas such as Argyll, the Western Isles and the Northern Isles? Would they lose out? Is that fair? The idea seems to me to be absurd. As far as promoting access is concerned, in what way are people denied access now? The minister did not say. I do not believe that people are denied access. I spent a great deal of the summer in the west Highlands in my constituency. I was happy to travel on the Shearwater over to the small isles to visit the Morvern games and to be the chieftain of the Mallaig and Morar games—the first non-laird to be so. I had a marvellous time and nobody restricted my access to anywhere.

I do not believe that taxpayers' money, which it is our duty to spend wisely and invest well, should be spent on what must be the  most woolly, vague and ill-thought-out document that I have ever come across. If the Executive wants to establish an office serving a marine national park, which I believe would cost £4 million or £5 million if it was similar to the Cairngorms national park—I am surprised that the Tories are willing to sign up to spending money in that way—it would be doing well to find houses in Mallaig or Fort William. There are no houses for local people, never mind for people who are bussed in from somewhere else. How long do I have left, Presiding Officer?

The fishermen and the communities in my constituency have looked after their fisheries for centuries. That sustainable management of resources is proven by the fact that last year there was at long last—as the minister knows—an increase in the nephrops quotas, for which I have argued for a long time. If those resources had not been sustainably managed, the scientific evidence that justified the increase in the quotas would not have been available. The argument that a coastal and marine national park is required for sustainable management therefore falls, as we already have that. We have a huge responsibility to Scotland—the Scottish National Party believes this as the party that seeks to be the Government of this country in under a year's time—to spend taxpayers' money to address the real problems. The real problems on the west coast are the lack of affordable housing and the lack of ability to retain people who work as teachers in the area, who have to live in caravans and who stay for perhaps a year. Those are the real priorities. We are prepared to make that decision and not foist yet another bureaucracy on Scotland.

Is not the question, how does one assess people's views unless they are asked for them? Do the Conservatives believe that there is a strong case for a local referendum in which the electorate is the residents who live within the designated boundaries of the coastal and marine national park, so that their opinions can be ascertained? If not, how can they be ascertained?

Does not a more basic question exist: should a park be created at all? In Scottish Field , the minister says: "We can't give residents an absolute veto on a national park." Does that mean that the Executive would impose national park status on residents in a designated area, even when the park did not have their consent or support?

Would there be a referendum?

How?

Will the minister take an intervention?

In order to confound the minister's expectations of me, I ask whether it would not be better to spend the £4 million or £5 million per year that it might cost to staff and run an office and bureaucracy somewhere on the west coast on affordable housing or getting new people into farming or enabling young people stay in the west Highlands because they do not have to leave to find a job. Would that not be a better way to spend such a huge amount of taxpayers' money?

What is the minister's answer?

Does the minister agree that the loss to Scotland and to the national health service dentistry services of about 50 dental students is an absolute scandal? Does he agree that the situation resulted directly from the fact that, although we welcome trained students from England into the country, there were simply not enough vocational training posts in Scotland to keep about 50 dental graduates here? Given the  acute shortage of NHS dentistry services, is not that an absolute scandal and a sign that the Executive simply maladministered a system that could easily have worked to the benefit of all those who are throughout Scotland languishing on waiting lists for NHS dentistry services?

Does the minister agree with TIE, which has said that BAA's reasonable request  for an indemnity against the losses that might arise if its runway has to close means that the project is no longer deliverable?

I am told that it is easy to be negative, so let me eschew that approach, as always. On Monday this week I had the pleasure of cutting the ribbon at a ceremony to celebrate the launch of six new Stagecoach bus services; I also had a pleasant chat with Scottish Natural Heritage staff at their new headquarters in Inverness. This evening, I will travel to my constituency by rail—I congratulate First ScotRail on receiving the accolade of UK public transport operator of the year. Many commercial companies in Edinburgh and other cities provide excellent  public transport and it behoves us to recognise the good work that they and their staff do. The Greens urge us in today's debate to adopt targets in order to tackle climate change. My good friend Mark Ballard and I agree about a great many things, as members heard in yesterday's freight debate, such as the folly of spending £1 billion on a rail link to Edinburgh airport when that money could be used to update the whole Scottish rail network, including, as Alex Salmond announced at our conference, the SNP's pledge to cut rail journey times from Inverness to the central belt by 45 minutes. We have much common ground, but in responding to the debate, my serious point is that although the Greens say that we should adopt targets, they have not—to my knowledge, over nearly four years of the current parliamentary session—explained to us how those targets can be met. Although the Greens set objectives, they do not spell out how they should be fulfilled. I think that that is fair criticism. In that way, they do not take an entirely responsible approach to politics. If they wish to be in Government, as we do, they have to say what they will do and how they will do it. If I was a Green party MSP, I would say, if I was being honest, that fuel tax is not high enough. I accept that it takes a leap of imagination to imagine me as a Green MSP—I struggle myself. However, the tax on diesel in the UK has been the highest in the 25 European Union states for the past three years, so we are contributing to the environment. Indeed, the more fuel a car consumes, the more tax is paid. It is reasonable to point out that Scotland, Europe's leading oil producer, is paying through the nozzle at the pump for the privilege of driving on the goat-tracks that we call our roads. The Greens do not say that fuel tax should be doubled or trebled, that people should be banned from going on holiday to Majorca or that there should be a car tax of £1,000, £2,000 or £3,000. If they were being honest, they would say that those are the kinds of measures that they believe in their hearts would have to be imposed. I will postulate why they do not say that: it is because they have perhaps become a slightly grey party. They know that, if they tell the truth about what they believe needs to be done, the votes will disappear like snow off a dyke. That has been the fundamental failure of our good friends in the Green party over the four years of this session of Parliament.

And the Edinburgh airport rail link.

Do the Greens accept that, as the RAC Foundation for Motoring argues, motorways are substantially safer than dual carriageways and dual carriageways are substantially safer than single carriageways? A strong case can be made for making roads safer on the basis of saving lives—80 young people were killed on our roads last year, for example—which means upgrading roads such as the A9 to dual-carriageway status.

We disagree about that. I ask Bristow Muldoon what he believes should be done about the problem of foreign drivers using UK roads and paying not a ha'penny for the privilege. The problem has existed for perhaps a decade and, five years ago, Gordon Brown said that it must be dealt with. What should be done about it? The Government dropped lorry road-user charging, having hailed it as the great white hope. Is nothing being done? Even at 5 per cent, it is an extremely serious problem.

I am enjoying this speech, but does Mr Muldoon realise that the projects that the SNP would scrap—the Edinburgh trams and the Edinburgh airport rail link tunnel project—will cost £1.4 billion, which would be freed up for almost all of the projects that members have mentioned?

I understand the minister's argument, but what the haulage industry in Scotland would like to know is really quite simple: does the Scottish Executive believe that the differential—the higher overall tax on diesel—is simply unfair?

I fully agree with the member on the importance of English Welsh & Scottish Railway removing from the Forth rail bridge the substantial amount of coal freight that is carried across it at present, but does she agree that that  freight will not be moved on to the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine line if Transport Scotland and the minister insist on levying an additional rail toll? The imposition of such a toll on any operator on the UK rail network is unprecedented.

Does my good friend Mark Ballard agree that to allow much more freight to be transferred from road to rail it would be prudent for us to invest widely in the Scottish rail network, to enable more frequent services and more capacity in the whole network, instead of spending up to £1 billion on Holyrood 2—also known as the Edinburgh airport rail link? [ Interruption. ] I thank the minister for his running commentary.

I add my congratulations to Phil Flanders of the Road Haulage Association. I also congratulate the Aberdeen haulier Rab Howie, whose evidence impressed the Public Petitions Committee and led to this inquiry being conducted by the Local Government and Transport Committee. I thank the Freight Transport Association and hauliers throughout Scotland for their valuable input and the information that they provided to the inquiry. Freight transport is essential to the economy of Scotland. It supports and provides around 137,000 jobs. It has been said that, if every lorry went off the road, the country would be at a standstill in three days' time—the shop shelves would be empty and public services would come to a rapid halt. Another point that is not readily understood by all is that the haulage industry has cleaned up its act immeasurably in the past decades. Since 1991, the emissions have been reduced in respect of particulates and noxious gases by a factor of around 90 per cent. In 1991, one heavy goods vehicle produced the same volume of emissions as 10 do now. That is a tribute to the industry. With the introduction of Euro 5 by 2009, standards will improve further. What a shame that Gordon Brown has said nothing about what grants, if any, will be available to United Kingdom lorries to meet the Euro 5 standards when countries such as Germany have already committed to that. When did anyone last see black smoke coming from the back of a lorry? The committee did much good work. We all  support the transference of goods from the road to the railway. Ironically, it is companies such as John G Russell, the Transport Development Group, Eddie Stobart and the Malcolm Group that are leading the way in transferring goods from road to rail. We want that trend to grow. We support their efforts. All members of the committee were unanimous in the view that such work was valuable. We want timber lorries in Scotland's forests to be able to use red diesel. The Executive's response is particularly lily-livered in its refusal to recognise the fact that, in Belgium and France, two tanks are used, which enables the usage of red diesel to be monitored through the tachograph system. That initiative removes the argument that HM Revenue and Customs previously adduced, which was that it would be impossible to prevent avoidance. Given that the tonnage of timber traffic is set to increase from 6 million tonnes a year to 8 million tonnes a year, this is a key argument. I am disappointed that the Executive has not given any positive welcome to that fact. The committee would like serious consideration to be given to the idea of increasing the speed limit on roads such as the A9 to 50mph. It is ridiculous that lorries are trundling along such roads at 40mph. They are not designed to do that. It probably increases the incidence of accidents and it certainly does no good for anyone's blood pressure, as I can confirm. We would like a more haulage-friendly approach to be taken by more councils—such as the one for the area in which I am presently standing—to allow delivery of goods to shops. The committee heard evidence from across industry about the need for improvements to the road network and recognised that substantial improvements will be necessary to tackle and alleviate congestion. The committee recognised that the need for an additional crossing of the Forth is "paramount". I would say to the Executive parties that government is about making tough choices. We face a choice between, on the one hand, spending—according to the Executive—£609 million on burrowing a tunnel under a live runway at Edinburgh airport, which is one of our busiest and, on the other hand, investing that money in an additional crossing of the Forth, whether by way of bridge or tunnel. The Scottish National Party believes that the choice is a no-brainer. The effects of the Forth road bridge being closed to HGVs by 2013 are already being felt in Fife. We believe that it is already far, far too late. There have been years of dithering and delay on the part of the ministers with responsibility for transport. Nonetheless, an SNP Government next year will end that delay and order a new Forth crossing to be proceeded with.

I do not agree with Bristow Muldoon. We can have a much cheaper rail link to Edinburgh airport. The level of diesel tax in the UK is 20p to 25p higher than the average across the European Union. It costs 90p at the pump to buy a litre of fuel in the UK whereas, in Latvia and Luxembourg, it costs 56p. That means that foreign lorries can drive for free throughout the UK using petrol that they have bought on the continent. Five years ago, Gordon Brown recognised that fact. The situation is compounded by the fact that, according to the Vehicle and Operator Services Agency, foreign vehicles are not being properly maintained—the lack of maintenance is as high as 50 per cent in countries such as Eire. If foreign operators are not paying to maintain their vehicles and are paying lower fuel tax, how on earth can Scottish hauliers compete with two hands tied behind their back? In its response to the report, the Executive said: "Nevertheless, the Executive will aim to ensure that Scottish concerns are appropriately taken into consideration by the UK Government." What on earth does that mean? The fact is that the Scottish Executive has done nothing to tackle a problem that Gordon Brown acknowledged five years ago and which Douglas Alexander acknowledged this week. The SNP believes that, instead of receiving what Jack McConnell calls a union dividend, Scottish hauliers receive only constant, unfair, unreasonable and onerous tax demands.

As the convener of the committee quite rightly said, the committee recommended that the Scottish Executive should conduct research into the extent of market penetration by foreign hauliers. However, the Scottish Executive's response has been only to say that it will comment on the issue. Does the convener agree that it is essential that we have that research on the extent of the problem, given that the total price per litre on diesel in the UK is 91p, whereas in countries such as France, Ireland, Denmark and the Netherlands, it is 71p—20p less tax per litre?

I add my congratulations to the committee members on their work. They had a difficult task over a long period that involved going to many parts of the country. I joined the committee when it met in my constituency in Inverness. A word of congratulation is due also to the people who serve on the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on crofting, which I think has not been mentioned yet today, although many of its members are here to listen to the debate. The group is one of the well-attended cross-party groups in the Parliament. I am sure that its work made a significant impact and helped to bring about the current situation. I thank all the members of the group who participated in that work. The debate has swirled round the issue of whether the Executive's proposals should be viewed as a climbdown and an embarrassment or as a sign that the Executive is prepared to listen.  At the end of the day, that is perhaps not important from the perspective of thinking about where we go now. I well remember first climbing the Aonach Eagach—the climb down and return to the car park was extremely welcome. Such a safe place to be, for a minister or anybody else, is also a good place to start looking forward. It is unfortunate that the Conservatives have decided to oppose the bill, not least for a reason that has not yet been mentioned, although that is understandable because it relates primarily to my constituency. That reason is the evidence of Hamish Jack in speaking on behalf of the Spey Valley Crofters Association. He pointed out the anomalous situation of many of his colleagues who are farmers in Strathspey. They could have registered as crofters in 1955 but, as Mr Jack told committee members, they chose not to do so, perhaps because they were worried about offending their landlord. As a result, many small areas of land—which, in some cases, are smaller than the croft units beside them—do not benefit from being registered. Because the provisions on smallholdings apply to areas outwith crofting counties such as Inverness-shire, there is a slight risk that we will not be able to address in this bill the problems that Mr Jack and others face. However, by voting for the bill to move to stage 2, the SNP will at least be able to lodge amendments. Indeed, I fully intend to do so.

Perhaps I can be ungentlemanly and take Ted Brocklebank's intervention first.

I totally disagree. After all, some measures in the bill, modest though they might be, are worthy of support. My point is very simple: supporting the bill might not be a perfect solution, but allowing it to progress to stage 2 means that I, as a  constituency member, can stand up for my constituents and attempt to rectify a long-standing grievance. I will do just that. Does Sarah Boyack still wish to make an intervention?

I have absolutely no objection to having two acts of Parliament on crofting, although it would be better to think through these matters in a single piece of legislation. I look forward to playing my part in the committee's stage 2 deliberations, and I hope that I will secure votes from all parties in the new wave of consensus that is sweeping through the chamber. You might have noticed over the years, Presiding Officer, that I do not experience such warm breaths of approval in every debate that I contribute to. I am particularly pleased that the issue that I tried to take up on behalf on a number of constituents seems to have been successfully resolved. I refer, of course, to the status of Crofters Commission staff. When I spoke to crofters in Lochaber and throughout my constituency about the bill, I endeavoured to point out that the staff are the ones who will have to deliver whatever system the Parliament passes. The staff were greatly concerned about the prospect of losing civil service status, and I very much welcome the fact that that threat has at least been lifted. As far as that matter is concerned, I must thank the minister. She impressed people with her appearance at the meeting of the Environment and Rural Development Committee in Inverness, at which her points were very well made and accepted. We are very grateful for what I hope is at least a respite. I hope that by suggesting people who might serve on the committee of inquiry, I am not giving them the black spot. However, we all recognise that Sir Crispin Agnew's knowledge of crofting law is unsurpassed. In my days as a solicitor, I engaged his services, and no one could have done a more thorough job as an advocate or could have taken more care over learning the detail of cases and completing his work in a thoroughly professional manner. I am not aware that he has any axe to grind and I think that he would make an excellent chairman of the committee of inquiry.  Given that the staff of the Crofters Commission are concerned that the good news that they have received might be only a respite and given the concern, which I hope has not been exaggerated, that SEERAD might have an agenda that it will be reluctant to abandon, I suggest that a member of the staff in Inverness—perhaps one of the local staff representatives—could serve on the committee of inquiry. The danger is that, if there is not a member of staff on the committee, the staff may feel that the committee is, once again, determining their fate without their having a say or an influence, that the matter will come back to the table and that they will lose their status and become a quango. I hope that that concern will be addressed. Another concern, which was well expressed by the Scottish Crofting Foundation in its briefing to committee members in August, is funding. Today we are talking about crofting law, but what about crofting funding? The concern relates to the rural development programme and to the possibility of crofting funding being subsumed into land management contracts. That is a complex area, but I wanted to flag up the issue in this debate because a lot of people will read the Official Report . Crofting financing schemes have had a long history and they must continue. If we lose them and everything is subsumed into the LMC process, crofters will be competing in a tight environment, in tier 3 of the rural development programme; there are many concerns about that. Eleanor Scott's points about forest crofts were well made, but I would like to give the minister some gentle advice. He has probably had too much advice from me today, and I know that there is such a thing as overkill, but I am slightly concerned that the efforts of the Forestry Commission and of Forest Enterprise, which I broadly support, tend to produce programmes that are extremely complicated. One would almost need Crispin Agnew to submit one's application for benefits under some of the housing schemes, in which about eight or nine steps are involved. I remember an SNP manifesto setting out seven steps to independence, and after the election most of us decided that that was around five or six too many. There is an unfortunate similarity, from the minister's perspective, between that and some of the housing schemes that the Forestry Commission has come up with. The schemes are worthy, but perhaps they are overly complex; I hope that we can have a look at that issue. I have some more time, so—

I will not take members through the seven steps. I am better versed in the seven  pillars of wisdom, but I am not sure that that pertains directly to the topic of the day, so we shall leave that for now. I conclude by sharing with the Parliament the fact that, back in 1992, when I was campaigning and going round many of the crofting areas, including Mallaig, I had a campaign video called, "Fergus Ewing: the video". I played a leading role in that video, it has to be said, but one of the more captivating cameo roles was played by a man who was well known in Mallaig and who, sadly, passed away recently. The late Archie McLellan, who could not be matched for his knowledge of crofting history and Highland history, pointed out to the viewers of the video, as I am sure they will remember, that it was not so very long ago that the Highland clearances took place, and that the purpose of crofting law was to ensure that people were not forced off the land. That remains its purpose. There are, of course, other ways of helping people to stay in their own parts of the Highlands, but crofting law and the crofting system support a way of life that I am sure we all wish to protect, cherish and strengthen. I very much hope that we can achieve that.

I apologise for not being here for the start of the minister's speech. When will the committee of inquiry's remit be finalised? When will the committee be established and when will it be required to conclude its deliberations? Will all those dates be before or after the general election in May?

I concur with Maureen Macmillan's comments about the A96. Does she agree that there should be a long-term objective to dual the A96 along its length between Aberdeen and Inverness, and that although it might take 20 years or more to achieve, we should nonetheless put party politics aside and agree the common objective?

I have the distinct feeling that the minister doth protest a little too much. There are four reasons why the SNP believes that the scheme is wrong for Edinburgh, for the rail network, and for Scotland. First, the costs of the project are currently estimated at more than £600 million, which is a rise of 20 per cent. In truth, the costs are unknown, rising and excessive. Secondly, in our view, the scale of expenditure on transport projects would be much more effectively invested in other means in our transport network. The SNP has committed its support for proceeding with the necessary works—formally called Waverley 2—that would increase the number of paths per hour in Waverley station from 28 to 32. The Executive toyed with that proposal before ditching it. Unless that increase is ordered and happens soon, the rail network may face gridlock within a few short years. Secondly, we believe that the proposals that Network Rail made recently in its rail utilisation strategy offer a far better and more prudent investment for the whole rail network in Scotland. Network Rail has identified 44 gaps, bottlenecks, pinchpoints, infrastructure works and improvements to signalling and platforms all over Scotland and 44 options for sorting them out, at a price tag of £300 million. For one half of the colossal sum of £609 million that the Executive proposes to spend on the Edinburgh airport rail link—[ Interruption. ] I know that the minister does not like what I have to say, but he will have to listen. For half that sum, we could have an improved network for the whole of Scotland, including longer trains for the Glasgow to Edinburgh link that would cut that journey by eight minutes. We could cut the time from Inverness to Perth, Glasgow and Edinburgh by 45 minutes through an investment of £50 million. We could make improvements throughout Scotland as identified in the rail utilisation strategy. That would deliver what we believe is needed for the whole of Scotland and for all rail users throughout Scotland, who are frustrated by delays, cancellations and problems because our rail network is at or close to capacity.  Thirdly, BAA runs Scotland's busiest airport. It will require indemnities and guarantees to be built into the bill against the possibility that its runway will have to be closed. Will the minister give those indemnities? In any event, how could he? The cost to the nation of the loss of our major airport would be incalculable. We know from the Prestonpans experience that Network Rail considered just the potential risk of subsidence through mine workings to be such that it required to spend £50 million. The fourth reason is that we do not believe that the alternatives to the EARL scheme have been considered. We want Network Rail to consider those proposals with BAA. Network Rail is the licence operator; it has the expertise and it knows best how to deliver a new route from A to B. I will deal with three main flaws in the EARL proposal. The first is the tunnel. The key reason why the project is so expensive is that it requires the construction of a tunnel under a live runway. That is simply a colossal risk. According to one source who was involved in the preliminary investigation, disused mine workings are thought to be in the vicinity of the airport. Can the minister, Transport Scotland and the Scottish Executive give a cast-iron guarantee that the risks that are involved in constructing the tunnel—and in the whole project—will not lead to further cost hikes? Secondly, we know from the evidence that the Edinburgh Airport Rail Link Bill Committee heard from Ron McAulay of Network Rail that the rolling stock—diesel multiple units—that is required for EARL to work does not exist. He said: "As far as I am aware, there is no version of this train running on the network yet."—[ Official Report, Edinburgh Airport Rail Link Bill Committee , 20 June 2006; c 173.] The trains do not exist. I will ask the minister a question and I will take an intervention from him, although he did not take one from me. If the trains do not exist, how can he say—as he did on the radio this morning—that the costs are capped at £497 million? We do not know how much the trains cost, because they do not exist.

I have discussed the matter with Network Rail. The rolling stock strategy has not  yet been rolled out, so we have no idea what it will cost. My colleague Bruce Crawford will put the case for the urgent requirement to order an additional crossing of the Forth, given that the Forth road bridge may be closed to lorries by 2013. If over the past seven years we MSPs have learned anything about public sector projects, it is that it is imperative to have proper management of risk and a prudent and cautious approach to the expenditure of vast amounts of public money. Tavish, we will not be lavish with public money. We will pursue a prudent, frugal and sensible approach for all Scotland, with an alternative rail link to Edinburgh airport and a modernised, upgraded rail network for everyone in Scotland.

Will the minister give way?

The Scottish National Party also supports an alternative rail link from the airport to the city, but not the Turnhouse link. Does Mr McLetchie agree that the flaw in his amendment is that he is asking the promoter—which has already considered and rejected alternatives—to start afresh and consider alternatives? Would it not be better for Network Rail to be given that task, working with BAA?

I congratulate John Scott on his personal contribution to establishing farmers markets. That is an accolade that he should be proud of. We have farmers markets in my constituency, and they are extremely welcome. The motion also mentions farm shops, which I think are becoming, if anything, even more significant than markets. There is a farm shop at Wester Hardmuir, between Nairn and Forres, which I can thoroughly recommend to anyone who is willing to risk driving along that goat track called the A96. Over the summer months, like other members, I had the pleasure of attending various games and shows, including the Grantown show, where I had the political misfortune to be asked to judge the tractor competition. It can be a vote-losing experience, and one is tempted to reject out of hand the entrants who live outwith the constituency. Naturally, I resisted that temptation. One of the losers was a local wag. He asked me, after he found out my name and called me Fergie, "Why did your mother name you after a  tractor?" I have not passed those bon mots on to my mother—I do not have sufficient courage—but attending the show gave me the opportunity to pick up on some of the concerns, which is the point I am coming to. There are serious concerns, of which I think the minister is well aware. There are concerns about charges made by the Scottish Environment Protection Agency. I say to the minister that, with respect, SEPA is out of control. The sadly intemperate attack that the chief executive of that organisation made on NFU Scotland in the Press and Journal a week ago last Saturday was extremely unfortunate and ill-advised. In Scotland, there is a charge of £700 for a licence to put tar on farm roads, but there is no similar charge in England. That is outrageous—the charge must go. There is also huge pressure on the dairy sector. Other members have referred to its problems. I inform the minister that those in the sector are on the edge, which is just not fair. One thing that we could do to help—my party has not yet adopted this policy—is to give every child in Scotland free school milk. We should not just pass the buck on that to local authorities, which was the Executive's stated position in 2002 and again last week. Farmers produce food. They may look after the environment, but they have done that anyway. Given the insecurity in the world, the biggest threat now in my view is food terrorism, which is a topic that is being increasingly discussed. What that means is that unless we can produce the food we need to feed ourselves, we may not have enough. One threat or actuality of botulism in the milk process could kill hundreds of thousands of people. People such as my sister-in-law would never enter a supermarket again or buy anything from one. Unless we produce our own food—we must remember that that is farmers' function—I think that we will regret the day. I am afraid that policies are moving away from recognising that primary purpose of farmers.

I am happy to support the bill, which contains many sensible proposals for changes to the law. It relates primarily to the summary justice system, but the preamble also states that it covers solemn proceedings. The two constituency matters that I would like to raise touch more obviously on solemn proceedings. At a weekend surgery, I met a young lady who was raped some years ago and whose attacker was convicted and sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment. He then lodged an appeal and the young lady was told that the appeal would be heard more than a year later. Unfortunately, the appeal was in fact heard much earlier and she was not informed that the appeal hearing was taking place, so she did not know that her attacker's appeal was being heard. The sentence  was reduced on appeal to six years, so the man will be out in two years. The Crown Office has apologised for the omission, and that has been accepted. However, the point that arises from the case of that young lady, whom I am obviously not going to name, is about the effect on rape victims. I understand from speaking to people who work for Scottish Women's Aid and other organisations, and from conversations about the case with the Solicitor General for Scotland, that once a trial is over the adrenalin that has sustained a victim through to seeing her assailant be brought to justice is lost, and there can then be problems such as depression and other serious consequences. In some cases, female victims may even attempt to take their own lives. The correspondence that I have had with the Solicitor General about that case informs me that the current law states that the appeal court cannot, after conviction and sentence, hear from the victim or review the sentence in the light of information that is provided by the victim. The consequences to the victim of rape do not, however, stop on the date of the sentence, so surely it should be open to the appeal court to consider hearing from the victim—according to the normal rules of evidence—how she has been affected after the sentence. Surely the criminal should be responsible for all the consequences of a crime, especially serious crime, and surely that responsibility should not be elided at a fixed, arbitrary date when sentence is passed. I hope that if it is within the ambit of the bill, as I believe it is, an appropriate amendment can be lodged at stage 2. I am writing to the Minister for Justice and to the Solicitor General for Scotland about the matter, asking them to consider the arguments in advance. I hope that we can, in a non-partisan way, reform the law to protect people such as the young lady I saw last Saturday. The second case that I want to mention relates to a man called David Penman. Mr Penman was sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment for savage sexual attacks on two females, one of whom was disabled. The other was a 19-year-old student. I will not go into the details of the attacks—suffice it to say that they were vicious, vile and savage. He was sentenced to 10 years but, under the automatic early release scheme he was released after having served just over six years. That was something about which the prison officers who were responsible for looking after that individual were extremely concerned; I understand that they expressed their concerns behind the scenes. I have raised the case with the Minister for Justice. I very much hope that we can agree across all the parties in Parliament that there are some individuals, perhaps only 20 or 30 people in  Scotland—I certainly hope that it is only a small number—who should not be let out of prison early. That man was let out under the conditions of a sexual offenders protection order.

I am pleased to accept that statement from the minister and I look forward to receiving the detail of the proposals. I want to make a couple more points about the fellow to whom I referred. He was released on the basis that he would be supervised for 24 hours a day. He has been let out of prison, but must be accompanied at all times because of the risk that he is adjudged to pose. The cost of that over six months has been £85,000. I understand from Stewart Stevenson—who I am sure is an authority on the matter—that the cost of keeping somebody in prison is £36,500 a year. Therefore, the comparative cost to the public of looking after this man under supervision is five times more than the cost of looking after a prisoner. That is absurd. The man was also given the best council house in Nairn, ahead of many young families, and was put there without the elderly people in the area being told that a convicted rapist was being placed in their midst. Frankly, that is wrong. There is a small number of people in jail in Scotland who should not be let out. Based on the extensive information that I have received, my view is that the man in question is one of them. Last Saturday, I met the mother of the disabled woman who was subjected to the sex attack and I am pleased to say that the victim has found the strength to go back to studying and do a course. I am sure that we would all congratulate her for having the strength to come back from that vicious and vile attack. I welcome the minister's undertaking to ensure that we can deal with such obscenities.

Will the minister join me in praising all those who were involved in the international mountain biking competition that was held this year at Aonach Mor. It was such a success that Lochaber was full up—a case of Lochaber no more room at the inn. Is she aware that the world championships will be held there next year, which will mean thousands of extra people to be looked after? Unlike Mr Purvis, I congratulate Forest Enterprise on its work in expanding the facilities for beginners, intermediates and on what I call the kamikaze runs at Wolftrax near Laggan. Does the minister agree that it is excellent news that is very much to be encouraged, and that we want as many people as possible to enjoy the splendid benefits and hospitality that my constituency has to offer?

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made in relation to major improvements to the A9; what sections of the road will be dualled; whether it considers that the provision of dualling will reduce the number of accidents resulting in death or serious injury, and when the design work in respect of dualling the section from Perth to Ballinluig will be completed. (S2O-10410)

Does the minister agree that although many accidents result primarily from driver error, the Automobile Association has provided clear evidence that dual carriageways are twice as safe as single carriageways, which means that one benefit of dualling the A9 from Perth to Inverness would be fewer fatalities in Scotland?

To ask the Scottish Executive how many of its employees work some or all of the time from home and how many work on flexible arrangements by which they can choose when they travel to their workplace. (S2O-10327)

It is disappointing that the Executive does not know how many of its staff work under flexible arrangements. By contrast, we know that BT, with 100,000 employees, has 71,000 staff on flexitime. Should not this devolved institution devolve to people some element of control over how they work? If that happened, would not there be immense benefits, not only for employees but for the environment, through the reduction in congestion that would result from a great many cars being removed from our roads?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Would it not show respect to other members if complaints of that nature were also  notified in advance to the member who is the subject of the complaint?

I thank all members who supported the motion and those who have stayed on for the debate. Last week, we supported the enabling bill for a Borders railway. This week, I put the case for improved transport links for the Highlands. There are three main trunk roads that connect the Highlands to the rest of Scotland: the A82, which serves the west Highlands from Glasgow to Inverness; the A9, which runs up Scotland's spine; and the A96, from Inverness to Aberdeen. Rail links connect Inverness to Perth and Inverness to Aberdeen. They are largely single track, like their sibling mode of transport, the roads. The motion calls for major improvements to both road and rail links and for a national consensus to agree those broad objectives. It calls, as an ultimate objective, for the upgrading of the two busiest trunk roads—the A9 and the A96—to dual carriageway status from Perth to Inverness and Inverness to Aberdeen. The objective of this debate is to construct a national consensus that the transport links that serve the north of Scotland are inadequate and that major improvements are required. In my view, that consensus already exists among the people. During the past seven years, no issue has been raised with me more frequently by my constituents than the issue of transport links. It is the people's priority, but it is not, apparently, a priority for the Scottish Executive. That is a democratic deficit that I wish to see brought to an end. It is, sadly, a matter of record that, during the past seven years, there has been no major improvement to any of the three main trunk roads that connect the north of Scotland to the rest of the  country in the south. New junctions have been promised, and an upgrade to the junction at Ballinluig was announced today—we welcome that. There have been several new roundabouts on the A96 and some new two-plus-one sections, but there have been no major improvements to those roads in the past seven years, nor has there been any major improvement to the northern rail links in that time. The Scottish Executive has not ordered any major improvement to those transport links as part of its strategic projects plan. There have been minor projects and, of course, those are welcome, but although Inverness is Scotland's fastest growing city, it is the only city in Scotland that lacks dual road or rail links. One can understand why many of the citizens of Inverness feel that we have not been invited to the devolution ball. Inverness is a Cinderella city. The national consensus that I believe exists among those whom we seek to represent also includes fulsome support from business organisations. The Inverness Chamber of Commerce commented just today: "Currently, we are a city without inter-city connections." There is also support from Fort William Chamber of Commerce as well as from the Federation of Small Businesses, the Scottish Council for Development and Industry, Councillor Charles King and the Highlands and Islands strategic transport partnership. Highlands and Islands Enterprise's development network says that the motion is consistent with its long-term ambitions for the Highlands. The consensus exists with the people and with those who represent businesses in the north of Scotland. Why should the roads be dualled? First, for the economy, as that would create and sustain jobs and create opportunities. We send our high-quality fruit produce, our national drink and many other products to the south. They embark on a long journey, often to far-flung parts of the world. The lack of dual carriageways causes long delays and platooning behind lorries. Secondly, the roads should be dualled on the ground of road safety. The three main trunk roads in the Highlands are the top three in the Freight Transport Association's list of the worst trunk roads in Scotland. Earlier this month, in a poll conducted by the rural community gateway, the three roads were voted, by a long way, the worst rural roads in Scotland. The A9's record on fatalities is among the worst in Scotland. On that road between 2000 and 2004, 84 people died in accidents and 1,111 accidents occurred. Scarcely a week goes by without news of another tragic accident. I know that members have been in accidents on that road and I had a  friend who died on the road. I am sure that many others can tell a similar tale. The A9 is particularly unforgiving of driver error. Responsibility always rests with the driver. However, driver error is almost encouraged when the road alternates from single carriageway to dual carriageway and now to a two-plus-one section before going back to a single carriageway. No method such as improved signage can tackle the confusion that that creates. The third reason to dual the roads is to do so for the people. I am absolutely convinced that the people whom I represent want better roads and better railway services. They are fed up with the experience of three or four hours' drive to the central belt. That is frustrating, a waste of time, uncomfortable and irritating. People have had enough. Let us put the stakeholders to one side and respect the people's wishes. I have not called for a timescale in the motion. The work that I advocate is part of a long-term plan and would certainly take a couple of decades. For example, the cost of upgrading the A9 is £600 million and that work must be spread over a few years. The aim of the debate is to agree the objective that major improvements are required. Let us take the politics out of transport. That is done in the USA, where people can look up a plan to improve roads in 2015 or 2016. Once the objectives are agreed, politics falls by the wayside. If the motion is acted on, lives will be improved and some lives will be saved. The economy will benefit, people will gain and opportunities will be created. If this relatively new institution acts on the national consensus that I outlined, we will create a clear sense that the Scottish Parliament is a Parliament for the whole of Scotland.

More aviation.

Will the member give way?

The member guessed wrongly. I am puzzled about why the Greens, who are concerned about reducing emissions, support a project that will inevitably promote aviation and more use of aircraft—those are some of the reasons that the minister set out, some of which I agree with. Why do the Greens support the scheme rather than a fast rail link from Scotland to London, for example, which would limit in the long term the number of domestic flights between Scottish airports and London?

I congratulate the committee on a persuasive piece of work. The members who gave their time to consider the matter in detail put in a great deal of effort. The Scottish National Party supports a Glasgow airport rail link in principle and therefore wishes the bill to proceed beyond preliminary stage. However, the committee's report identifies a very large amount of work that is yet to be done. The committee has considered a number of questions, and I will go through some of the points that it makes. On connectivity, it is clear that the patronage figures for the rail link are estimated as being fairly low. To those of us who followed the project's progress before it came to the Parliament, that was clear from the research report that the Scottish Executive commissioned from Sinclair Knight Merz consultants. According to Mike Lunan, formerly of the Rail Passengers Committee Scotland, that research "suggests there would only be 13 passengers on every train, and while that may fluctuate, the figures would certainly not seem to stack up. But cost implications are a matter for politicians." How right he is.

It will be a waste of money if we do not ensure that the scheme is as successful as it should be, which is why I am referring to some of the committee's work. It is unfortunate that the promoter only belatedly provided figures on the levels of patronage. The committee—which includes Mr Arbuckle—concluded that those figures are relatively modest. The main issue, which is the Glasgow crossrail scheme, has already been highlighted. Without the crossrail, the connection to Glasgow Central station would be a terminus for many passengers who wanted to travel on to other parts of Scotland—including Inverness, to take one location entirely at random. Is the Glasgow airport  rail link viable without a crossrail scheme? The committee will want to consider that at consideration stage as thoroughly as it has at preliminary stage. I was disappointed that we did not get a clearer steer from the Executive about what its thinking is on that because, without the crossrail scheme, the robustness of the case for the airport rail link is much reduced. In that respect, it is appropriate to make a comparison with the Edinburgh airport rail link. The committee considered the policy objectives and would have expected the evidence used by the promoter to substantiate its claims to be much more concrete than it was. The committee's report says: "For example, there was little empirical evidence presented to the Committee of the clear, causal link between an airport rail link and increased economic growth for the city or region it serves." The promoter claimed that GARL would improve access to Prestwick airport, but Steven Fitzgerald, the chief executive of Infratil Airports Europe Ltd, said: "I am not aware of the basis on which the promoter makes that claim."—[ Official Report, Glasgow Airport Rail Link Bill Committee, 8 May 2006; c 66.] Well, he should know. I agree with John Scott that a key benefit of this project, and a reason for supporting it, would be that people who currently drive from Ayrshire to Glasgow would be able to take the train. John encapsulated that point quite well.

I will certainly take an intervention from the committee convener.

I am grateful to the convener. I am happy to endorse her point—it is entirely correct. The scheme's impact on traffic will be virtually negligible. Whatever its merits, the scheme will not take a significant number of cars off the road going into Glasgow. Paragraph 37 of the committee's reports says: "The promoter provided very late supplementary written evidence to show that ... there would be a 2% reduction, by 2012". That figure was an increase on the promoter's earlier figures of a 0.5 per cent reduction and then a total 0.8 per cent reduction by 2030. There seemed to be disagreement between the  promoter and Network Rail about the impact of the GARL infrastructure on the overall network. Paragraph 49 of the committee's report shows that it was not clear how the objective of alleviating social exclusion would be tackled. One of the main reasons for having such a scheme is to provide higher quality public transport. However, paragraph 57 of the report says that "the final decisions on timetables, the fare structure and operating hours are still to be taken." As the minister said, a leap of faith is therefore required to support that particular claim. I was particularly disappointed that Simon Wallwork's alternative proposal, the cost of which would be a tiny fraction of the cost of the promoter's proposal, could not be considered in more detail by the committee—although I understand that the committee was limited by the procedures that it had to follow. The committee praised Mr Wallwork's proposal for a light rail scheme costing between £10 million and £15 million. The proposal would alleviate congestion and provide a park-and-ride scheme. I was disappointed that the promoter refused to meet Mr Wallwork before it presented its proposal to Parliament. I had asked the promoter to meet him. The costs of the scheme have risen substantially. The minister now says that the cost will be between £170 million and £210 million. Like the minister, I will conclude by saying that support for this project will depend on the demonstration of a case that is extremely robust—financially and in every other respect.

First, I apologise to members for the fact that I have to leave the debate early to travel north. I, too, congratulate Maureen Macmillan on raising a topic that is now well and truly on the radar screen of every politician in the Highlands. There is no doubt that there is a huge number of people who have come to work in the Highlands from Poland, Lithuania, Latvia and further east in Europe. They come because they can earn far more here than they can in their own countries.  They tend to be hard working and they have the courage to come here. They may want to stay here and they will usually want to send back home a large proportion of their earnings. The Highland economy is reliant on tourism and on fish and food processing, and many of our eastern European visitors come to do jobs in those sectors. Some of those jobs might be regarded as being too menial or too low paid for local people. One hears that comment a great deal. However, our eastern European visitors are here and as long as they are here, they are our responsibility. We accept them into our country and they have a right to be treated fairly and with dignity. I hope that the surgery to which Maureen Macmillan referred can be made available for some of the many Poles who have made Inverness their home, so much so that there are now 2,000 Poles in Inverness. I had to think carefully about whether to retain my allegiance to Trinidad and Tobago in those circumstances. The pressures on housing are immense. Homelessness applications to Highland Council have nearly trebled over the past four years. Maureen Macmillan referred to the effect on education and I do not think that I need to repeat her exposition. The Deputy Minister for Education and Young People recently visited Inverness. Once it was pointed out to him that it is, in fact, an urban centre, I am sure that the minister was made aware of the pressure on our education and housing services in the Highlands. If it is the case that the Highlands receives proportionately more eastern European workers than do other parts of Scotland, I say to the minister that it follows logically—he is shaking his head, but I think that what I said is true. I would be interested to know what his statistics are, if he says that I am wrong. If I am right and more people come into the Highlands from eastern Europe than go to other parts of Scotland, that means that our public agencies require a fairer deal in order to discharge their duties on housing and, in particular, education. When I discussed this issue with the Scottish Council for Development and Industry three Fridays ago, I heard about the practical, nitty-gritty problems that migrant workers face in obtaining employment. A new migrant worker must do three things: register for a national insurance number; open a bank account; and register with the Home Office under the Department for Work and Pensions scheme. Each of those involves serious problems. I hope that the Scottish Executive can establish some kind of formal arrangement with the Home Office, once it is functioning again—partially—to try to solve those problems. I will write to the minister about that. However, the Home Office is doing more for the  cause of independence than just about anything else at the moment, particularly among those who are trying to take on staff. They are met with a Home Office that routinely loses documents that are sent to it and which is incapable of functioning. It leaves employers worried about whether they should shop and report people because they are illegal immigrants, having overshot their stay. Those are serious problems, but I cannot tackle all the nitty-gritty elements of them just now. I remind members of the novel by Albert Camus, "L'Etranger", which is a most chilling and clinical account of the darker side of human nature that fears the outsider. I think that in Scotland we want to welcome the outsider and not fear him. However, we have a lot more work to do to live up to that objective.

Will the minister respond to the issue that I raised? The amount of grant that is available for extensions to houses for people with a disability of whatever type that means that they are immobile and require an extension appears to be substantially less in Scotland than it is in England. Will the minister report to us on why that is and let us know whether he can eliminate that discrepancy?

I note that no fewer than 41 MSPs have signed the motion, which shows that there is wide, cross-party support for the ideas that it expresses. I congratulate Cathie Craigie on securing this opportunity to debate an issue that has a devastating impact on a large number of people in Scotland. I am informed that the Muscular Dystrophy Campaign is in touch with around 17 people in my constituency. In general, however, it is in touch with only one third of those who suffer from MD. That, perhaps, gives us cause to worry that a large number of people are not receiving the diagnosis and treatment that they require. In preparing for the debate, I discussed with a constituent the issues that he thinks should be emphasised with regard to rural areas. One aspect that he raised was the need for joined-up thinking on the part of the various authorities that are involved in providing assessments and treatment, such as the health service and the social work department. For example, if people from the Highlands need to see a specialist who is based in Glasgow or Edinburgh, would it not make sense for that specialist to have an arrangement to see 10 or 15 people in Inverness on one occasion rather than requiring people to make multiple trips from remote Highland locations to places such as Glasgow and Edinburgh?  Michael McMahon mentioned the fact that some premises need to be extended to deal with those who have muscular dystrophy. Often, people with other forms of disability need their houses to be extended. A girl in my constituency suffered an accident and is now a paraplegic. I have learned that, in Scotland, there is no disability fund and that the available finance for an extension has a maximum ceiling of £20,000 as opposed to—I believe—£30,000 in England, Wales and Northern Ireland. Perhaps the minister could consider that issue in particular. The Muscular Dystrophy Campaign has asked us for change in respect of promoting the importance of having the correct wheelchair—the right chair for the right person—swiftly delivered. It is absolutely right to focus on that. The Inverness access committee has highlighted that issue with the health board and the health board has done a lot of good work. The shopmobility campaign is successful in Inverness and many volunteers give a great deal of time and effort, as they do across Scotland. However, there is still a lingering feeling that, perhaps, dealing with problems relating to access and wheelchairs is not a core issue for the national health service. I would like to see that mindset changed so that it is seen as a core issue. I, too, have been asked by many constituents to intervene. We all know that government is about making choices and distinguishing between what is essential and what is merely important. If there is an option to put some more resources—perhaps £1 million or £2 million—into providing the right wheelchairs at the right time and cutting some of the delays that members have referred to, would it not be better to put money into that and take some money off some of the public health advertising campaigns? We could easily cut that budget line by a few million and nobody would notice a blind bit of difference, since there seems to be no evidence that television campaigns that exhort us to behave better in our lives are efficacious. I hope that the minister will consider diverting some of the resources from public health advertising and will, instead, provide wheelchairs that people need. I commend the many people who have come to listen to the debate. That shows that Cathie Craigie was right to raise the issue. I hope that the cross-party support for the motion will send a clear message to the minister of the priority that the people of Scotland place on this issue.

To ask the Scottish Executive what information it has received from Highland Council in respect of Highland Council's plans to put out to tender the provision of care for elderly people who are currently resident in local authority homes, such as Grant House, Grantown-on-Spey; Invernevis House, Fort William; the Wade Centre, Kingussie; and Ach an Eas and Burnside, Inverness; and whether it considers that the savings which the council has predicted are realistic. (S2O-10087)

I have given notice of my supplementary question to the minister's office. He will be aware of the widespread concern about the issue among the relatives of people who are looked after in the homes and the worrying possibility that they may have to move. The minister will know that Highland Council leaders elected not to hold public meetings to present the policy in any part of my constituency. Does the minister accept that the council has not carried out such an exercise previously and that the task of preparing the specification and the preferred bidder method of tendering are immensely complex and challenging? Does he therefore agree that it would be prudent for the plans to undergo some form of independent evaluation before they are implemented, to ensure that they are robust?

rose—

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to encourage increased investment and employment in the life sciences sector in Inverness. (S2O-9916)

I welcome the minister's response. Given that notice of my supplementary question was given to his office by me yesterday and by The Press and Journal this morning, he will be aware that Lifescan Scotland Ltd, formerly Inverness Medical Ltd, is the biggest private sector employer in the Highlands. At the moment, it employs 1,500 people with plans to employ another 150, many of whom would be at the leading edge of research and development. However, as the minister knows, those excellent plans are threatened by a unilateral notification from the Department of Health in Whitehall that it will cut by 15 per cent the amount paid for this company's product. No company can stand such a cut in revenue overnight without there being consequences. Will the minister publicly state that the Executive deplores and opposes that action and will he make the strongest possible representations to the Secretary of State for Health at Westminster that the move is damaging and the cut excessive?

There is a surprise.

I will give a brief example of a situation in which land attachment might prove to be a more benign option than sequestration. Unfortunately, many debtors bury their heads in the sand, leave it until it is too late to deal with the problem and are sequestrated, at which point it is almost impossible to protect the family home. Land attachment will focus some people's minds without sequestration and thus allow the family to rally round the debtor to protect the family home. Thereby, sequestration might be avoided.

We are here to modernise the law of bankruptcy, in particular the Bankruptcy (Scotland) Act 1985 and the Bankruptcy (Scotland) Act 1993. The 1993 act has a rather unusual provenance and it is a little-known fact that The Herald diarist, Tom Shields, can claim a significant degree of credit for the passage of that legislation. The 1985 act made provision for insolvency practitioners to be paid rather large amounts of money for putting people through the bankruptcy process. The Scottish Law Commission estimated the cost per annum at between £12,500 and £50,000 but, by the early 1990s, the actual cost was nearly £20 million. My wife—with a bit of offstage prompting from her spouse—had the answer to a parliamentary question that she had obtained publicised in Tom Shield's diary one day. That parliamentary answer listed a hit parade of IPs in Scotland, ranked by order of income received according to the insolvency work that they undertook. The incomes were very substantial indeed. That did not make Tom Shields, me or George Kerr, the accountant in bankruptcy, especially popular with some insolvency practitioners at the time, one of whom described the 1993 act as a socialist plot between the Ewings, George Kerr and Tom Shields. That was the last time I was accused of being involved in a socialist plot. That is the story of Tom Shields's responsibility for the Bankruptcy (Scotland) Act 1993. Mr MacAskill and Mr Neil referred to the fact that we in Parliament have time for a proper debate on the issue. My wife took part in the proceedings of the standing committee that considered the Bankruptcy (Scotland) Bill on 14 July 1992. It is interesting that, 14 years ago, her amendment 113 called for a much wider exemption of assets from bankruptcy proceedings. We have mentioned houses, to which I will return. If we really want to encourage entrepreneurship and allow people who are down and out through debt the chance to come back, we have to consider what they might need. They might, for example, need a car to get a job and to get about, particularly if they live in rural Scotland. Is not there a case for saying that a motor car up to a certain value should be exempt, which happens elsewhere? I am not suggesting that—to take a hypothetical example—a politician who has two Jags and gets into a debt problem with, perhaps, grace and favour homes through which there were undeclared taxable emoluments, should be able to avail him or herself of such an exemption. However, in the case of the ordinary  Joe who finds him or herself in difficulty through debt, there is a case for the car to be exempt. Equally, given that the debtor's family are usually innocent victims, there is a strong case for life policies to be exempt. There is also a case for solatium for personal injuries compensation to be exempt. If a person is injured and sustains brain damage, should his compensation be attachable by his creditors at all? I think not. Those strong arguments were put by Margaret Ewing in 1992. They were not accepted then although, to be fair, Donald Dewar performed a magnificent impromptu rebuttal of them, which I thought was extremely effective at the time. Ian Lang and various others also rebutted them. We now have the chance to modernise our law in a wider way than has been considered at stage 1. I apologise for not having contributed more to the proceedings thus far to put forward some of the ideas. I hope that the minister, who has said that he is open to suggestions, will hear further representations from me. The central issue in the debate is land attachment, which we should not consider in isolation. If we have parallel systems with one set of rules for pre-sequestration land attachment, one set for post-sequestration land attachment and a third set for repossession for secure creditors under the Mortgage Rights (Scotland) Act 2001, of which I have not had much experience, we will create anomalies and complexities. The committee needs to do more work on the recommendations that it made, on which the Executive has to follow up. Paragraph 62 of the committee's report states only that the Executive must bring about changes; it does not say what the changes should be or how they should be brought about. Paragraph 173 refers to providing a right of appeal, which is one way to proceed, and says that houses of significantly high value should not be exempt, which is absolutely right. I really did not understand Mr Sheridan's desire to exempt people who own houses worth £20 million. I would not have expected a millionaires charter to be drawn up by the Scottish Socialist Party. We have to acknowledge that the democratic system that we have requires protection for property rights. However, given that in the United States of America—the home of capitalism—the system exempts the family home, it would not be a catastrophe for enterprise if we did likewise. There is welcome consensus—the Tories agreed with the committee's somewhat opaque conclusions about land attachment. There can be a way forward. I suggest that the minister consider the procedure in section 40 of the Bankruptcy (Scotland) Act 1985, which sets out the factors that the court must consider before  there is a sale. They form a comprehensive range of factors. As someone who has tried to prevent the evictions of a great many people—sometimes successfully and sometimes not—I can say that section 40 provides the minister with a means by which he might flesh out the proposals of the committee.

rose—

Will the minister take an intervention?

I accept a great deal of what the minister is saying. However, the new land attachment will be a radical, new and powerful weapon in the hands of creditors. Adjudication was an imperfect tool because of the 10-year period that was required to perfect it. Has the Executive anticipated the extent to which land attachment will be used? In particular, will local authorities and agencies of the state use it to recover taxes and public debts? If so, tens of thousands of land attachments could result with the possibility of a high number of evictions. What information has the minister gleaned from public agencies? Has he asked them how they anticipate they will use this new and powerful tool?

We all agree with the need for more research and development investment in life sciences, but does the minister recall the lecture that Mr McKillop of AstraZeneca gave, in which he pointed out that, proportionately, the amount of research and development in life sciences in Europe is a small fraction of that in the United States? To be frank, we have fallen way behind.

If they do not, why is the member talking about us?

On 19 October last year, the leading daily newspaper in the north of Scotland, The Press and Journal , telephoned me for a quotation on Highlands and Islands Enterprise's announcement of the proposed £1 billion investment in the Highlands by a company called Forscot. The HIE press release said that that proposal would result in the creation of 6,000 jobs in the Highlands. That would, of course, be welcome news if the proposal is sound, but I chose to make no comment because I was not aware of the facts—members can call me old-fashioned if they like. Since then, I have made it my business to acquaint myself with the facts by going round many of the successful companies that are engaged in the timber and timber products sector in the north of Scotland and by speaking to representative bodies such as the United Kingdom Forest Products Association. Those companies included BSW Timber, which is receiving assistance from HIE to create the largest sawmill in the UK in Fort William, and Norbord, which is based just outside Inverness and which has supplied panel products for decades. They also included John Gordon & Son in Nairn, which is a family business, like many others in the timber sector. Such companies are the backbone and bedrock of a successful and essential part of the rural economy. They also contribute to the success of the construction sector by supplying the products that allow us to seize the opportunities, which did not exist a generation ago, that the construction sector has provided in Inverness.  Since that phone call, I have given some study to the Forscot plan. Based on my discussions with those businesses that I mentioned and with others, my view is that the proposal is not a sensible plan but a flawed plan. Quite simply, Forscot has miscalculated the amount of timber that would be required to make the plan work. Forscot is looking for 4 million tonnes a year, but only 6 million tonnes a year are cut and there ain't an extra 4 million tonnes. To invest public money in the proposal would, I believe, be foolish. When I met Mr Frette, who is one of Forscot's directors, he told me that, in theory at least, £150 million of public money might be available. No application has yet been made and, understandably, the enterprise company would not share with me what amounts it has discussed with Forscot. However, the point is that we want to promote sensible development. Bill Jamieson was right to point out that the word "sustainable" is popular with politicians because it has no fixed meaning. I suggest that the investment that we support can be either sensible or risky. Enterprise companies have a difficult job to do, in that they must both manage risks and take risks. However, they must do so with the benefit of the tools of rational analysis and evidence-based judgment that Adam Smith bequeathed to the nation. Therefore, my first recommendation is that, although Forscot, if it so wishes, should be allowed to spend £1,000 million—its lack of cash, unfortunately, is a slight difficulty—we should not invest £150 million, which could dual the A96 from Inverness to Nairn, in a proposal that, according to all the advice that I have received, is flawed.

Yes, I believe that the Forscot plan emanated from the Jaako-Pöyry report, which has been peddled for some years without success. There may be a need for an integrated pulpmill, paper mill, sawmill and energy plant, but I suspect that any such plant is more likely to be successfully created in China or South America. My point is that Forscot can invest £1,000 million if it wants to do so, but it should not be given £150 million of public money that would be better deployed. That is my judgment.  My second point is that the timber sector has a parallel opportunity in biomass. For example, a company in Invergordon called Balcas Limited, which is a well-established company that is led by Ernest Kidney and has a good track record in the north and south of Ireland, is planning to create a biomass project that certainly appears worthy of support. Mr Kidney will make a presentation to the Parliament and I hope that we will hear more about that project soon. My advice to the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning and his deputy is that the dash for biomass is too unconstrained. If too much of the available timber that is cut is used for biomass, we will see displacement, which would cause severe problems especially in the panel products industry. Given the grave concerns that exist, once the Forestry Commission report on the available cut in the public and private sectors is published, the ministers need to engage in thorough talks with the heads of companies such as BSW Timber, John Gordon & Son and James Jones & Sons. If we continue with the unconstrained dash for biomass, we could end up subsidising through renewables obligation certificates one sector at the expense of another viable sector—namely timber—which could be put at risk. I want to see more renewable energy from biomass. It is not that we should have no biomass industry but that the Executive should engage in discussions with the people who run Scotland's timber businesses to ensure that we get it right. At the moment, we have seen the dash for gas replaced by the dash for biomass subsidised through ROCs. That is wrong. I apologise for focusing on one specific area of the Scottish economy, but Alex Neil is much better at the generalities than I am so I will leave that to him. I assure the minister that, next May, the SNP-led Executive will seek to achieve the unrealised potential of our timber sector and timber products industry.

Does it?

The Scottish National Party welcomes the fact that business rates discrimination will eventually be removed, but does the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning accept that it would have been far better for business if higher rates for Scotland had not been introduced by Jack McConnell when he was Minister for Finance, with the support of the Liberal Democrats?

I have given the minister notice of my question. As he knows, one fracture leads to another. The SIGN guidelines state that patients  who have already suffered a fragility fracture should be a priority target. However, a Scotland-wide audit that was published in 2005 showed that, although in the Western infirmary in Glasgow, nearly everybody in that category received treatment, only one fifth—21 per cent—of such people in Aberdeen, Inverness, Livingston and East Kilbride received it. Does the minister agree that that is unacceptable and that the disparity in standards of treatment throughout Scotland desperately needs to be reduced?

So much for the Labour Party.

To ask the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body whether it will make a statement in respect of the work of the post-completion advisory group and, in particular, whether claims will be pursued by that group in relation to breach of contract by the construction managers in respect of their performance against their contractual obligations and whether Bovis will be sued for the Flour City losses. (S2O-9905)

Is the SPCB aware that Flour City landed a contract worth £7 million on the recommendation of Bovis, as construction manager, despite the fact that Flour City had no assets, no directors and no track record, and that it did not even have a bank account in Scotland? Does the SPCB agree that that was negligent; that part of that negligence involves a failure to procure a parent company guarantee or performance bond; that the claim, if not pursued, may be prescribed in August; and that, therefore, legal action to recover the £4 million that is owed should be taken before then? Is it not time to claim £4 million cashback on the Holyrood project?

I thank all MSPs and Parliament staff for their messages of sympathy and condolence over the past weeks, which have been of great comfort to me and the Ewing and McAdam families. To ask the First Minister what improvements have been made in respect of the diagnosis, treatment and prevention of osteoporosis; what further plans the Scottish Executive considers should now be made, and over what time period they will be implemented. (S2F-2233)

I thank the First Minister for that answer and for his kind comments. Yesterday, as the Parliament's representative, I attended a meeting of the European Union's international panel on osteoporosis. Delegates from other countries recognised that progress has been made in Scotland, not least by the fracture liaison unit in Glasgow and through the fracture audit work that has been carried out in Edinburgh and Aberdeen. I can tell members that delegates from England were particularly jealous, as well they might be on many counts. Does the First Minister accept that early identification, diagnosis and treatment of people who are at the highest risk of sustaining fragility fractures because of  osteoporosis should be a priority in our health care strategy? I have a further, specific question, of which I gave the First Minister advance notice this morning. Yesterday I learned that the Austrian presidency of the EU is making osteoporosis and the care of fragility fractures a priority. The issue will be discussed at an informal meeting of health ministers at the Council of Ministers next week. Given that one in two women and one in five men in Scotland who are over 50 face fragility fractures and the misery and diminished quality of life that they entail, does the First Minister agree that, like Cyprus, Latvia, France, Germany and Austria, the nation of Scotland should make the issue a priority for the hundreds of thousands of people whose lives could be improved immeasurably?

I thank the minister and his office for providing an advance copy of his statement this morning. I also congratulate the Scottish Executive on producing a ministerial statement that does not appear to have been leaked to the press and media in advance. That may be because it has nothing new to say. There are many projects about which I would like to raise questions, but I will confine myself to one: the Waverley station project. Is the minister's statement significant for what it does not say on that rather than for what it says? Up to this morning, the Executive was committed in principle to supporting work on the project in two phases, but the minister's statement referred only to the work in phase 1. That work will allow an increase from 24 trains per hour to 28, but professionals expect that extra capacity to be exhausted by 2012. Phase 2 is required if there is to be a further increase to 32 trains per hour, but this morning's statement excludes any reference to phases 1 and 2. They have been airbrushed out as though they were former members of Mr Stalin's politburo. Has the Scottish Executive quietly abandoned its plans for phase 2 of the Waverley station project? In view of the fact that new lines—the Airdrie to Bathgate line, the Borders rail link, the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine line and the Edinburgh airport rail link—are to be opened, when does the minister estimate that the increased capacity that will be provided by phase 1 of the Waverley station project will be exhausted? Does he agree that additional capacity can be provided almost immediately through cost-effective measures such as longer trains with selective door openings?

I congratulate Stewart Stevenson for raising this issue. I wish to highlight in my comments the section of his motion that points out that, welcome though the concessionary travel scheme is, it fails to cater for many people in Scotland. The people for whom it does not cater fall into two categories: first, those who have a mobility impairment and cannot access a bus service, either because they cannot walk to the bus stop or because they cannot get on the bus; and secondly, those who live in—largely, but not  exclusively—rural areas, where there is no bus service. That point was put to Tavish Scott at the recent meeting of the Local Government and Transport Committee to which David Davidson referred. It is fair to say that the minister was sympathetic, but his response was that Rome was not built in a day and that another worthy measure was being approved that day. We all agreed with that, but I hope that we can also agree—and that the minister will acknowledge in winding up—that the worthy scheme, welcome though it is, does not deal with those two categories of people. What can be done? Much is being done. In my constituency, the Badenoch and Strathspey Transport Company, which is run largely by the redoubtable Maggie Lawson, has been in charge of a successful scheme that has operated for a number of years. It is a community car scheme that fills gaps in public transport. It does not seek free car transport, but it wishes continuance of its subsidy so that the maximum fare is, say, £5. At the moment, the maximum fare is £7, which is for medical journeys, but people find that too expensive. Maggie Lawson has pointed out to me—I hope that the minister will cover this—that such schemes rely on local authority funding. Only four local authorities—Aberdeenshire Council, Moray Council, Western Isles Council and Dumfries and Galloway Council—allow concession-card holders free travel on community transport. Maggie Lawson understands that those four local authorities have agreed to continue funding the schemes using money that the minister has allocated for discretionary concessionary travel, but the discretionary travel budget has not been ring fenced and can therefore be used to provide any council service. That problem is not unique to concessionary travel—it occurs in road maintenance, too—but it is a problem that leaves concessionary transport entirely to chance. I also point out the growing tendency of people who would formerly have been transported by the ambulance service to be transported by other means which, again, are being provided through other funding arrangements. I understand that a patient transport service—PTS—is seeking efficient government funding to run pilot schemes in which it would arrange patients' transport. The voluntary sector, which would deliver the transport, is concerned that the scheme would be operated by the PTS but funded by others. That seems to be unnecessarily and unduly complicated and I hope that the minister will address that. Finally, nothing comes for free. The Executive may well ask where the funding will come from. As the minister knows, in my opinion the funding scheme is overgenerous in that the rate of return that the Confederation of Passenger Transport  negotiated in the deal of the century thus far is at the rate of 74p in the pound, whereas previously the subsidy varied from 44p to 60p—a steal, I think the minister will agree. I hope that there will be money left over from that to fund the measures that I have described today. I wait in suspense for the minister's response.

rose—

Will Mr Wallace give way?

I thank Jim Wallace for giving way. Will he make public the advice that he received in connection with the report that he mentions? That advice was quoted in Scotland on Sunday , yet it remains covered up and secret, like so much else.

rose—

The legal team acting for Shirley McKie in the civil litigation had three matters to prove: first, that print Y7 was not that of Shirley McKie; secondly, that print Q12 was not that of Marion Ross; and thirdly, that there had been a malicious prosecution. If the team failed to prove that, the minister must explain why taxpayers must pay £750,000 to Shirley McKie. During statements on the matter in Parliament last week, it was stated that 1,700 cases were checked to ascertain whether other errors had been made around the time of the Marion Ross murder investigation. No errors were found in those 1,700 cases. Nevertheless, two errors were made in the Marion Ross investigation. Stewart Stevenson, our resident mathematician, assures me that the chances of that occurring naturally are one in 1,444,150. Alex Neil and Nicola Sturgeon raised that issue, but neither the minister nor Mr Purvis provided an answer. If the minister and Mr Purvis regard the Taylor HMIC report as an  inquiry, they should note that paragraph 9.9 of that report says: "The experts were not asked to explain why in their view SCRO experts were mistaken ... They were asked to assist HMIC in the inspection process and not to undertake an enquiry." My question for the minister is simple. Has any inquiry that has taken place considered why the misidentifications occurred?

I would be happy to give way to the minister, if she wants to answer my question.

I ask members to put themselves in the position of Iain McKie, whose daughter faced charges of perjury and a trial in the High Court. After she had been acquitted it was discovered that the state had withheld evidence. Last week I asked the Lord Advocate whether evidence had been withheld. I knew that it had been withheld and so did he, but he failed to mention that to the Parliament. The defence team never received evidence of a blind testing that was carried out eight days after the original misidentification occurred. The fact of that blind testing was concealed from Shirley McKie's defence team and was not mentioned by any of the three SCRO witnesses, who swore on oath that they were telling the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth. The fact of that blind testing was revealed by the Mackay report, which was provided to civil servants. Of course, the Minister for Justice and her predecessor say that they never saw the report. However, they were told what was in the report five years ago. That was a cover-up.

No. I do not give way to bit players. If the minister wants to try to answer some of the questions—

On 22 June 2000, the then Deputy First Minister and Minister for Justice said that the print was not that of Shirley McKie. Five years later, lawyers acting on Cathy Jamieson's instructions had still not admitted that fact. They did not even admit in the pleadings a matter that had been stated in this nation's Parliament five years earlier. That is outrageous. If every civil court action in Scotland was conducted in such a way there would be no justice system, because the system would grind to a halt. What else is the minister covering up?

Will the minister give way?

For much of the past six years in the Parliament, I have consistently argued that Scotland's road users have been fleeced. I am delighted that at long last the Executive has admitted that that is so, by taking action to scrap the tolls on the Erskine bridge. However, can the minister explain as a point of principle why the three bridges should be treated differently from roads, given that, without a shadow of a doubt, each of them is part of the national road network? People in Scotland do not pay for using a particular road, so why should they be penalised for where they live or work and be required to pay tolls on two, but not three, of the bridges? If he has scrapped tolls for one bridge, how can he argue consistently that they should remain on the other two? We now know that people in Fife will  continue to pay, while people in Faifley will not. People in Dunfermline will pay, but people in Dumbarton will not. People in Kilmacolm will pay, but people in Kirkcaldy will not—or vice versa. [ Laughter. ]

I always knew that I should listen to you more, Presiding Officer. Can we add to the West Lothian question in Scotland the Kirkcaldy conundrum? Can the minister explain why he now says that he has agreed that we must start work on a replacement crossing today? On 17 November, my colleague Tricia Marwick suggested to the First Minister that "the work on the case for a new Forth crossing" must begin now. The First Minister responded that "That is a particularly daft suggestion and we will not take it up."— [ Official Report , 17 November 2005; c 20862.]  Why has the Executive taken up the suggestion today? Finally—

I do not want to disappoint members, but finally—

On the important technical aspects, which Alastair Andrew explained to me and my colleagues last week, when will the Executive be in a position to make a final decision? It has been suggested to us that the reports to which the minister referred on corrosion and dehumidification may not in fact be ready until 2013—the year before HGVs will not be able to cross the Forth.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. This morning, when I was listening to "Good Morning Scotland" and reading that excellent journal The Courier in order to keep abreast of the news, I discovered what turned out to be the precise contents of today's ministerial statement. It appears that, once again, the Executive has breached the rules that govern the release of information to the Parliament. Given the First Minister's laughter, it would seem that he thinks that this is a matter for amusement and jocularity. Is that the view of the Presiding Officer? Can any sanction be imposed for the Executive's serial offending in this fashion?

rose—

: On a further point of order, Presiding Officer. It is not my wish that Parliament should be denied the opportunity to hear the statement now. It seems that some members were not aware that the Minister for Transport and Telecommunications had been good enough to admit that there has been a breach—the First Minister certainly seemed to be unaware of that. We do not wish to deprive Parliament of the opportunity to hear the statement and we want the opportunity to ask questions. For that reason, and that reason alone, we do not propose that the statement should not be heard. However, I ask again, are there any sanctions at all for those old lags who cannot learn from their previous conduct?

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive considers that expansion plans at Scotland's three biggest airports are at risk from a takeover of BAA and, if so, what representations it has made to Her Majesty's Government and the Civil Aviation Authority. (S2F-2126)

It is not who owns the airports that counts; it is the investment in them. Surely the First Minister is aware that any bidder is likely to be interested solely or primarily in BAA's London airports. Will he therefore tell Parliament whether he has yet met with BAA or the potential main bidder, Ferrovial, and, if not, who has? Given that the Department for Transport has said that it will do nothing whatever to intervene in the process, who will articulate Scotland's voice? Will it be the Chancellor of the Exchequer or the Secretary of State for Transport, or do they take an interest in transport matters only for the duration of parliamentary by-elections in Scotland?

The minister made a point about parents' powers. This morning, I received an e-mail from a parent who pointed out that, in the secondary school in Inverness that her child attends, it is possible to take only two advanced higher courses this year—Gaelic and maths. Her child wishes to pursue a medical or veterinary career. What power will that parent have under the bill? How will it ensure that there is a wider choice of advanced highers in Inverness and the Highlands?

My questions are to the Lord Advocate, and they were intimated to him in writing earlier today. Will he confirm that, prior to the trial of Shirley McKie for perjury, an independent verification, or blind test, was carried out at the behest of either the SCRO or the prosecution services to check the accuracy of the identification by the SCRO of the fingerprint or fingerprints as belonging to Shirley McKie? Was that blind testing carried out prior to Shirley McKie's trial for perjury? Will he confirm that the Crown Office knew of the blind testing and that it was informed of its outcome before the trial? Will he confirm that that evidence was withheld from the Shirley McKie defence team, and was not disclosed prior to her trial?

I congratulate Andrew Welsh on raising an extremely important issue with a great deal of passion, and at the right time, because there is time to deal with it. I circulated a copy of the motion to all the community councils in my constituency and received a great many responses. Inverness south community council, which does not yet have a community hall, pointed out that heaping more charges on it would deter it from creating a community hall. The association of Cairngorms community councils made the point that a number of the committees that run halls do not have charitable status. If the minister is looking to extend the  exemption scheme, I hope that she will take account of the fact that not all community halls have charitable status, which, as I understand it, means tax clearance from the Inland Revenue. Boat of Garten community council has just received money from the lottery to establish a hall, and it is trying to raise the final £80,000 to achieve its aim. It is already struggling with strict requirements in relation to health and safety, public entertainment licences and the provisions of the Disability Discrimination Act 1995, as well as the cost of heating. The water charges could well be the last straw. Iain Murray of the community council points out that in the average hall, water demands are confined most of the time to little more than tea making and the use of toilets. The use of the water has to be considered; I hope that the minister will cover that. Lochaber federation of village halls points out that it already has cash-flow problems and that increased rates could lead to the closure of many village halls, as Andrew Welsh was quite right to point out. Kincraig community hall committee points out that it runs a wide variety of events, such as health and fitness classes, youth clubs, children's dance classes, children's football, the partially sighted bowling club, volleyball, yoga and pipe band practices. Some of those activities will cease because the hall committee cannot afford to pay the rates. I am passionate about this subject, because community halls—many of which are in small areas—provide a focal point for the community at a time when the post office and the petrol station are under threat in rural Scotland, which has suffered at the hands of successive Governments. Although I am pleased that the minister is here to respond—I have great respect for her and the obvious sincerity that she brings to the task—and that the Deputy Presiding Officer is here, for whom I have nothing but praise, not one Scottish Socialist Party member, Labour back bencher or Liberal Democrat member is present. I do not often say something when members are not here, because there might be reasons for it, but I cannot think of any reason why there are no Labour, Lib Dem or SSP members here to discuss an issue that is so crucial to communities. I have covered more territory than I expected to cover in such a short space of time by the expedient of speaking extremely quickly. I look forward to the minister's response.

There is no such thing as a perfect tax that everyone will support and believe to be fair. It is reasonable to say that the council tax per se is not unfair, but because of the high level that it has now reached, its unfairness is becoming increasingly manifest year on year. It would be better if the Conservatives could acknowledge that they raised the council tax substantially after it was introduced, and if Labour members and their Liberal junior colleagues could acknowledge that they, too, have raised the council tax far higher than is fair. That is why we are here today, and I think that there is a common recognition of that fact. Indeed, the First Minister himself has said from time to time—by implication, if not expressly—that the current system will not do. Otherwise, I guess that we would not have the Burt commission, although there is no doubt an element of playing for time is involved in that review.

I will not give way yet. My colleague, John Swinney, hit the button when he explained why the system is unfair. It is unfair to pensioners, to people on low incomes and to people on fixed incomes. There is absolutely no doubt that that is the case, as John Swinburne also pointed out, and the question is what is to be done about it. It is reasonable to say that there has been an awful lot of point scoring in today's debate. It has been the fifth debate on the  matter, and I am glad that I have not participated in all five. I doubt very much that I would have managed to persuade any of my colleagues on the SSP benches, with whom I have very little, if anything, in common. The problem faces the people who come to my surgeries week in, week out, complaining about the burden of meeting their council tax bills and about the level of the council tax. If the answer, as Mr McConnell and his Labour colleagues contend, is to reform the council tax, that just will not work, because it is now too high. The reason why reform will not work is that just because someone lives in a big house, that does not mean that they have a high income, particularly in the case of widows and widowers. That factor was one of the prime reasons why Phil Gallie played such a part in persuading his party to end domestic rates back in 1985-86. The plight of the widow or widower on a fixed low income in a large house is why reform of the council tax will not work.

That is a general point, but it ignores the fact that a plethora of taxes seek to tax capital, such as capital gains tax, inheritance tax and tax on spending. There are a variety of taxes, and any responsible party will always have a variety of taxes—that is not a contentious point. If the Greens were to ask me for some advice, I would suggest that they would be best to go away, preferably to a darkened room, and come out with some detailed proposals that we can examine. That would be very good.

No. John Swinney put forward detailed, thorough proposals on a local income tax. Since he published those detailed proposals, nobody has laid a finger on them. [ Laughter. ] That is true. I note the laughter from those on the Labour back benches who chose to take a certain approach in their speeches in the debate. I was not going to say this, but as Bristow Muldoon laughed, I will say it for the first time. We were told that we all had to raise our game when we came to this building, but I have listened to him and others make cheap ad hominem attacks in speech after speech, in which they have played the man, not the ball. I will leave that to them and get back to the debate.  We have put forward detailed local income tax plans: it is a matter of fact that those are serious, thought-out proposals. I will attack the last cheap argument that has been used against the SNP, which is that we have not produced a bill. Forgive me if I am wrong, but is there in the Parliament, as it is currently constituted, a majority for local income tax that would result in our not just sounding off about but delivering change? No, there is not. That was pointed out by Mr Arbuckle. He said that it is important that we have the parliamentary majority to deliver change. That is what is important. We can have as many debates between now and the Scottish general election next May as we like, but we know what the outcome will be. That is why Tommy Sheridan's bill is a complete and utter waste of time and why the SNP, which has a convincing, thought-out, worked-out, sensible and practical proposal that will benefit pensioners and other people on low and fixed incomes, is the right way to go for Scotland. I am confident that we will win support for our proposal.

To ask the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body whether it has (a) sought and (b) obtained legal advice on whether the construction managers in the Holyrood project are legally responsible for the losses, or any part thereof, arising from the award of a trade package  to Flour City Architectural Metals (UK) Limited and the subsequent non-performance of the obligations under that package; what the present estimated losses are arising from that contract, and whether the SPCB will make a statement to the Parliament on this matter. (S2O-8980)

That response managed to avoid giving out any information whatever. I congratulate Mr MacAskill on his debut. To be serious, however, I know that the corporate body is aware that this was a case of a contract worth £7 million being awarded, on Bovis's recommendation, to a company with assets of £2, no directors in the United Kingdom and no work experience, and which subsequently went into liquidation. It is a company that lied in its application form, whose bid was non-compliant and which asked for an up-front payment of a seven-figure sum before it had done any work, did no work at all and was paid more than £1 million. Does the corporate body agree that, while the public like this building, they are still angry about the fiasco of the process? People have been identified as legally responsible for failures by the Auditor General in his Flour City report, and the public, like me, want cash back. Are not Mr MacAskill and his colleagues in the SPCB concerned that a delay of more than four years since Flour City went into liquidation is in danger of prejudicing recovery and that a perception is arising that that is because the SPCB wishes to sweep the matter under the carpet?

And on buses.

I warmly congratulate Jackie Baillie on securing the debate. I also congratulate—as she does in her motion—Enable and a consortium of other charities in Scotland, including Down's Syndrome Scotland and Alzheimer Scotland, on the work that has been carried out to introduce the thistle travel card scheme. That work has been completed in a relatively short time. According to the information that I have, approximately 280,000 thistle travel cards have been distributed. That figure shows how successful the scheme has become, but I cannot help but note that although the figure is substantial, it must represent a fairly small fraction of the total number of people who may wish to have, and would benefit from, a thistle travel card to help them to get about and perhaps to have more confidence about getting on public transport and enjoying the liberties and benefits that access to public transport can bring. There is not much point in repeating what Jackie Baillie said, although I would underscore the points that she made. I will make some supplementary points. First, there is a lack of awareness in rural communities of schemes such as the thistle travel card scheme. I hope that all reasonable and sensible steps can be taken by the minister to help that scheme to be further promoted in rural areas. Secondly, there is a lack of access to public transport in rural areas and that is a serious problem. My third and principal point concerns  how the thistle travel card scheme will interrelate with the national concessionary travel scheme and, in particular, with the smart-card technology that is intended to be used when the national scheme is introduced on 1 April this year. Ideally, the scheme should combine the smart card with the thistle card. It seems to be logical that the smart card should have the thistle card logo on it as well as the data capture that is contained in the smart card. Otherwise, people who have disabilities and who will qualify under the national concessionary scheme will have to produce two cards—a smart card and the thistle card. I know from the material that I obtained from the Scottish Executive under the Freedom of Information Act 2000—I know that the minister will not mind my saying this—that the Executive was a bit slow in getting off the mark to deal with the practical nitty-gritty problems that arise. Although the announcement that there was to be a national concessionary travel scheme was made in December 2004, it was not until 24 March 2005 that Debbie Sheldon, the project manager of the scheme, asked local authorities for details of the up-to-date scheme. It is odd that the Executive did not have, for example, details of the local authorities' current disabled eligibility criteria when the national concessionary travel scheme details were announced. The task of producing smart cards for 1.2 million pensioners and hundreds of thousands of people who have disabilities—whether it is a learning, mental or physical disability—is massive. There are concerns that that task will not be completed to its optimum level by 1 April. I hope that the minister agrees that it would be desirable to have one card and I would be grateful if he would address that point in his closing remarks, if possible. The debate will help to promote awareness of the scheme. Perhaps that, more than anything else, is the important benefit that Jackie Baillie has secured for all those who could benefit from the scheme in the future. I congratulate her on introducing the debate.

Given that production in the timber industry in Scotland will increase from about 6,000,000m 3 to 8,000,000m 3  or 9,000,000m 3  per annum, does the minister agree that that will require a far greater supply of suitably qualified and skilled people in harvesting, saw-milling and processing? Does she further agree that the Scottish School of Forestry, which is situated at Balloch near Inverness, can provide those skills, but that it needs more resources? How much, if any, of the £1.5 million that has been described as a Highland locational premium will be made available to the Scottish School of Forestry to enable it to take on more students and provide more skills training, which will demonstrably be needed and which we all wish it to do. Finally, will she join me in meeting the staff and having a pleasant day out at the School of Forestry at Balloch?

When the minister is considering proposed changes to the format of public planning inquiries and giving reporters inquisitorial powers, does he agree that those powers should extend to enabling reporters to consider issues such as whether a local monopoly may be established by the likes of Tesco, which has three stores in Inverness and is applying for a fourth? The reporter's role in such inquiries should extend to considering whether a local monopoly would be created that would be extremely damaging to smaller independent retailers. In Inverness, their future seems to me to be under serious threat.

Contrary to what Helen Eadie said, a decision cannot be made next month. Lawrence Marshall, the convener of FETA, is reported in The Scotsman as saying that although the cable investigations will be reported to the minister next month—as the minister has agreed—it will not be clear until next year whether repair options will be pursued or a replacement bridge will be constructed. It should be stressed in a debate such as this, in which there is a lot of heat, but not a lot of light flickering at the end of the tunnel, that the timescale for any transport project in Scotland is horrendous. The timescales are unnecessarily long and should be focused on in this debate. Lawrence Marshall stated that it could take up to 11 years to complete a bridge. If the warnings that the bridge must be closed to freight traffic by 2013 are correct, we already face the certainty that freight traffic will not be able to cross the firth. That will cause devastation and environmental damage, so I am pleased by the surprising but welcome news that the Green party is now in favour of a replacement bridge. We must address the timing of construction and transport projects in Scotland. Projects take so long because of what I call the compliance bureaucracy. There is no doubt that if a new method of crossing is decided on, we will rightly need every type of expert report under the sun—engineering, hydrological, geological and environmental reports will all be necessary. Several people from RSPB Scotland will have to be hired. We will have to get mollusc and worm reports and we will have to consider the interests of dolphins and whales—[ Interruption. ] I kid you not. All of that will happen, which is why Mr  Marshall said that it will take 11 years to complete a bridge. According to the Labour party, Mr Marshall and his colleagues have ruled out a tunnel, but Mr Roy Pederson, a transport expert, writes in The Scotsman today that a tunnel should not be hastily ruled out. He said: "Since 1983 more than 25 sub-sea road tunnels have been built in Scandinavia" at a cost of £10 million per mile. Therefore, a three-lane 10-mile tunnel would cost about £100 million. I do not know whether he is right—

Christine May has made her points. Mr Pederson may be right, but I know that FETA has ruled out a tunnel. However, as the minister said, it is for the Government, not FETA, to decide whether there should be a replacement and if so, what it should be. I am quite sure—

No. I am sorry—I have very little time. I am quite sure that the minister agrees that it would be utterly irresponsible and negligent not to investigate fully the possibility of building a tunnel, especially if it were to cost anything close to £100 million, although a tunnel would extend even further the 11-year period that Mr Marshall said it would take to build a new bridge. That suggests that successive Governments have been negligent in failing to do as the Scottish National Party has advocated and plan for a new bridge crossing. I know that the minister takes seriously the timing of transport procurement projects. However, we must accept that the costs of the compliance bureaucracy and the green tape in which we are fankled are unacceptable and unworkable. If the worst fears about the structural state of the Forth bridge are borne out, the price tag that is attached might seriously be that no freight will be able to cross the Firth of Forth.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it considers that levels of investment in improved road and rail links for Inverness since 1999 have been fair or sufficient. (S2O-8720)

The minister is a notoriously observant chap, so he will know that Inverness is Scotland's fastest-growing city, but it lacks dual carriageway links and has a single-track rail link to Perth. Is he aware that a ring road is planned? The Executive has also promised Glasgow a ring road—the M74—for £500 million, and Aberdeen has been promised one for £300 million to £400 million. The Executive has also committed a round figure to Inverness's ring road: zero. Is he aware that it has been suggested that Tesco should, in respect of planning gain, contribute £13 million to Inverness's ring road? Inverness has no Scottish Executive, but it has a Tesco. Is Inverness the city that Jack and Tavish forgot?

Does Jamie Stone agree that the solution to the problem has nothing to do with the air route development fund and everything to do with the Executive's commitment to working on and implementing the Highlands and Islands transport partnership's proposal, which aims to reduce flights in the Highlands by 30 per cent? Does he feel ashamed to be part of an Executive that has so manifestly failed to deliver on its pledge to his constituents?

It is right to say that the Greens will not say what they would do. However, given Ming Campbell's promise that there should be more environmental taxes, will Mr Arbuckle say whether aviation tax should be one of those?

Will the Greens be candid? It seems to me that they are saying that air travel is bad. Do they think that it should be banned, restricted or taxed and how would they tax it? Will they come clean or have they been Blairised?

I believe there will be considerable consensus in today's debate. The Scottish National Party's starting point is that Scotland is a nation and we wish our people to be able to take part in the world of nations, which means that we must be able to travel internationally. The SNP has always taken the view that—as far as is possible, practical and environmentally viable—Scotland should have direct air connections with the rest of the world. Of course, our nearest neighbours in England—if I may mention them—are also very important to us in the SNP, as everyone knows. Many of our  best candidates hail from England. Our air connections with the fine country of England are valuable, not least to people in my constituency of Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber, for whom retention of the Gatwick and Heathrow air links is extremely important. However, that is a matter for another day. The SNP also believes that aviation is a key driver towards our prime target of achieving economic growth. We believe—this ties in, I think, with the figures that the minister quoted—that the development of aviation is hugely beneficial for the economy. First, it creates a great number of jobs in each of Scotland's airports. Secondly, those jobs tend to be of high quality. Thirdly, it plays a crucial role in attracting visitors to Scotland. Perhaps the most ingrained underlying tourism problem in many parts of Scotland outwith the major cities is that jobs have tended to be seasonal. Businesses that operate for only six to eight months of the year have to pay all their overheads from the revenue that is generated in that period. I would like Inverness, for example, to be able to attract visitors from every part of Europe, as well as from among our friends in England, so that we can transform a seasonal industry into a 12-months-a-year industry. The effect of that would be to create higher-quality jobs, security of employment, more opportunities for business, less uncertainty and more stability. Generally, it would be good news all round. Although the air route development fund has in our view been a good and effective investment, it plays only a relatively small part in the overall aviation industry in Scotland. The minister quoted the figure of approximately 1.4 million passengers a year on flights for which assistance has come from the ARDF. However, he has been fair in pointing out that that figure should be set against the total figure of 20 million passengers a year. A relatively small proportion of the total benefit of aviation has stemmed from the ARDF. Nonetheless, it has made an important contribution.

The ARDF has certainly played a part. The growth in aviation has been inexorable, with low-cost flights arising from the early 1990s, according to figures that I have studied. Conservative members seem to be pleased with that, but the rise of low-cost flights was not down to the Conservative Government. It was companies such as Ryanair that made a huge contribution to the economy of Scotland.

I am always the first to acknowledge the robust contribution that Phil Gallie plays in every debate in which he participates, but I point out to him that if Scotland had the fair, lower corporation tax regime that Mr Mather has called for, Ryanair might still be based in Scotland as well as operating from Scotland. That is the sort of economic gain that Mr Cameron spurns but which we would like to see.

Mr Sheridan will be disappointed. I am not sure why he expected me to agree with him. It has not happened yet, and will not happen this morning. Aviation is an industry, and therefore every route must operate viably and effectively, but there is a problem with costs for carriers in airports. Barbara Cassani, who was the managing director of Go, says in her book that those costs led her to choose the east midlands over Scotland. We need perspective: airports are expensive to run; they require security, fire services and a great many other facilities to protect passengers and to provide the necessary service. However, costs must remain competitive with our neighbours south of the border and with our friends in other countries in Europe. The SNP appreciates that each airport in Scotland is different and that each has benefited to differing extents from the ARDF. Prestwick recently received a substantial benefit from the fund, whereas Glasgow did not. There was comment in the press recently on the loss of the Brussels connection from Glasgow. That was attributed, in part, to the ARDF subsidy to the connection at Prestwick. We must always bear it in mind that a subsidy to one company, albeit that it might be largely for marketing purposes, could be a competitive disadvantage to other companies. The SNP would like a review of the operation of the ARDF; it is time for an audit of the scheme, although we do not prejudge the outcome of any review. I hope that the minister will, in concluding, agree that this is a sensible moment to announce a review. I am sure that the Local Government and Transport Committee would be happy to co-operate if the minister authorises a review. There are strong arguments for extending the ARDF to  air freight to allow it to be applied more flexibly. BAA has argued that it should also be applied to less frequent and seasonal services. The SNP would also like an end to the ludicrous private finance initiative deal that was used to build Inverness airport. It was foisted on the management there by new Labour, and it is so bad that a building that cost £6 million to build will have to be bought out for £34 million. Some idiot in the then Scottish Office based the return on the contract on the number of passengers, so the more successful the airport became, the wealthier the merchant bankers became. That is not because the contract was a PFI contract—although we criticise the PFI system for being more expensive than it need be. It was a duff contract because it was a duff deal. We wait with interest to see whether the Executive will own up and tell us which minister was responsible. My colleague Shona Robison, who cannot be here this morning, has lobbied extremely hard for the ARDF to be provided for routes from Dundee airport. Oban airport has been extremely successfully operated by Mr Paul Keegan, and I hope that he will be able to take it further forward. The minister touched on the environment and dealt effectively with interventions from our Green friends. I also argue, as the minister did, that for one country to act unilaterally would be absurd, self-defeating and utterly ineffective. The imposition of taxation on Scottish airports and operators would not reduce the number of flights—it would merely displace them elsewhere. Action should be taken at European level. I do not wish us to return, as the Greens apparently do, to the days when air travel was for rich people.

That is the most improbable statistic that I have heard for a long time. If the Greens were honest, they would just say that they want to tax each passenger £50 or £100 on every flight, that they want to rip up every runway in Scotland and turn it into an allotment and that they want to rip up every motorway and turn it into a cycle path. The Greens would be less hypocritical if they themselves did not use air travel, but I recall meeting their former leader at Glasgow airport one day. In conclusion, the SNP will support the Executive's motion, and I hope that the Executive will support us. There is a common vision for the huge benefits of aviation to our country, and the SNP is not at all coy in saying so. I move amendment S2M-3837.2, to insert at end:  "further acknowledges the importance of aviation in the prime aim of growing the Scottish economy; urges the Executive to seek to remove barriers to further success in aviation policy; calls on the Executive to audit and review the ARDF and its efficacy thus far, with a view to refining and widening its terms, and to consider, for example, its extension to air freight traffic and to less frequent and seasonal services, and urges the Executive to work with Scotland's airports and carriers to deliver a competitive economic environment, which should include the provision of appropriate and sufficient infrastructure for our airports."

The minister has said that she has set the objective. Scottish Water says that the cost of the investment programme will be £3.3 billion, while the Water Industry Commission for Scotland says that the figure will be £2.1 billion. Obviously, both of them cannot be right. Is it not the case that the Executive has sat on the sidelines, leaving matters entirely to the regulator? If the sums are wrong, as I believe they are, will not that have momentous consequences for the next seven years, because there will be insufficient money to achieve the Executive's objective and areas such as Badenoch and Strathspey will have no new houses whatever, with the catastrophic consequences that that will bring about?

Does the First Minister agree that the primary reason for our having high rail fares in Scotland is the high cost of running the rail network? Does he recall the evidence of the Office of the Rail Regulator to the Parliament a year ago that Network Rail currently operates at 31 per cent inefficiency? Does he agree that we should accept the critique of Janette Anderson, the chief executive of First Engineering, who said that the  necessary process of improvements, which Pauline McNeill mentioned, was "unbelievably slow and cumbersome"? Does he accept that that critique, far from being idiocy, was spot on?

The SNP has begun this year by addressing an issue that is of concern to a great number of people in Scotland: the burden that the council tax places on many people in our society, not least our senior citizens and those on fixed incomes. We know that the council tax has risen substantially since it was introduced by the Tories. The Conservatives increased it substantially and the Labour Government has increased it even more. The impact of that is that, in all but five local authorities in Scotland, the average council tax band—band D—now exceeds £1,000 a year. If we are honest and can leave the political party trenches for a moment, we all know in our heart of hearts that the burden that that places on a huge number of our citizens is, simply, unfair. In what I thought was a robust and coherent performance this morning, John Swinney focused on the immediate priority of what we would do about the current local government settlement if we were in Government just now. He identified—using figures that have been approved by the Finance Committee—a method by which we can freeze council tax figures now. That is something  that people such as Bristow Muldoon should give some credence to.

Bristow Muldoon has had his say. That is what people in Scotland seek from this Parliament and the Scottish Government. More than 10 years ago, Nicky Fairbairn said that Scotland was fortunate not to have a Government. Looking at the performance of the Government that we have, I can begin to understand what he meant.

Certainly not. John Swinney also recognised that, although local authorities are required to make savings of more than 3 per cent, the same requirement does not apply to the Executive. In his response to that point, the minister showed all the poise and assurance of a man overboard floundering in the sea, so I will throw him a lifebelt. Transport Scotland has just been created, which is a new quango. We do not know exactly how many employees it will have but a figure of around 200 has been mentioned—perhaps the minister could give us an accurate figure. Plainly, it is a huge and potentially valuable resource. However, I have a question for the minister. If around 200 or more civil service jobs have been created, how many fewer civil servants will there be in the Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning Department of the Scottish Executive? I safely predict that the minister does not know, although he should do, because he is the Deputy Minister for Finance, Public Service Reform and Parliamentary Business. Rather than recognising the reality, which is that the council tax is a huge burden on our senior citizens and those on low and fixed incomes and has increased by 55 per cent, the Executive's amendment talks about the steps that local government can take to "maintain downward pressure". If what we have seen—a 55 per cent increase—is downward pressure, goodness knows what it would be like if there were even higher increases. I was interested to note that, in response to the crucial question of the £85 million gap that the Finance Committee identified, the minister said that he did not necessarily accept the figure. I think that we deserve better from a minister in response to a considered piece of work by a committee of this Parliament that has received advice from Professor Midwinter, which shows that there is a gap of £85 million. Instead, what does the minister say? Does he say, "Yes, there is a gap," or "No, there is no gap"? No. He says: "It  ain't necessarily so." Ira Gershwin is a good songwriter, but he should not be writing the script for the Deputy Minister for Finance, Public Service Reform and Parliamentary Business in the Scottish Executive. When a minister with responsibility for finance comes before this Parliament, he should be able to tell us where the money has gone. It was Deep Throat, in the film, "All the President's Men", who gave Woodward and Bernstein the excellent advice: "Follow the money." We should expect George Lyon to realise that that is advice that it is incumbent on him to take. However, he does not know were the money has gone. It is awfully sad that we have not heard an acknowledgement that the local income tax policy is a coherent alternative. I know that the Deputy Minister for Finance, Public Service Reform and Parliamentary Business perhaps supports the local income tax policy, as do his Liberal Democrat colleagues, because they tell us so—and we have to take that at face value. However, it remains to be seen whether the support that the Liberal Democrats give to the local income tax policy is as enthusiastic as the support that they give to their leadership. The good news is that we will not have long to wait. Mr Kennedy may have been unfairly voted off in the first round of the political version of the Anne Robinson show, "The Weakest Link". Perhaps, minister, "You are the weakest link."

I always thought that Stewart Stevenson was numerate. Does the minister consider that the fact that cohabitants' rights upon death will apply only where there is no will is consistent with the Executive's aim of protecting the vulnerable? Especially if two cohabitants have fallen out in the period shortly before one of them dies, there is a great incentive for one to exclude the other from their will. The bill will not provide the necessary protection, because a cohabitant could be excluded entirely by a will. That is completely different from the situation between a husband and wife—a surviving spouse has indefeasible legal rights, which take priority under the Succession (Scotland) Act 1964, which Pauline McNeill mentioned. The wife has the protection of being entitled to a house, up to a fairly substantial value, and to a cash sum, but a surviving cohabitant will have no such right. The current system for winding up estates has clear rules on intestacy, with various benefits. The law sets out a scheme under which estates are wound up. However, the bill will create a discretionary award, not a rules-based payment, which means that the sheriff will have to determine how much is payable, which will introduce uncertainty. Where uncertainty arises in the winding-up of an estate, it has at least the potential to encourage and generate acrimony. I take this brief opportunity to point out yet again that the bill does not do what it says on the legal tin.

I understand fully the minister's position; I have understood it all along. The debate has been useful because it has allowed some clarification of just how minimal the so-called protection that will be afforded to vulnerable females, in particular, will be. I did not state that there could be a payment only when there was hardship. Amendment 23 states that there could be a payment in two circumstances: when there was hardship or where there were children. The Child Support Act 1991 provides an obligation for aliment that will continue irrespective of the provisions of the bill—and rightly so. Those who argued that amendment 23 would somehow affect that are entirely wrong and confused about the amendment. If there is confusion in the chamber about what the bill will do and what protection it will provide, how can we expect people in the country to be aware that, when they are told that they will get legal protection—the minister has repeatedly used the word "safeguard"—that protection will probably relate to a few sticks of furniture and a small amount of cash, rather than the full rights that are afforded to man and wife through the institution of marriage, which, if I were a feminist, I would certainly support? In Scotland, marriage fully protects the vulnerable female, whereas the provisions that we are debating would cause great uncertainty and confusion. If any of us went to any street in Scotland and asked people whether they were aware that we are doing this, I suspect that fewer than one in 100 of them would have the slightest idea. I seek leave to withdraw amendment 22.  Amendment 22, by agreement, withdrawn.  [Amendment 46 not moved.]

I have listened with interest to all the speeches. Very few members agreed with me, but that is not a unique experience. However, some members ranged far beyond the specific scope of my amendments—the amendments in the next group are perhaps rather more important—which I lodged in an attempt to provide clarity for the courts. We should remember that it is our job to make law that is clear and certain. If we fail to do that, we might end up asking the courts to achieve the impossible. That said, I believe that we have had an interesting debate that has been mostly on topic. Having achieved that, I seek, with the leave of members, to withdraw amendment 16.  Amendment 16, by agreement, withdrawn.  [Amendment 17 not moved.]   Amendment 18 moved—[Cathy Jamieson].  Amendment 18A not moved.  Amendment 18 agreed to.

The intention behind the setting up of the provision for financial claims of former cohabitants is set out in the Executive's explanatory notes to the bill, which state: "On the break up of a ... cohabiting relationship, one party may find themselves in a position of financial vulnerability". Like other members, I was struck by the eloquence and passion of Susan Deacon's speech in the debate on group 14, but we need to go to the nub of the issue. What does the Executive claim will be achieved if the current words on the page remain in the bill when it becomes law? In the stage 1 debate, the Deputy Minister for Justice said: "We need to introduce greater certainty, fairness and clarity to the law, and to protect the legally vulnerable when a relationship ends."— [ Official Report , 15 September 2005; c 19116.]  The aim of the bill is to protect the legally vulnerable. However, paragraph 193 of the Justice 1 Committee's stage 1 report points out that the committee, after doing its job thoroughly, could find no reference in the bill to financial vulnerability. The bill does not do what it says on the tin—it does not contain any provision to the effect that vulnerability is to be the justification for a financial claim. Instead, the bill makes it clear that equity is to be the justification for a financial claim. Indeed, sections 19 and 20 provide the only two classes of rights that cohabitees will have, which relate to household goods such as furniture and furnishings and money or property that is derived through a housekeeping allowance. It is important—especially in the light of what Susan Deacon said a moment ago—to clarify what protection will not be afforded to cohabitants. That was covered by Hugh Henry at stage 2. A vulnerable woman who splits from her partner after 10 or 20 years, with children, will have no claim whatever against the matrimonial home if it is in her partner's name. Under the provisions of the bill, she will have no claim whatever to the pension of her male partner, if he has a valuable  pension right; she will have no claim whatever to any car, caravan or other vehicle; and she will have no claim whatever to any securities—any stocks or shares. She will also, perhaps, have no claim to her male partner's domestic pet. Members may argue—as Susan Deacon did with great passion, and I agreed with her sentiments—that we are providing protection for vulnerable women; however, we are not. We are doing the exact opposite. The minister admitted to the committee that there will be no protection for the female partner and that she will have no claim against a house in the male's name; no claim against the male's pension; no claim against stocks and shares; and no claim against money except in very limited circumstances. How much would a claim for the average household furniture be worth? Second-hand furniture is worth little—we are talking about a sale value of a few hundred pounds. I agree with the sentiments that Susan Deacon expressed and I admire the aplomb with which she expressed them. I agree also with the sentiments that Pauline McNeill, Mary Mulligan and others expressed at stage 2. However, the bill will not protect the vulnerable. It will not safeguard the children and it will not do what it says on the tin. There is no reference to vulnerability: the word "vulnerable" does not appear anywhere in the bill. My amendments do not address those fundamental criticisms. I am afraid that, if members agree that the bill will take away rather than confer protection, their only option is to vote against the bill. That is what I will do later, with sadness. My amendments are intended to make it clear that it is the vulnerable partner and the children who should be protected to the limited extent that they can be protected under the bill. Ironically, if the bill is passed it will allow a wealthy member of a formerly cohabiting couple to make a claim. It will give each partner rights; therefore, the wealthy male with the job, the house, the pension and the car will also have a claim to half the furniture and the household goods.

No, I am not. However, the committee said that a claim could be made by a wealthy person—that was the committee's conclusion. I mention that because it may not be obvious to members who were not able to attend all the committee meetings. I move amendment 22.

I start by quoting the minister from the stage 1 debate on the general principles of the bill. He said that the package regarding cohabiting couples was "perhaps the most complex and controversial aspect of the bill". He went on to say that the aim was "to protect the legally vulnerable when a relationship ends."— [ Official Report , 15 September 2005; c 19116.]  At stage 2, Brian Adam and I argued unsuccessfully that the whole of section 18 should be deleted, and I will vote against the bill because it contains provisions that I believe are unworkable. We decided not to bring the argument back to the chamber today because it attracted  only one vote in committee. We feel that there was no purpose in trying again because there is no realistic chance of getting an amendment through. We determined to try to make the provisions less unworkable—if that is not an oxymoron. The starting point is the definition, because we will create in Scots law a new status that will belong to a group of people called "cohabitants". The first question that a court will have to determine is whether the parties in a couple are cohabitants. Let us consider what the Executive has said about its aim. In the policy memorandum, the Executive states that the bill focuses not on all cohabitants, but on people who are in long-term and enduring relationships. If we look at the definition in the bill and the definition that is proposed in amendment 18, which will change the original definition slightly but not fundamentally, we find that no attempt has been made to include provisions to that effect. No reference is made to commitment or to an enduring relationship and no length of time is specified. In theory and perhaps in practice, it is quite possible that one could become a cohabitant after living with someone for a few weeks. In the interests of fairness and clarity, I suggest that there should be an objective definition. It is difficult to define legally concepts such as loyalty and the commitment to share one's life with someone else because any such test would be subjective. It would be an objective test simply to say that no one could be a cohabitant until the cohabitation had lasted for a period that was consistent with the Executive's criteria for an enduring relationship. In my view, one year is a reasonable starting point. If a couple had not lived together for a year, it is unlikely that the two partners could be said to be involved in an "enduring" relationship. However, I lodged amendment 18A to offer Parliament an alternative approach, as I signalled to Hugh Henry at stage 2 that I would. I know that the Executive will argue that it would be arbitrary to impose a strict time limit of one year. A couple who had lived together for 11 months and who had a child might be regarded as cohabitants just as might a couple who had lived together for 13 months. That is why I have offered an alternative that I hope will be attractive to the many members who would be concerned about difficult cases arising. Amendment 18A provides that if the cohabitation period had not reached 12 months, there would be a presumption against the partners being defined as cohabitants. However, that presumption would be rebuttable—it would be open to the pursuer who had gone to court to argue that he or she was, in fact, a cohabitant. I will listen with interest to the responses of the minister and other members before I decide  whether to put both options to Parliament. I suspect that the option of the rebuttable presumption that is contained in amendment 18A might command more support. I urge members to think carefully whether they want the £11 million that it is suggested will be spent on legal aid to be used on disputes about whether people are cohabitants. In determining our approach to the bill, we should reflect on how popular such expenditure of £11 million would be among members of the public. I move amendment 16.

I think I am out of time; perhaps I will take an intervention from Phil Gallie later.

Have the Tories costed this commitment?

The debates at stages 1 and 2 and, so far, at stage 3 have been conducted with a great deal of sensitivity by all those who have taken part. We hold different views on the topic but those views are not a matter of party politics. My view has always been that the people of Scotland do not expect us to vote on such issues on party lines. Our decisions are entirely a matter of judgment. I disagree strongly with the minister's suggestion that there is relevance in the fact that there has not been a consultation on the proposed reduction. As Mary Mulligan pointed out, the overwhelming majority of people who took the trouble to respond to the consultation and express their views were opposed to a reduction in the  period of non-cohabitation that is required to found the irretrievable breakdown of marriage.

I am sorry. I have very little time. I am no expert, but my experience as a family lawyer for a couple of decades is that, when someone comes to seek advice about a divorce, they face a momentous decision, which is not taken without a great deal of thought and pain. It involves a difficult discussion about private and deeply personal matters. It takes a long time for most people to undergo that process. To me, the idea that there is a host of people who desperately want a divorce after the first month but are frustrated by the law is wrong. As I said at stage 1, I accept that five years is probably too long. Some people are probably waiting after two or three years, having gone through the torment and turmoil of the process, so the committee's compromise of three years is a good one. Some regard should be had to the fact that a committee of the Parliament has examined the issues in much more detail than we have. I am not saying that its view should be binding, but it should be persuasive to those who are thinking carefully about which way to vote. I fundamentally disagree with the suggestion that changing the law can remove acrimony. For what it is worth, my experience is that there is a tendency for some litigants—often male litigants, I have to say—to use the grounds of adultery and unreasonable behaviour to create an embarrassment. They use it as a lever or as a weapon to try to get a better financial deal. That is wholly wrong, but if the minister really wanted to remove that possibility he would have removed the grounds of adultery and unreasonable behaviour so that they could not be used as a weapon. He has not done that, so he cannot argue that acrimony will be removed. To argue that the law on the page will remove acrimony from such situations is a misconception of the role of law. I have never argued that if divorce is made easier and quicker, that will fundamentally undermine the institution of marriage. To argue that would be to overstate the position. However, if we change the law to allow divorce after as short a time as one year, we will be chipping away at the foundation columns of marriage, which is the bedrock and foundation of society and which offers the best possible chance for the upbringing of children. The majority opinion in the Parliament may be in favour of the shorter periods, but I do not think that there is such a majority in the nation that we represent.

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Although I cannot claim the political longevity of Jim Wallace, I have endeavoured to speak in every debate on fishing in the past six years and, in doing so, I have always argued the case for the west coast in general and Mallaig in particular. As Ted Brocklebank pointed out, nephrop is now our most valuable fishery stock and it forms a perhaps disproportionate part of Scotland's valuable export market because it is consumed throughout Europe as a delicacy. For the past six years, I have made pleas, on what I consider to be a valid scientific basis, for an increase in the total allowable catch for nephrops. I was therefore extremely pleased to discover this morning that the European Commission has proposed increases that are based on the scientific evidence, such as it is. It would be churlish of me not to congratulate all those who were involved, including the civil servants at Fisheries Research Services and the fisheries organisations. That includes, not least, John Hermse and John MacAllister of the Mallaig and North West Fishermen's Association and Robert Stevenson of  the West of Scotland Fish Producers Organisation. It is their solid work that brought us to a position at which, at long last, the Commission seems to accept the evidence that has always indicated that nephrops are not under pressure. However, I say to the minister—I think he is well aware of this—that if there are to be conditions with regard to effort, it is essential that the representatives whom I mentioned be consulted about the impact of those conditions before a decision is made. When I made that point to Richard Baker, he replied fairly that the minister is in constant contact with those people. That is true, but it is not the point. It is not enough for there to be contact: it seems to me that there must also be input from the people who know exactly what the conditions will mean, otherwise we will end up with a nonsensical result such as we have seen recently, whereby effort restrictions in the North sea have meant that vessels did not have time to do any fishing because they used up their days and months simply by sailing to the appropriate fishing grounds. That is why the SNP argues in its amendment that the fishing representatives should be a part of the team. I am confident, following discussion of the matter at the briefing yesterday, that some progress has been made. Perhaps the minister will say whether the representatives of the Scottish Fishermen's Federation, the Mallaig and North West Fishermen's Association and the Western Isles Fishermen's Association who wish to turn up at Brussels—under their own steam and at their own cost, of course—will be made welcome at Scotland House and kept fully informed by officials. There would be no breach because they would not be in the negotiating room, but they would be able to contribute, in a structured way, to the conclusions. I am fairly confident that that basic point has been accepted. Perhaps my Christmas is about to come early as I give way to the minister.

This seems to be an extremely festive exchange. I am pleased that that is the case. The issue is difficult—it would be foolish of me to suggest that it is easy, particularly in the light of the bizarre negotiations that are undertaken in the early hours of the morning. Nonetheless, no matter how difficult things are and  how tense things may be, the voice of the fishermen must be heard and taken into account before any deal is struck. I am delighted to hear that progress seems to be being made towards that end. The Green amendment mentions an apparent alternative, which has not been clearly canvassed. The Greens do not say whether they want TACs. They want on-board observers—I presume that every boat would have an observer—but goodness knows how much that would cost. They also want marine protected areas. Two proposals have been made that I want to deal with briefly, one of which is the proposal for a marine national park for the west coast. That proposal—or half-baked idea—is opposed by virtually all the fishermen to whom I have spoken. They do not know what the idea means, other than that it will mean more regulation, more costs and more restrictions.

I would take an intervention, but I am in my final minute and so cannot do so. I am sorry. All but two out of 100 members of the Mallaig and North West Fishermen's Federation objected to and opposed the Highland regulating order that would introduce new levels of bureaucracy to the Highlands. I do not have time to canvass on that matter, but I urge the minister to say whether, when we seem to have received a good response for the west coast from the European Commission, we might start to see a new conservation bureaucracy and new green tape entering into the equation. That would truly be ironic and might have prevented the late Hugh Allen—who did so much to promote the cause of the west coast—from having that wee dram tonight if he were around.

Does Richard Baker therefore agree that in order to ensure that any restrictions and conditions concerning days at sea are not unworkable, the fishing representatives from the SFF and other organisations should, in effect, be part of the negotiating team, so that no deal is ever agreed without their having been consulted fully about the small print?

When we go home and turn on a light switch, we expect the light to come on. Mark Ruskell is right to say that we take it for granted that there will always be energy. I utterly support the development of small-scale renewables technology, but I do not think that anyone would seriously suggest that such technology can meet the world's energy needs. However, we should seek to encourage the development of the technology in all practical and reasonable ways. No member has mentioned the final two or three lines of Sarah Boyack's motion, which refer to a reduction in the council tax and other fiscal measures. Those proposals are worth considering, although local authorities need to know how much money is coming in, which they would not if an unspecified number of houses had an opt-out clause.

I do not have enough time—I have only three minutes. A stick is applied at the moment, but a carrot approach is also worth considering. I want to discuss the first approach, of which I have an example from the real world. Kingussie community council wants to restore a small hydro scheme that used to operate, but it has found that the Scottish Environment Protection Agency would impose charges under the water framework rules that may make the scheme non-viable. We should focus on today's stick and not tomorrow's possible carrot, worthy though the carrot no doubt is. We need to have a serious look at how SEPA is causing problems for, and adding costs to, such schemes. Secondly, I want to extol and promote the solid work of the Scottish and Northern Ireland Plumbing Employers Federation. This may seem  to be an unduly concrete point to make in a debate in which many worthy ideological contributions have been made, but it is the plumbers who install the systems—the solar power and the ground pumps. They know the problems. One problem is that the Energy Saving Trust will not give a grant to anyone unless the plumber has already provided two installations—nobody receives a grant for the first two installations. Is that bonkers or what? SNIPEF has promoted solar ground source heat pumps and biomass boiler technology and I am sure that the minister will listen to its recommendations, which are well worth considering. That every house should have its own renewable energy supply is an attractive idea. There would then be a fantastic world, because large companies would not have the power that they currently have, although I would argue that that power is not necessarily malign—others may take a different view. The development of the technology—whether micro, macro, global or local—is absolutely essential, but it is not happening. I hope that we all agree that companies such as Wavegen in my constituency should be encouraged and supported in that respect.

It is undoubtedly the case that the majority of disorder and violent crime in Scotland is related to the excessive consumption of alcohol, and it is salutary to remind ourselves that, between 1980 and 2003, 3,000 licensed premises—an increase of a fifth—were created in Scotland. As Stewart Maxwell has said, consumption of drink is increasing, and the rise in violent crime concerns the police and concerns us all. The Scottish National Party's position, as exemplified by what we have said and done, has been entirely consistent throughout. We have argued from the simple standpoint that if we make it possible to have even longer opening hours than our already very long opening hours, that will lead to one of two outcomes: the possibility of more crime or the probability of less crime. I think that it will lead to the former. It must be the former. All the evidence shows that that will be the case. That is why we pursued a consistent position, and that is why the Local Government and Transport Committee's stage 1 report stated: "As an alternative, the Committee was attracted by the suggestion made by Sheriff Principal Nicholson that 18 hours might be a more appropriate cut-off point."  That was the provenance of the 18-hour provision. It was not something that we picked arbitrarily; it came from the years of work of Sheriff Principal Nicholson and his committee. Members of the Local Government and Transport Committee put in hundreds of hours of work and came to a consensus, but over the past 72 hours the Executive has vacillated and moved from one position to another, to the extent that the minister was not even able to tell us what his position was—he could not tell us of which particular hole he was temporarily the occupant. The disservice that has been done today has not been done by Parliament or by MSPs; frankly, it has been done because there was a split among those who are in charge of the two components of the Executive. That is the reality, and I contend that the impact that that has had on Parliament is such that, as Bruce Crawford said, there has been a boorach. To put that a different way, as Susan Deacon perhaps implied, we have been denied the opportunity of giving proper, full, thorough and lengthy consideration to the various options that were available today. Those options should have been put to the Local Government and Transport Committee. As the Scottish Licensed Trade News stated, the industry made huge attempts to persuade the civil servants who advise the ministers of the soundness of its case with regard to 20-hour opening. The civil servants said, "No chance"—but there was a chance, so the advice that was given was wrong. That, of course, is the responsibility of the ministers. In conclusion, there is total conflict, paradox and contradiction in, on the one hand, the Executive's apparent concern for health, which has meant that smoking in public places has been subject to a total ban, and, on the other hand, its passing of legislation that will permit the extension of drinking hours. It is by no means to make a pedantic or a legal point to identify what section 60 says. I am afraid that Mr Arbuckle is wrong, because section 60 makes it clear that any applicant can go for a licence for 22 or 23 hours and the proviso about exceptional circumstances will not apply—it will apply only if the application is for a 24-hour licence. The law will provide no protection against the issuing of such licences. In passing a law that will allow more and more drinking and will create the possibility of more crime being committed, the Executive is making a grievous error. That is why the SNP will be consistent with the position that it has adopted from day one and will vote against the bill.

Amendment 38 seeks to delete the fees provisions in section 127(1)(c), which were inserted following an amendment in the name of Paul Martin at stage 2 that was supported by all the Labour members of the Local Government and Transport Committee. That amendment stated that licensing boards would be able to charge fees "in respect of the recovery from particular licence holders of sums not exceeding any increase in the cost of providing public services (including policing) which is directly attributable to activities in, or in the vicinity of, or by customers of, or staff employed in, the premises in respect of which the licence is held." There are two reasons why I opposed the amendment in committee and continue to oppose the measure now. First, the measure is unenforceable, because it is impossible to interpret and implement. I understand Paul Martin's motivation in lodging the amendment and I do not criticise him for doing so, but the scheme that he has devised would not work. How would one calculate the increase in the cost of providing public services? For example, on policing in the city centre, how would one calculate the increased police provision that was required? With regard to the ambulance service, how would  one calculate the increased number of ambulances or ambulance staff required? On refuse collection, would one have to compute the additional volume of garbage that was left as a result of antisocial behaviour? After doing that calculation, one would have to decide whether it related to one particular pub or to more than one and where the behaviour occurred, because the bill states "in the vicinity of"—[ Interruption. ] I hear a member's watch going off—one would have to set one's watch accordingly to do that computation. One would have to apply the total extra cost across an unspecified number of public houses or clubs in an area. A finance department that performed that task would require hundreds of staff, and there would have to be such a department for each licensing board. I submit that the measure is unenforceable. I know that Paul Martin received the same letter that I received from the Law Society of Scotland, in which it states views broadly to that effect. Secondly, I argue against the measure because it is punitive, as public house premises and clubs pay the Exchequer substantial amounts of money through general taxation and, in particular, through non-domestic rates. Licensed premises pay high levels of non-domestic rates, and it is right that they should make that contribution, but if this extra cost is levied, premises will have to pay an extra tax—a Martin tax—which is a tax too far. I therefore hope that, by my advocacy, I will successfully persuade members of the Executive parties to vote for amendment 38, in my name. I hope that they will take pleasure in that act. I move amendment 38.

I must admit that I thought that, latterly, the minister was at his most persuasive. I will briefly point out that there is an argument—it was drawn to my attention by Gordon Millar, although I should perhaps have thought of it myself—that premises that are not operated responsibly should not be allowed to continue.

If I may finish the argument, I will certainly give way if I am permitted to do so. If premises are not operated responsibly, they should not be allowed to continue. If we agree that premises may operate irresponsibly but must pay extra for doing so, we will be tolerating that irresponsibility. Surely all of us, including Paul Martin, can unite behind that principle.

Paul Martin may use that analogy, but I do not believe that it is directly applicable. We are talking about people who are not enclosed in a football ground but roaming around city-centre areas where there are many different public house premises. I am delighted that the Parliament will unite behind my amendment, and I look forward to many repeat occasions.  Amendment 38 agreed to.

If members study carefully Bruce Crawford's amendment and the section that it seeks to amend, they will see that the effect would be to allow a pub or club to remain open for 18 continuous hours, from 11 am to 5 am the following morning. Why would anybody or any premises wish to open for longer than that? No one yet has mentioned the staff—the people who would have to work outwith those hours, from 5 am onward. There is surely a gross contradiction in the Executive being prepared to permit 24-hour continuous opening, on the one hand, and banning smoking in public places, on the other hand. That is a complete contradiction that, I suspect, the public will wholly fail to understand. I agreed with the sentiment that Wendy Alexander expressed about our reflecting the mood of the people who sent us here. I hope that we will all try to do that today. There is no desire for this. There is no appetite or, might I say it, thirst for it. The trade does not want it; the experts do not want it; the public do not want it.

Obviously, I have not got time.  What conceivable reason would there be for the Executive whipping the bill through, as drafted, except the desire to follow Mr Blair and what the Government in England is doing? This is a test of whether Executive members will practise devolution or will follow orders from London and London Labour.

We have no hesitation in supporting amendment 6, but with the proviso that there will be detailed and comprehensive consultation about the type and range of conditions that are proposed before any new measures are introduced and that the proposals will come to Parliament for further full debate and discussion. I invite the minister to state explicitly that that will be the case. I understand that amendment 6 will apply only to premises that are open after 1 am. The purpose is to seek to ensure as far as possible that order and safety are preserved. Training of stewards, first-aid training and CCTV cameras are examples of measures that we may consider appropriate. I point out to the Tories that the SLTA supports the measure, perhaps because it does not want licensing boards throughout Scotland to set different standards. People will want to know what the standards are throughout Scotland. That is why the SNP supports amendment 6, which will further protect the public against the dangers and excesses of alcohol.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. You have said that the manuscript amendment that we have not yet seen has been accepted because of exceptional circumstances. Given that all these matters have been debated by Parliament for months, will you give us further information on how these circumstances can conceivably be described as exceptional? Will Parliament get any guidance on the matter? If it is not entitled to any such guidance, is there not a risk that a refusal at the last hour to give it on this matter might bring this place into disrepute?

The minister mentions the Airdrie to Bathgate line. Will he comment on my offer that the SNP will be happy to help to fast-track the proposed transport and works act so that the Airdrie to Bathgate line is not delayed by the parliamentary committee process? That process is likely to add a year or two to the timescale.

I thank the minister for agreeing that this debate should not have a motion and amendments because that means that we can have an open debate about how we see Scotland's rail services developing. The Scottish National Party wishes to emphasise four points in this debate. The first and main point relates to the consultation. What do passengers want from Scotland's rail service? We submit that the answer to the consultation—we await the responses with interest—might be the same as it was to the previous consultation five years ago. Passengers want reliable train services that they know will leave at a specified time and arrive at the time stated in the timetable. It therefore seems that, in the short-to-medium term, we should focus on delivering that reliable service. From our discussions with industry experts, we believe that we should address in the expenditure of taxpayers' money the capacity constraints, the pinchpoints and the bottlenecks, which might be single-track sections, outdated signalling, old track, insufficient platforms or myriad other problems. On its website, Network Rail divides Scotland into three sections and identifies some of the constraints in eastern Scotland, which is the most populous part. I submit that although the focus in the Scottish Executive's policy on rail in Scotland for the first six years of the Scottish Parliament has been on delivering new lines, we should now turn our attention to the improvement of the existing network. Although the Scottish National Party supports improvements such as the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine railway line, the Airdrie to Bathgate line and the Borders rail link, had there been an SNP minister for transport six years ago, assessing how best the substantial amounts of money should be spent, they would probably not have concluded that some of the projects that have been promoted  by the Executive would be the top priority. Politics is not easy, Government is not easy—

Not at the moment. Government is not easy—

Not at this point. In politics and Government, we need to distinguish between the important and the essential. That is not to say that the SNP opposes the projects that I have mentioned, which will go ahead. After all, they have already been planned and it would be foolish to cancel projects that have been agreed. However, spending on the existing network has not followed what we regard as the priorities. For example, according to Network Rail's analysis and forecast expenditure for the east of Scotland, the total enhancements—or improvements—expenditure for 2005-06 is £18 million. However, approximately £2,200 million has been earmarked for new routes. If I were a commuter on the Glasgow to Edinburgh line on which severe problems over the summer and into early autumn caused the line to be cut, I would question whether the creation of new routes should be the top priority. As I have said, the SNP supports the projects that I have mentioned, but it is only reasonable to make that point. After all, the debate's purpose is to focus attention on ways of addressing capacity constraints.

If Mr Arbuckle had been listening to me, he would have heard me say that I supported the projects that I mentioned. Other projects have been proposed, and we support in principle the Glasgow and Edinburgh airport rail links. It is also right that the close parliamentary scrutiny of the Edinburgh tramlines should reach a conclusion; however, the former Minister for Transport himself questioned whether the lines would represent value for money if their costs increased. Of course, he said that before the costs increased. Turning to point two, at the business in the Parliament event that took place in the chamber on 9 September, Janette Anderson made a lot of sense when she highlighted what she felt to be an element of confusion and lack of clarity in how projects can and should be delivered. In this debate, which is about the Parliament co-operating to take politics with a capital P out of  transport, I repeat to the minister the offer that the SNP made in the debate on the Borders railway project. We agree with the First Minister's comment at the opening of the parliamentary year that we need to reform the existing parliamentary system in that respect. He said: "Too many critical transport projects that we have planned are taking too long to implement" and "we will legislate to simplify the process."— [ Official Report , 6 September 2005; c 18782.]  If the minister wishes to fast-track the process, we will co-operate. If we can do it for a bill that, allegedly, is required to satisfy the European convention on human rights, we should do it for a bill that is necessary to deliver more successful links for rail passengers.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. We should also introduce an integrated ticketing system. If people can buy a phone card for, say, £20, why can they not buy a transport card that can be used on any form of public transport and can be topped up on the bus or train? If we are going to have smart cards for concessionary travel schemes, the same measure should be extended to the whole range of travel. Finally, in the extremely short time available to me, I should say that the SNP agrees with and welcomes many of the long-term transport objectives for Scotland, including swifter intercity links and better links with London. Ideally, there should be more rail passengers and fewer air passengers. As the party that will form the next Scottish Executive, the SNP will wish to play a part with its Westminster partners to meet those objectives.

Perhaps inevitably, the debate has tended to focus on the past rather than on the present or the future. I will address what the Scottish National Party thinks we should do for the present and the future. It is undoubtedly the case that Scotland is part of the global economy, which has introduced changes that we can ignore no more than Canute could ignore the tide. However, there are clear and present dangers for the Scottish manufacturing sector. The first is the cost of haulage, which is higher in Scotland than in the rest of the UK, and substantially higher in the UK than in the rest of Europe. That has been given effect because our Scottish Chancellor of the Exchequer, Gordon Brown, gives the advantage to hauliers from the continent.

Of course not. Those continental hauliers travel through Dover taking advantage of the fact that every litre of fuel they buy costs 20p less. It is a form of fiscal sadism whereby a UK chancellor gives an advantage to Germans, French and other Europeans to come over here with lorries and tanks that can carry 1,360 litres, drive 2,400 miles, rarely get stopped by the Vehicle and Operator Services Agency and undercut haulage here. All manufacturing industry relies on haulage. The situation I describe is an outrage. The previous answer to the problem was lorry road-user charging, but that was abandoned by new Labour because of the horrendous cost that was predicted correctly by Professor Alan McKinnon of Heriot-Watt University. However, the new Labour Government admitted that there was a problem and that the lorry road-user charging was a solution to that problem. Now that it has abandoned LRUC, what does new Labour say about the advantage that Gordon Brown gives to  foreign haulage and, by definition, foreign manufacturing companies? Not one word. I was privileged to listen to Jeanette Anderson, the managing director of First Engineering, deliver a compelling and cogent address in this chamber four or five weeks ago. Her point was that whatever the Scottish Executive cannot do, what it should do is to focus on delivery. However, that is what it has not done. If we look at the delay in the M74, the dithering in the various rail projects and the seemingly endless statements and press announcements, we do not see much action. If the Scottish Executive were a firm of solicitors, it would be called Dither, Swither and Blether. What the Executive should do is listen to the Civil Engineering Contractors Association and the Institution of Civil Engineers. They say that it should create a preparation pool of work so that if a contract such as the M74 is delayed, others can be brought into its place. The Executive should sort out the quagmire of quangos that are supposed to be responsible for delivering transport projects. As I am in my last minute, it would be churlish of me not to congratulate Murdo Fraser on his elevation to deputy leader of his party; I wish him well. However, I find it a bit disappointing that his former robust espousal of the cause of fiscal autonomy is today no more. Instead of that strong Murdo Fraser who we used to know, who was not afraid to speak out and voice his views, what did we get today? We got equivocation on fiscal autonomy and uncertainty so that we do not know whether he is for it or not. Sadly, the Murdo Fraser who we used to know has sputtered and stuttered like a car that has run out of fuel.

Is it Conservative party policy that Scotland should have fiscal autonomy in order to redress that lack of competitiveness?

Will the member give way?

It is absolutely right that the minister says that there is a necessity that some private discussion take place. I think that that is sensible. There must be an obtaining of advice, which is part of the process of taking any decision, whether in Government or elsewhere. However, after such discussions have taken place and the civil service has formulated its detailed submissions on any major decision, I think that there is no reason why such advice cannot be made public. The same applies to speaking notes that the civil service prepares for ministers. We saw some of those documents in the course of the Holyrood inquiry, which I attended in the year when my taxi bills were higher than £3.46, which I think they have been in the past six months. What we learned from the inquiry was that it is difficult to see why the late first First Minister took some decisions. For example, it is difficult to see why no explanation was given for why the first First Minister declined to accept the advice in April 1999—it was shortly before the election, I believe—to have a press conference to explain that the likely building cost of Holyrood had gone from £40 million to £50 million. One may surmise that the midst of an election campaign was not a particularly congenial moment at which to reveal that the cost of building this place, as estimated then, had risen by such a large amount. The benefit in making public the final advice that the civil service gives, rather than the initial advice and discussions and the searching for facts and checking of information, is not only that the public would then know what had been decided, but that they, and indeed ourselves, would be able to assess why a decision had been taken. Knowing the information that lies behind a decision would, of course, have the desirable consequence of allowing us to have a higher level of debate. If we know what the options were in the taking of any ministerial decision and see the advice and information that was given and why a minister took decision A over decision B, surely that would lead to better Government. In such a circumstance, a minister would no longer be able to conceal the advice that he had received; he would have to explain and justify the basis upon which any decision had been taken. I want to discuss two areas in which legislation must be liberalised and in which the public must have the right to greater access to information about the money that they provide to Government to spend.  A lot of public money is paid to voluntary bodies and private companies. Where public money is paid out, the public have a right to see how it is spent. As has been said, that applies to companies such as Reliance, but it also applies to charities such as RSPB Scotland, whose turnover exceeds £80 million. The RSPB spends around £30 million on staff. How does it do that? I would like to see information on the public money that the RSPB receives. I hope that such bodies—bodies that profess to have a civic responsibility—would volunteer to tell the public how much public money they manage to consume. Members of the Scottish Crofters Union whom I met on Saturday in Lochaber were slightly envious to learn that the RSPB makes £1 million a year from its farming income. That is more than any of the crofters who were present at the Torlundy mart on Saturday. However, the second and main area that I wish to address relates to commercial confidentiality. The excuse of commercial confidentiality is often used as a smokescreen and convenient expedient when there is no well-founded justification for the withholding of information on the basis of confidentiality. The fundamental proposition that I wish to advance to the minister is this: there is a need for confidentiality while a contract for public sector services or a public sector building is in the course of tender, but once the contract has been awarded to one company, the public are entitled to see what services that company is to provide and at what cost. For example, a year ago I was pleased to attend the reception following the award of the ScotRail franchise to First ScotRail. When I asked Moir Lockhead and Mary Dickson whether the contract would be published, they said that it would be, as soon as they could get it through the lawyers. The contract was published about three weeks ago. What kept it a year? People write about train services in Scotland being deficient, but the answer to them is that First ScotRail is obliged to do only what is in the contract. The company cannot be blamed for not providing services and routes that it is not paid for. It is very convenient for the Executive to withhold for a year the publication of the contract, because doing so impairs debate. People expect all sorts of things from First ScotRail. They expect better rolling stock, more services, more routes, higher frequencies, greater cleanliness, more reliability and more punctuality. If the public cannot even see the contract and see what they have paid for—the minister admits that they have a right to know—how can they come to an informed decision? Another example of the Executive not fulfilling its proportions of disclosure or compliance—to which the minister referred—was Inverness airport. The  airport was one of the early PPPs—the acronymic offspring of PFIs so beloved by new Labour. The building cost around £6 million and the contract is so bad that it is having to be bought out. I think I know what the price is—I will not say in case I am sued—but the total repayment cost may be around £35 million. There was a public sector comparator for that contract, showing how much it would have cost in 1998 when new Labour approved the contract. Guess what? That information has been withheld. Why? Because it is an embarrassment to new Labour, which approved the PPP. That is why it withheld the information. Unless Labour fundamentally changes its approach to the spending of public money, and until we can see how that money is spent, it is preventing us all from doing our job and it is denying the public the democratic right of scrutiny.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it supports the continuance of acute care provision 24 hours a day, seven days a week, at the Belford hospital, Fort William and whether it will provide the necessary support to the hospital, its staff and NHS Highland in enabling that objective to be achieved in the long term. (S2O-7848)

Surely the minister recognises that many components of the group's report require action by the Executive. Measures such as those that relate to the retention and recruitment of staff, joint working between health boards and the importation of elective surgery from other health board areas are not within the sole competence of NHS Highland. Does he accept that the Executive should give a clear commitment that all those measures will be addressed as required by the Executive, working with the health board?

The minister will be aware that the higher tax in Scotland has been known as Jack's tax, after its author, who introduced it seven years ago as his second major ministerial act—his first act, obviously, was to ignore the Holyrood costs. I ask the minister whether this is a case of Jack's tax—rest in peace. Is there any example of a longer period elapsing between the death notice, which was issued last month, and the funeral ceremony, which is not scheduled to take place until 1 April 2007? More seriously, why should the Executive claim any credit whatever, given that we have had higher tax in our country in every month since the Executive gained the power to set the tax and that we will have a level playing field for only the final month of the first eight years of the Scottish Parliament?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has made sufficient budgetary provision to pay for the transport projects to which it is committed in principle and, if not, what discussions the Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform has had with the Minister for Transport and Telecommunications in respect of which projects may not be supported. (S2O-7794)

How can that be the case if we heard earlier today that the cost of the M74 project, which was estimated at £250 million four years ago, might now be double that; if we learned last week that the cost of the Edinburgh tramlines has risen, over a much shorter period, from £500 million to £714 million; and if the figures for the rail links from Glasgow and Edinburgh airports to the city centres have no proper estimates at this point? Does he not agree that something has to give? Will the Executive hold a debate on the issue, given the substantial interest throughout Scotland in whether all the schemes will come to fruition?

Will the minister give way?

This is all very amusing, but will the member answer a serious point that Janette Anderson made recently in the chamber? She said that the decision may be extremely damaging to the Scottish economy because, to meet the huge transport projects for the London Olympics, capacity will be sucked out of Scotland. Does Scott Barrie think, as the First Minister does, that Janette Anderson—the chief executive of First Engineering, which is one of Scotland's leading companies—was, and I quote, "an idiot"?

I commend Michael Matheson for the way in which he moved the motion. He put the case, clearly and comprehensively, for Scotland to send its own Olympic team to London in 2012. None of his major arguments have been tackled by the speakers thus far. The minister refused to say why Scotland can have her own football team but not her own Olympic team. Interestingly, she did not respond to Mr Matheson's argument that there is no technical or legal barrier to Scotland having her own team, although at one time those who espouse the British-team-only cause argued that because Scotland is not an independent nation state, she would be barred. Of course, that is absolutely not the case. We learned from this debate that Donald Gorrie could not get into the British Olympic team, although he could have participated in a Scottish Olympic team, but that is not enough to put us off pursuing the motion. I would have loved to see Donald Gorrie take part in the Olympics, had I been of the right age. No one has addressed the fact that, from testing the opinions of more than 1,000 people, we know that nearly four out of five people in Scotland want Scotland to have her own team. I accept Jamie  McGrigor's point that no one has a monopoly on patriotism, but that is not our argument: we argue that everybody should have the chance to compete for our own country of Scotland. The snide and disparaging remarks that were made by the minister and, uncharacteristically, by Jamie McGrigor do us a disservice. Those who have led the grass-roots campaign are disappointed that the comments appear to be based on a partisan agenda. They argue that the debate should be about not politics, but what is best for Scotland, which is why we believe that Scotland should have her own team. I will dwell on my experience of promoting aspiring athletes at grass-roots level. I agree with Donald Gorrie that that is where we should direct our attention. A great many talented athletes in places such as Badenoch and Strathspey in my constituency aspire to compete in the winter Olympics in Turin next year in, for example, skiing and snowboarding. They tell me that there are opportunities at grass-roots level and at the very top level, where the cream get support, but that in the middle we have no rungs on the ladder. That is a serious problem. The minister, who is shaking her head, does not seem to accept that that problem exists. I am proud and delighted that we are moving the motion. Outwith this chamber, there will be none of the petty personal attacks or the professional fouls that we have seen this morning, with the minister as usual playing the man, not the ball. There will simply be a recognition that the idea's time has come. Scotland should take her place on the international stage, not as part of Donald Gorrie's euroland team, but as part of the Scottish team in the Olympic games, with our athletes doing their best, taking part and winning medals for our own country.

Does the minister accept that SNP members and the 78 per cent of people in Scotland who would like a Scottish team in the Olympics will continue to cheer on outstanding individuals such as Kelly Holmes? However, that is nothing whatever to do with the desire to have a Scottish team. Why should we have a Scottish football team, but not a Scottish Olympic team?

I congratulate Brian Adam on  leading the campaign with others and commend him for his pugnaciously persuasive address this evening, which put the case comprehensively. The Aberdeen office is not the first to face closure. A pattern has been established of closing Scottish Met Office branches—not all had as many as 37 employees, but they were nonetheless important to many rural parts of Scotland. The Aviemore office was closed back in 2002. That closure was opposed and, at the time, we argued that the consultation was not a real one, because the outcome was pre-determined. Job losses have also occurred in many other parts of Scotland, of which Tiree, Kirkwall and Stornoway are but three. I understand that, in 2000, the Met Office had about 2,200 employees, a small proportion of whom were in Scotland. The Scottish National Party does not argue that every body that currently operates on a United Kingdom basis should provide a pro rata share of jobs in Scotland and we would not necessarily negotiate for such an outcome after independence—I am simply proving how reasonable SNP members are. However, there is a trend towards there being not much of a commitment by the Met Office to Scotland. The relocation from Bracknell to Exeter was in train back in 2000-01, when I was heavily involved in trying to prevent the closure at Aviemore. The Met Office must try to demonstrate its commitment to Scotland. I was delighted with the letter that Nicol Stephen sent Mr Touhig on 12 July 2005 pointing out the importance of retaining the office in Aberdeen. I commend the Executive for sending that letter and for the arguments that Nicol Stephen put in it. I wish that the Executive was always up front about its representations to Westminster and I do not see why those representations should be made in secret. However, the acid test will come when we see the extent to which the Met Office has listened to the Scottish Executive and the extent of the Executive's influence in the UK. From my perusal of its annual report, I think that the Met Office might want to have a good look at its accounts. I wonder whether there might be audits on some of the joint venture arrangements that it has made, some of which, it has been suggested, appear to have gone awry. I also wonder whether the £25 million loss that it made in 2003-04 and the £4 million loss that it made on exceptional items with its move represent prudence in action or botched jobs. Moreover, I would be worried if I were a member of the Met Office's pension scheme, given what the accounts say. The annual report states: "The Met Office is unable to identify its share of the underlying assets and liabilities." That is not exactly a statement of confidence.  I will leave my wife the task of being an advocate for the mountain rescue service, which is one of the many services for which local knowledge is necessary. The avalanche information service that is operated from Glenmore Lodge is another such service. Unmanned stations cannot do the job as well as it can be done.

I am grateful to the minister for giving way because it gives me an opportunity to  make a point that I was asked to put on record by an auxiliary, who pointed out that although auxiliary firefighters have signed a contract and are in some ways similar to retained firefighters, auxiliaries do not get paid retained money. That is a distinction between them. Is that the position, minister?

I congratulate David Davidson on securing the debate. I know that the relatively sparse attendance in the chamber signifies not any lack of interest but merely that by-elections are taking place today. We in Scotland are fortunate in having an immensely professional body of firefighters, so I was pleased to vote for the bill that gave them further legal protection. Firefighters have been subjected to quite outrageous assaults by a handful of individuals while on duty. Few things can be more repellent than to hear about episodes of projectiles being thrown at firefighters or fire engines being set on fire. I very much hope that anyone who is now convicted of such an offence is sentenced to the most severe period of imprisonment. I personally have cause to thank the firefighters because my father died in a fire. That experience let me see at first hand just how professional the service is. We heard on the radio this morning that nine out of 10 fires in Scotland are caused by cigarettes. The same news item mentioned the possibility of having self-extinguishing cigarettes, which is surely a proposal that should be considered. Will the minister, who I imagine is more familiar with the matter than me, confirm whether the Executive is looking into that? If lives could be saved on a massive scale simply by requiring that cigarettes be self-extinguishing, I would have thought that  the cigarette industry itself would want to take that on board. However, if the industry will not do so—I see a wry look pass across the minister's face—perhaps it could be encouraged or forced to do so. As David Davidson said, we must also consider other measures such as community education. In the remote and rural areas that are the topic of this debate, some habitations will always be a long distance away from the nearest fire service. Therefore, consideration must be given, as I know it has been, to the fitting of sprinklers in such areas. On 8 October 2003, I also led a debate on the role of firefighters in remote and rural areas. That debate focused not on the excellent work that is done by retained firefighters but on auxiliary firefighters. In whatever time I have remaining—the clock is not working—I want to turn to that issue.

I welcome the fact that, since that debate, after much effort over a long time by many people, a measure of compromise has been reached. The Health and Safety Executive has recognised that breathing apparatus need not be introduced immediately and that, while training is taking place and new equipment is being supplied, those auxiliaries who are pursuing wild fires can continue to do their work. I put on record my appreciation for the work that Brian Murray, the firemaster, and Councillor Drew Slack and his colleagues on the Highlands and Islands fire board have done on the auxiliaries' behalf, in carrying out what we accept is a difficult task. Nonetheless, I think that there is still some work to do. This is not a purely local matter or a question of micromanagement, because larger issues are involved. Just last week, in his speech on road accidents on the A9, John Swinney pointed out that that road has the highest number of fatalities in Scotland—82 people died on it between 2000 and 2004. Newtonmore has the most southerly auxiliary fire service. With a small population, it is difficult to ensure that more than four auxiliaries are available at any one time. To ensure their continued interest, there is a strong case for them to revert to the activity that they were previously permitted—helping to tackle road traffic incidents. I will quote from one auxiliary to illustrate the type of service that auxiliaries can provide. The auxiliary states: "I attended a fatal road accident and helped shield a child from the sight of her parents who were fatally injured trapped in their car." That may not be an obvious task, but, sadly, one could foresee it being necessary.  Newtonmore is the nearest station to the A86, the most dangerous stretch of road in Scotland. They say that there is a golden hour within which one must provide emergency first aid and get seriously injured people to hospital—in this case, to Raigmore. It is a close call to get from Newtonmore to Raigmore within one hour. I know that the minister cannot interfere in this case, but I hope that he will consider the general issue with fire boards. I have mentioned Newtonmore, but I could mention other areas. The requirement that auxiliaries sign a contract may be acting as a deterrent to volunteers who feel that that is an infringement of the volunteer ethos. The contract also requires auxiliaries to work in areas outwith their own. Employers, who also have to sign a contract, may be deterred from allowing an employee not just to put out fires in their area, but to go much further afield. I am getting the eye from the Presiding Officer, so I will conclude.

To ask the Scottish Executive when the buyout of the private finance initiative at Inverness airport terminal will be completed and what is causing the delay. (S2O-7689)

I hope that the conclusion will be this year. As the minister knows, I have, with members of other parties, been campaigning for the buyout of the PFI. As he also knows, HIAL currently has to pay, out of its resources, a sum approaching £2 million per annum to the PFI owners. Does he agree that, after the buyout of the PFI, the Finance and Central Services Department should not recoup the money but make it available for development potential, including of such things as radar, controlled air space and the extension and improvement of runway and hangar facilities? Such improvements would provide a massive opportunity for the Highland economy and give MSPs such as me the chance to visit the London Olympics.

Members have made important points, which I will not repeat. There is a chronic shortage of affordable housing in my constituency, but a lot of good work is being done by housing associations and other agencies, including private sector companies such as Tulloch Construction, Morrison's and Robertson's, which do a sterling job. I want to deal with three issues that have not been raised, the first of which is self-invested pension plans. All parties in the Scottish Parliament may be concerned about the surge in house prices, to use Maureen Macmillan's phrase. However, if the chancellor down in Westminster takes measures that will increase the value of existing houses, that will be bad—it will be inflationary, as we can foresee. However, that is what Gordon Brown is doing by allowing people to include houses in their pension schemes, which, of course, will attract tax relief. Demand will be created as soon as people are offered tax relief if they put something in their pensions and prices will be inflated if demand is created. I would be interested to know what the minister has to say about that. Secondly, there have been severe restraints in rural Scotland in particular as a result of the lack of water and sewerage infrastructure. The next round of improvements under quality and standards III is due to begin shortly and will last for a long time—I think that it will last for around nine years. I understand that Scottish Water has estimated that the cost of Q and S III will be £3.3 billion, but the water industry commissioner, with consultants—whose remit has not been published—has given an estimated figure of £2.2 billion. How on earth  can the figure go from £3.3 billion to £2.2 billion? Will the minister say whether the figure that has been given is reliable? The issue is not his department's responsibility, but he has an interest. If there is not enough money in the budget, development will not be possible in many places in my patch, such as Newtonmore, Kingussie, Kincraig, most of Badenoch and Strathspey and much of Lochaber. Thirdly, for some time I have pressed the Forestry Commission to make available some of its land for housing. Obviously, the Forestry Commission is in the business of growing trees; indeed, I hope that it will plant a few more trees in the years to come. However, it is Scotland's largest landowner—it owns even more land than the Duke of Westminster does. I was delighted and surprised that a copy of the national forest land scheme arrived by e-mail but, when I sat down and read it, I thought that it seemed too bureaucratic and complicated. The scheme is only for communities—private individuals cannot apply—which must have a ballot if the value of the plot that is to be acquired by them for housing is more than £50,000. Why? Individuals rather than communities will live in the house. Should not individuals in the Highlands have the chance to buy a plot from the Forestry Commission? I wrote a characteristically long, lawyerly letter with 29 numbered paragraphs to Bob McIntosh and received a pleasant reply. However, I did not get the impression that the Executive is grasping the issue by the scruff of the neck and saying to the Forestry Commission, "Look, we want you to supply us with targets for the number of houses." In my patch, people could wait on a housing list for several decades after their expected lifespan. I ask the minister whether there is an imperative to get the Forestry Commission—well intentioned though it is—to be rather more ambitious for Scotland. I hope that the minister will address those three issues and say in particular whether he agrees with what Gordon Brown is doing—it would be reassuring to hear that not everybody in the Labour Party supports Gordon Brown. However, to be serious, it must be clear to everybody in Scotland that the new Labour measure that I mentioned will be fairly disastrous if we are to achieve the aims that we all want to achieve.

In the light of what Gordon Jackson says, is he confident that the project will be completed on time, by 2008?

Will the minister give way?

The minister will be aware of the report in The Herald yesterday that the estimated bill to reintroduce trams to Edinburgh has increased by £340 million to £714 million. Is the minister not concerned that, with projects being affected by rises of that sort, something will have to give? If so, will he tell the chamber what consideration the Executive has given to the matter and whether it has reached a conclusion?

Will the member give way?

rose—

Will the member give way?

rose—

Will the member give way?

I begin by praising the hard work of the MSPs, witnesses, clerks and everyone else who, for more than two years, have considered the Waverley Railway (Scotland) Bill. I welcome the huge effort that plainly has been made. I understand that the evidence of the proceedings extends to nine volumes; indeed, it is so extensive that it is too expensive to publish. The SNP has always supported the re-opening of a Borders railway. Beeching's act of transport vandalism in removing the Waverley line is not ancient history—it happened in the 1960s. Now the Scottish Parliament has the chance to put that right. The SNP carefully notes the criticisms in the committee's report, many of which the convener has outlined. We have lodged a reasoned amendment to the motion because I believe that the range and extent of the criticisms in the report are such that we require more than a simple noting motion. Those of us who believe that the project should go ahead must think about the best way of progressing it. The question is not so much about who should be in charge of the project—although that is important—but about the best way of turning it into a reality for Scotland and, in particular, for the people of the Borders. I make it absolutely clear that I recognise the hard work that has been put in by the promoter, Scottish Borders Council, and the other councils and partners involved in the project. I am not criticising any individual in any way. The council's spokesman acknowledged that the council had no previous experience of such a project. Perhaps, in that respect, comparisons can be drawn with the Scottish Parliament building. Indeed, if we extend those comparisons, we reach the conclusion that we should take every opportunity, whether mid-project or before a project has got under way, to consider the best way of delivering it. On the current private bills procedure, the First Minister remarked in his opening speech in this parliamentary year: "Too many critical transport projects that we have planned are taking too long to implement."— [ Official Report , 6 September 2005; c 18782.]  The fact that it has taken more than two years to complete the preliminary stage of the bill bears out  that conclusion, to which I hope we can all subscribe. The question for the Executive to consider is whether the seriousness and robust nature of the criticism in the committee's report merits a rethink about how best to proceed. I do not pretend to be an expert on procurement or to be able to say who should be in charge of the procurement process. It might be the Scottish Executive, the national transport agency or one of those bodies that puts a professional company in charge of project management—indeed there might be many other solutions.

I have discussed the matter with colleagues and have read the committee report, which we are debating. I look forward to having discussions with the promoter as we proceed. My point extends to the other projects with which we are concerned. Private bills on the Glasgow and Edinburgh airport rail link proposals are, apparently, to come before the Parliament, and ad-hoc committees are to consider them. I question whether it is conceivable that those two projects could be delivered on time if they were to suffer a two-year period for completion of the preliminary stage. I make that point so that it is on the record. Approximately three weeks ago, Ms Janette Anderson, the chief executive of First Engineering Ltd, made a speech in the chamber that I believe merits careful consideration by all. She pointed out that the £3 billion transport budget does not appear to have been spent thus far on new investment in the railway. She said: "Many of the schemes require parliamentary approval. My experience tells me that the process is unbelievably slow and cumbersome and that the schemes will never get off the ground in anything like the timescales in which they need to. The process needs a serious revamp—and it needs it right now." She also points out that, if the Scottish Executive does not get its act together, there is a danger that the supply chain will be "gobbled up in London" to meet the requirements of the London Olympics infrastructure projects, costed variously at between £4 billion and £17 billion, which was Barbara Cassani's estimate. When someone of Janette Anderson's eminence issues a coherent, thought-out and detailed warning to Government ministers, it should be taken very seriously indeed, given that it comes  from one of Scotland's leading businesswomen. We know that the First Minister's response was to call that lady an idiot. I believe that he made remarks about me recently, calling me the dourest of the dour brigade. I woke up yesterday morning, looked in the mirror and asked, "Mirror, mirror on the wall, who is the dourest of them all?" I do not mind if the First Minister decides to put me in the same club as Janette Anderson; I am quite happy to be in a club of people who suffer personal attacks from him. That does not really worry me. What concerns me is much more serious. Who is in charge of delivering these projects in Scotland? Is there any chance that they will be delivered on time? Does the minister agree with the SNP that this is the time to decide how best to deliver them? In the spirit of constructive co-operation, which, I hope, always informs my contributions in the chamber, I conclude by making a pledge to the Minister for Transport and Telecommunications: if he wishes to fast track this year—this month—a transport bill that will mean that the Parliament does not have to do work that it should not be doing and which it is not really qualified to do, he will have SNP's support. The aim of such a procedure would be delivery of the Borders railway line and more effective and efficient delivery of all appropriate and successful transport projects for the greater good of Scotland. I move amendment S2M-3329.1, to insert at end: "but in doing so expresses concern over the management of the project and therefore considers that the Scottish Executive should discuss with the promoter of the Bill whether it is able to continue to be the promoter."

To ask the Scottish Executive what measures it will take to promote greater opportunities for young people to participate in sport. (S2O-7481)

Does the minister agree that one of the best things that we could do for the young people who are here in the gallery today and living throughout Scotland would be to allow them the opportunity to participate in outdoor education and sports of all varieties at least once a year—preferably at Glenmore Lodge and other excellent establishments lying within the boundaries of my massive constituency?

The minister will be aware that during the past days and weeks the Governments of Poland, Austria, France, Belgium and other countries have taken action either to cut fuel tax or to introduce other measures to address the horrendous impact that the level of fuel costs is having in their economies. The minister mentioned that there is a dialogue, but is it not a dialogue of the hard of hearing? Is it not time for the Scottish Executive to spell out, clearly and in public, that Gordon Brown's fuel tax is too high and that the impact of the differential extra cost on the rural and island communities in the Highlands is causing unfair damage to individuals and businesses?

I apologise to the minister for missing the first two minutes of his speech. However, the rest of it—and the speeches that we have heard thus far—exemplify the sensitivity of the issues involved and the care that politicians of all parties take in addressing them. It is important that the people whom we represent in this Parliament see that those of us who are proud to be in political parties and to support those parties' economic and political platforms, can, nonetheless, take different views on matters of conscience. It is not that people expect that we should all vote in accordance with the party whip. The opposite is true: the people whom we represent expect that the party whip has no province in matters of conscience and morality. That is not to say that I stand up today to indulge in any polemics or any moral-majority campaign. I do so simply to express my views, which may or may not represent the views of all those in my constituency, which is the most populous in Scotland; in fact, it would be impossible for any of us to represent the views of everybody. I agree with the minister that today's debate should be about high principle, not the detail, which comes later. I agree with the sentiments that have been expressed by all speakers so far that we should all promote marriage. It is quite possible for us to promote and cherish marriage, to seek to have it adopted more widely, to confound the statistics and reverse the trend as far as we can with whatever influence we have as legislators and representatives of the people of Scotland. However, it is important to accept that those of us who feel strongly about these issues and who promote marriage are not impliedly or explicitly disparaging those who choose, for whatever reason, not to enter into marriage. To believe that marriage is the bedrock and the basis for the best possible chance for the upbringing of children does not entail any criticism of people such as single parents, who might in fact do a better job than do some of those who have entered into the state of marriage.  I have been happily married since 1983. Margaret chose St Andrew's night as the day on which we should be married because, of course, that would leave me with absolutely no excuse for forgetting her wedding anniversary. I stand before the chamber as an example of the imperfection of the human species—

It is rare for any statement of mine to be greeted with such widespread unanimity. As such, I suggest that it is not the institution of marriage that is imperfect but some of us who enter into it. The bill cannot in any way be said to undermine fundamentally the institution of marriage, but I think that it tinkers away at the edges. I believe that people who enter into marriage should do so "'till death us do part". That is not always possible, but it is the ideal. Scots law was reformed in 1976. Iain MacCormick, himself a Catholic, piloted the bill through the Houses of Parliament, which was a brave thing for him to do, given his background and beliefs. The Presiding Officer will remember those times. Iain MacCormick moved the law forward substantially by introducing non-cohabitation as a justification for the sole ground of divorce, which is, of course, the irretrievable breakdown of relations between husband and wife. In that regard, he introduced a period of two years for couples who had no children and a period of five years for couples who had children. The bill that we are discussing proposes to reduce those periods to one and two years respectively, as has been said. As a solicitor practising in this field, I was conscious that a little-known provision of the Divorce (Scotland) Act 1976 is that lawyers have a duty to promote reconciliation. From time to time, someone—usually a woman—would come to see me about a divorce but, after the first meeting, I would not see them again. I accept that that happened in only a minority of the cases, of course. I would not see them again not because they had gone to another lawyer but because, I suspect, second or third thoughts took place over a period of time and a decision was taken to reconcile. I do not think that we should put barriers in place to prevent that happening and I am slightly concerned that the reduction of the period from five years to two years does that. I think that it is fair to say that, if only a short period of non-cohabitation is required in cases in which children are involved, there is a diminution in the status of the institution of marriage. I think that a period of two years is too short.

I have not reached a final conclusion on that matter. On balance, I think that the member is probably correct and that a period of three or four years might be better. I look forward to the debate on that subject, although I do not expect to be able to attend all the relevant meetings of the Justice 1 Committee. It is to be welcomed that both the Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland and Cardinal Keith O'Brien speak out on these issues. However, it is unfortunate that some of what they have said has been greeted with a negative reaction. We should congratulate them on entering into the debate. Some people would regard it as the duty of such people to do so and I welcome, not excoriate, their contributions. The provisions in the bill relating to cohabitants can be criticised in substantial ways. If we are to have that new status, it has to be clear who is and who is not a cohabitant but that is not the case at the moment. Goodness knows how any sheriff could conceivably interpret the relevant section. I am grateful to have had the opportunity to make this speech. I stand before members as an example of imperfection, seeking perfection in the law. I suspect that that task might be beyond all of us but, no doubt, we will try as best we can.

I am grateful that the minister has given me an opportunity to add a point that I omitted to make in my original speech. At no time, anywhere, in any forum or in any debate have I ever suggested that the Executive should direct the trustees to do anything. I have said that, for six years, the trustees have been waiting in vain for the Executive's plans. They have expressed their concern about that to me in writing. Even now they have received no plans and the minister has not answered the question: will he clear the deficit or not?

Will the member take an intervention?

Where in the tendering proposals that Mr Lyon is supporting is there any protection against cherry picking?

The answer to all those questions is no, but Michael McMahon has not read our amendment—[ Interruption. ]

Our amendment calls for a task force to consider finally whether tendering is necessary, to consider the terms of the tender and to bring back as quickly as possible that work of experts, who have not had the opportunity to complete their case. It does not talk about law breaking, which was mentioned in the ridiculous and absurd intervention from the minister.

I had the great benefit this morning of enjoying the company of Councillor Donald Manford. When I discussed with him the issue of protecting lifeline services, he said that the term "lifeline" is 100 years old and suggests that the island communities in Scotland are entitled only to one or a few services. Instead, we should be talking about highways, because for our island communities the ferries are their cars and the sea is the road and the railway. We should think of the issue in that light. As the professor of business economics said in a submission to the 2002 consultation: "Perhaps it might help if the Scottish Executive were to imagine Morningside households and businesses having all transport access with the outside world completely severed ... for a whole week."

No, not at this point. The key issue in the debate from the Executive's point of view is that the EU says that we must tender. That view is not shared by Professor Neil Kay, Dr Paul Bennett or the STUC. It was also not the view expressed by Brian Wilson when he spoke on the subject some months ago—I suspect that the views of that gentleman are held in slightly higher esteem by some members on the back benches than they are by the minister who occupies the front bench, but that is just a wild guess. Over the past 36 hours, a number of people have given of their time pro bono to the Parliament. If those people, who include Scotland's leading academics, had charged for their time, they would have submitted a bill of £100,000. They gave their time for free because they care about the future of CalMac services. I make that point because those people have not had the chance to respond to the arguments in the Executive document. However, they have had the chance to speak to me—unhappily for them, some members may say. For example, Paul Bennett asked me where in the document the Coname case and the Irish Government's challenge on the state aid rules are considered.

I will do so after I have finished the point. Professor Neil Kay told me that the Executive's description of his arguments and work is frankly wrong. To misrepresent the people who came before the Parliament for the good of Scotland is a huge discourtesy to them and it is not good enough. We need to study the Executive document, but as a starting point and not a conclusion. That is why the SNP has suggested that a task force be set up under the chairmanship of an eminent person—Bristow Muldoon has an idea of the person to whom I am referring—to find a solution to the question whether tendering is necessary. The SNP does not believe that tendering is necessary. Even if we are wrong, it is clearly the case that the Executive's tendering plans are not good enough.

I would rather hear Professor Kay's views from Professor Kay. George Lyon has misrepresented Professor Kay's views just as they are misrepresented in the document. That is why the SNP argues for, and why an SNP Government would set up, a task force to unravel the problems. [ Interruption. ] The minister can barely restrain himself—

I am corrected by Mr Swinney—the minister cannot restrain himself. The Executive tells us that, if we do not tender the routes, the most horrendous consequences will befall Scotland. If that is the case, how is it that Finland has directly funded services yet will not be tendering for at least three years? Where are the horrendous consequences for Finland? What about Malta? The timescale given for Malta is 2010, which is five years away, during which time, I imagine, heavy fines will not be imposed.

What about the Baltic countries? What about Denmark? What about the case of Trasmediterránea, in Spain, which the European Court of Justice found had broken the rules? Trasmediterránea was fined, but it did not have to  pay the fine—perhaps because Mme Loyola de Palacio, the Spanish transport commissioner, had a little influence behind the scenes.

No, I will not. The minister enjoys playing the man, not the ball, in politics—I have observed that that is what he tends to do when he is losing the game.

I hope that Labour members will take seriously the STUC's arguments. What about costs? Yesterday, the minister said that the tendering process would cost more money. Well, there we are. He might mention the letter that he sent to Sylvia Jackson, which refers to Finland going to tender. Perhaps he thinks that it supports his arguments. However, I notice that the Finnish Government said that it is going to tender because it expects that it will save money. Yesterday, the minister said that tendering would cost money. When Bruce Crawford asked how much more would be an acceptable price for the Executive to pay—£10 million, £20 million, £30 million or £40 million, all sums that Jeanette Findlay postulated in her detailed paper—answer came there none. On the timetable, Audit Scotland agreed, after the good work of my colleague Brian Adam, to investigate the shambles of the NorthLink experience. He will talk more about that later—all I will say is that the Executive seems unable to learn from its mistakes.

We are deciding today whether CalMac services will go out to tender; it is a bit late in the day to start looking into things. Let me turn to the workforce and communities. [ Interruption. ] Our alternative would allow that to happen, so members should vote for our amendment. As I said, let me turn to the workforce and communities, which is the third element in the STUC's press release that was issued today and circulated to every MSP, including Labour and Liberal MSPs. I am interested to hear their comments. When, in an intervention, the minister  was asked whether there would be an assurance on workforce rights for the duration of the contract, he did not say yes.

No, he did not. He said that he would consider the matter. One has to listen carefully in politics, because the record will show that he did not say yes. I know what union members are worried about, because, with many of my SNP colleagues, I spoke to some of them today. They are worried because some of the companies that are after the CalMac and NorthLink tenders pay their staff €2 an hour. Is that acceptable to Labour members? Pensions were one issue on which I asked a question of the minister yesterday but answer came there none.

I will put the question again to the minister in case he decides to come up with an answer. He knows that I have pursued the issue with CalMac and with the trustees over a long period. As I told him yesterday, the press release that I issued has been confirmed as factually accurate by the trustees, so if he attacks me he is attacking them. The key point is that all the tender plans say is that any successful bidder must provide an actuarially equivalent pension fund. The current pension fund is in deficit, so the obligation on the successful company will be to provide a pension fund that is in deficit. What comfort is that to the more than 800 members of the CalMac fund? There is also a concern that, as the Executive plans are for a vessel-owning company and an operations company—vesco and opsco—CalMac will not have any assets when it has to put the pension deficit on the balance sheet next year, which means that it might be bankrupt when it is submitting its bid. In those circumstances, how could its bid be considered? The pension trustees have a fiduciary duty to their members. I respect their role. I know that they are concerned about the matter, as are members and the people whom they represent. I am concerned about it, too. The Executive has had six years to come up with the necessary plan to put to the trustees, but the trustees have received no plan, which they are concerned about. They cannot say whether the workers' rights will be protected without a plan. Is it possible to produce a plan? I doubt it, but it is clear that the consequences for the workers could be horrendous. An SNP Government would not tender; instead, it would protect CalMac and its workforce and  improve the ferry services to our island communities in Scotland. I move amendment S2M-3253.3, to leave out from "welcomes" to end and insert: "notes that the Minister for Transport and Telecommunications has stated that the tender process which he supports will result in extra cost to the taxpayer and believes that the Scottish Executive's tender proposals may put employment and pension rights at risk, whilst not resulting in any improvement to ferry services for the Clyde and Hebrides; believes that documents published by the Executive on 12 September 2005 should be considered further but that as they stand the tender proposals are flawed, and calls on the Executive to remit the matter to the Local Government and Transport Committee with a view to the appointment of a task force to give final consideration to the question as to whether tendering is the sole method of satisfying the legal requirements and, insofar as possible, to devise solutions to the flaws contained in the Executive's current proposals."

Does the minister accept that, as those substantial documents were published only on Monday, it would be sensible to allow Professor Neil Kay, Dr Paul Bennett, Jeanette Findlay and other experts who have given their time pro bono to analyse them? The documents should be a starting point and not a conclusion. Does he accept that a task force would be the best way of making a final assessment of the matter and of considering the complex issues around tendering that the Scottish Trades Union Congress rightly stressed today?

Will the minister give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I seek your guidance under the standing orders, in particular under the rule requiring respect towards other members. When a minister is closing a debate and is supposed to be responding to arguments that have been made  during that debate, is it consistent with the duty to which I have referred that a minister simply reads out from a pre-prepared text?

It was on the back of a fag packet.

I apologise in advance to members because I will need to leave before the  end of the debate to attend to constituency business. I, too, welcome Nicol Stephen to his new role, although I will miss the friendly exchanges that we had during his tenure of the transport portfolio. However, I am pleased to hear that he is now the self-proclaimed champion of tackling red tape and bureaucracy. I had not previously noticed the minister taking the courageous step of making such grand claims. Indeed, I had rather admired his former guile and caution. This seems to be a new bold Nicol—Nicol max, not Nicol lite—but we welcome him. On a serious note, however, will the minister follow up his claim by producing specific proposals on which pieces of red tape he will consign to the new Nicol dustbin? For example, will he consign to the dustbin regulations that might have an impact on many small businesses in his patch and in mine? The regulations to which I refer will force people who have private water supplies to pay several hundred pounds more—perhaps even more than £1,000 more—for monitoring of that supply. Such supplies provide Scotland's water pure and sweet to many customers, none of whom seems to have died as a consequence of visiting bed and breakfasts with such supplies throughout the land. Alternatively, will that red tape come into being like every other piece of red tape? Will we see Nicol Stephen as Rocky, or will we see business remain on the ropes? Let me turn to fuel, which no one has mentioned so far. As Jamie Stone will know, the pump price reached £1.06 in Caithness this week. For people in many parts of Scotland—and for Sloane rangers in Chelsea, where people have more money than sense—£1 a litre has become the norm and is likely to remain so for several years to come. What will the Executive do about that? As Nicol Stephen knows and appreciates, people in industries such as farming—the National Farmers Union Scotland released a statement on the subject today—fishing, timber and, in particular, haulage are suffering severely because of those high prices. At the start of the summer recess, I visited a haulier in the north-east who explained to me that the impact of fuel costs and the working time directive may force his company—as it has forced many other companies—out of business. Every week, haulage companies are forced into liquidation. They do not court publicity or headlines, but many are getting out before their overdraft gets too high. Who can blame them? Some companies, including one major company in the north of Scotland, are thinking of relocating to England because of the high transport costs. If they do so, that will be utterly tragic. We have already seen the closure of Norfrost Ltd. Sadly, Arjo Wiggins Ltd has decided that it will cease its  operations in Fort William; it cited transport costs as a significant factor—I do not say that it is the main or only factor—in its decision. I wait to hear what the minister will do about the situation. It is clear, in any case, that something needs to be done. I hope that the minister will support the Road Haulage Association's call for a thoroughgoing inquiry into the freight industry. Some of the things that are being done are good, for example the training and recruitment of drivers, although more needs to be done in that respect, and I hope that Parliament will take that on board. I am gravely concerned that Scotland, Europe's major producer of oil over the past three decades, also has the unfortunate distinction of paying the highest fuel tax in Europe. That seems to me to be nothing less than fiscal sadism. Moving swiftly on to the topic of business rates, I enjoyed Murdo Fraser's version of the Tory Government's record in that regard. Before he administers too many more lectures to members of other parties, he should reflect on the fact that between 1979 and 1995—15 years out of 17 years of Tory Government—business rates in Scotland were higher than they were in England. Ian Lang stepped in to take measures to fix a national higher rate, taking power away from councils, but he did not do so until 1990. It was Craig Campbell of the Scottish Council for Development and Industry who calculated that the amount of overtaxation from 1990 to 1995 alone was £1.2 billion.

Certainly.

I tried. When Mr Fraser gives lectures about Jack McConnell overtaxing business by £800 million, he should reflect on the fact that his party was perhaps even worse. It is only in the past two years that we have had a so-called level playing field. It was the current First Minister, Jack McConnell, who introduced the higher poundage. When he did so in 1999, I remember calling it "Jack's tax", after its author. It was Jack who brought the tax to life: it lived for six years, then he killed it. That is the first case that I can recall of fiscal infanticide. I will finish by quoting Oscar Wilde. He said:  "Yet each man kills the thing he loves ... The brave man with a sword ... Some do it with a bitter look".

I will sit down on that point.

As the minister probably knows this information far better than I do, will he confirm that the cost of return fares from some of our islands to the mainland can exceed £300 and that his constituents have suffered that exorbitant cost for too long? Will he also confirm that HITRANS has been making what the former Deputy First Minister described as "steady progress" for six years now? Does he agree that it is now time to try out the HITRANS proposals and to reject both the landing charges option and the new entrant—aid having a social character—which many believe has been introduced as an attempt to foil the strategic transport partnership's proposals?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it considers that diversionary courses, such as the methods deployed in the television series "Bad Lads Army", can play a role in turning young people away from a life of crime. (S2O-7390)

Does the minister accept that courses such as Highland youth advantage, which is run jointly by the Army and the Northern constabulary for male and female teenagers—"Bad Lads Army" without the beasting and physical punishment—have had remarkable success? The courses employ two features. The first is a mixture of physical education, exercise, training and lectures in citizenship and about drugs. The second—the essential part—is that they get young people who may be on the cusp of a career of crime away from their natural home habits and habitats and show them that there is a better way. Is the minister aware of the huge success of those schemes in the past four years?

The First Minister introduced the higher poundage—which I call Jack's tax in honour of its inventor—but is now scrapping it. He has said that the business rate poundage will be cut to the levels pertaining in England. When? From the start of which financial year? Does he not know?

Will the First Minister confirm that, if the Scottish Executive decides that the tender of the Clyde and Hebridean ferry services must proceed, and if CalMac were to lose that tender, CalMac's pension fund would have to close, and will he confirm that the actuarial valuation of the cost of closing the fund is, at present, £24.8 million? Does the First Minister accept that, in those circumstances, the Government would have to pay that amount, and does he accept that that amount is vastly in excess of any conceivable savings that might possibly derive from the decision to go ahead to tender? Does the First Minister agree that to  proceed to tender those services would be utter folly?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether the national concessionary travel scheme will be introduced in April 2006, as announced by the Minister for Transport on 22 December 2004, and whether the scheme will include the use of the smart-card system. (S2O-7317)

Does the minister—who I welcome to his new responsibilities—agree that the smart-card machinery that was intended to be used will not be available; that no financial modelling was done; that local authorities will find it difficult if not impossible to collate the details of the estimated 1.2 million qualifying people; and that Scots in rural areas where there are no bus services will have no benefit from the scheme? Does the minister agree that his new leader has bequeathed him a bit of a boorach?

No way.

I pay tribute to the committee clerks and the bill team, who have provided us with invaluable assistance throughout the passage of the bill. The Scottish National Party will support the bill this evening because we believe that a modern transport policy should have a strong regional voice. Much progress has been made during the passage of the bill to transform a skeleton into something that we can support. However, much will depend on how the bill is implemented and many questions remain to be answered. For example, we do not know what the relationships will be between the Executive and the agency and the agency and the RTPs. Those relationships need to be spelled out; nevertheless, there is potential. Every modern European Union state that has a better transport system than Scotland has a method of regional transport formulation and has had more investment over a long period than we have seen in Scotland under successive Westminster Governments of either hue. We acknowledge that the transport budget has, of late, risen and has improved, but we have substantial doubts about the way some of that investment has been made. It is ironic that, in stage 3, no consideration was given to the concessionary travel scheme. No amendments were lodged on that subject and  details on it will be brought forward later. We support a concessionary travel scheme, but it seems to me—having had access to documents including a report from consultants MVA Ltd—that the problem with the scheme is not that it is not worthy: it is. Likewise, it is not the case that we do not want senior citizens and disabled people to have the benefit of concessionary travel, because we do. The problem is that the scheme has not been thought through. Every person who is involved with it knows that that is the case. The smart-card technology that is supposed to be used next April will not be ready in time—at least, it will not be capable of being used with the machines on the buses—which will add extra cost. The financial memorandum states that, over two years, the cost of the concessionary travel scheme will be £196 million, but we know that the ceiling for the first year of the concessionary scheme is £155 million. The cost has risen dramatically, so one is bound to ask whether we are getting value for money from the bus companies. Have the bus companies got an exceptionally good deal? Will local authorities be able to assimilate and collate the necessary data about every senior citizen in their areas, as we anticipate they will be charged to do, and turn that information into smart cards by next April? Given that there are approximately 1.2 million senior citizens in Scotland, I doubt it. Will the scope for fraud be exacerbated by the fact that the smart-card system will not be introduced on 1 April? It must be. Will the company that is understood to be the only company that can manufacture the smart-card machines have the Executive over a barrel in respect of delivery of tens of thousands of machines? It might. Will it be able to supply the smaller bus companies? It has been put to me that that might not be its preferred commercial practice. That said, we are pleased that the bill has been transformed and that it will provide RTPs with reasonably strong powers. The SNP would like politics—with a capital P—to be taken out of formulation of transport policy. As I have always said, the way to do that is to use the method that has been adopted in the USA, where there are long-term transport plans that allow people to find out what road projects are due to be carried out in nine or 10 years, for example. With such a long-term plan comes realism and with realism comes an end to the unrealistic expectations that, understandably, people throughout Scotland have that every road in their area and every rail system should be improved. I believe that long-term plans should be produced by the RTPs. The most important problem with this afternoon's deliberations, which have otherwise been productive, is that there was no decision that the RTPs will be required to  prioritise their transport schemes or projects. It is one thing to prioritise elements of a transport policy, but it is a completely different matter to say, "Here are the 10 projects that should be delivered and here's the order in which we think they should be delivered."

That is the role that Government plays. It is unfortunate that the RTPs are not being asked to play that role as well, but an SNP Government will remove that inconsistency, as members would expect. That is something to which members can all look forward.

The Rail Passengers Committee Scotland is due formally to expire in July. I understand that some members of the committee have said that they wish and are willing to  continue. The minister has explained that, by an administrative act, he will introduce a rail passengers committee on a non-statutory basis, but he has not explained when or how that will happen or what the committee will do. Given that the committee will not have statutory powers to require Network Rail or other organisations to provide information, it will be a watchdog whose incisors are missing. For those reasons, I will press amendment 50.

I will press the amendment.

I hope that the mist remains clear. The purpose of my amendments is to bring back the Rail Passengers Committee Scotland. All parties in the chamber have recognised that that body has done an excellent job for rail passengers  in Scotland. It is not a girning, whining, carping body, but is recognised instead by everybody as having achieved a great expertise on the Scottish railway network over a number of years. There are 335 stations in Scotland, 2,100 trains a day and 3,000km of route, which represents up to a fifth of the UK network. The Rail Passengers Committee Scotland has been scrapped just as the Scottish Executive has received more powers over the railway. I have it on fairly good authority that one senior Lib Dem figure described that notion as "potty". It is potty that, on one hand, new powers over the railways are transferred to Scotland and, on the other, the Scottish consumer watchdog is scrapped—apparently defanged at the insistence of Network Rail. That organisation has deployed power over the UK Government, which plainly wanted to remove the teeth from the Scottish committee as an effective customer champion. At stage 2, I lodged this amendment and Paul Martin proposed that there should be a different type of body, which would be a public transport users committee. On the basis that it is better in life to get something rather than nothing, I supported his proposal with reservations. However, the reason why I bring back my amendment today—with a twist—is that it is apparent that there will be no committee for rail passengers, no customer watchdog and no champion of the consumer interest for a considerable period. Amendment 50 does not say that Paul Martin's model of a multimodal committee should be scrapped. If one takes all my amendments together, they say that once Paul Martin's public transport users committee model begins, the rail passengers committee for Scotland will cease. That means that Executive members can have it both ways. They can have their new public transport users multimodal committee, but they can also ensure that no gap is left where there is no effective voice for rail passengers in Scotland. My amendments would remove the dilemma that would face Labour and Liberal members about whether to vote according to their conscience or according to their voting instructions. I am sure that Lib-Lab members will be truly grateful for the removal of that dilemma. Therefore, I have great pleasure in yet again proposing absolutely constructive, sensible and workable amendments. I move amendment 50.

I suppose that I could paraphrase Mrs Thatcher by saying that where there was doubt, the minister has brought clarity. [ Interruption. ] That seemed to be popular in Conservative quarters. I welcome the minister's acceptance, albeit at stage 3, of the principle that a level playing field should exist between the private sector and the public sector. Initially, the bill would have imposed fines on private utility companies that dug up the roads and failed to meet their obligations, but if a local authority or the Scottish Executive—through BEAR Scotland, Amey and other companies—had failed to fulfil its obligations, it would not have been fined. That was not a level playing field. The national joint utilities group and many others have lobbied hard and undertaken much work on the matter, which allowed me to discuss amendments at a meeting with the minister and civil servants. It also allowed me to withdraw about 20 amendments, which has spared Parliament the time of debating them—that was certainly popular—because the minister has come round to the principle of a level playing field. That will be of inestimable benefit. We still have doubts about whether the commissioner will, of necessity, do a better job than the existing bodies have done, but we shall support the amendments.

One lacuna in the bill is that it is far from clear how the RTPs are to relate to the national transport agency and how those bodies will relate to the Scottish Executive. Last Sunday, the Scottish Chambers of Commerce made a strong argument on the importance of ensuring that the national transport agency that will be set up has a clear focus on the need for economic growth and that sustainable economic development is at the heart of the new agency's functioning and purpose. As the SNP is supportive of that aim, I felt that it was appropriate to lodge an amendment to allow us at least to debate the issue. I understand that the Executive has as its primary purpose the promotion of economic growth in Scotland, so I imagine that it will be sympathetic to the amendment. Of course, the phrase "sustainable economic growth" is  susceptible to interpretation. In the past, I have opined that it could be regarded as imprecise. However, I note that the Executive adopted a similar phrase in its amendments this morning, so I imagine that it will not wish to split hairs over such a minor matter—although something tells me that that may be in the minister's script. I hope that the Executive, which says that economic growth is its top priority, will vote in line with those sentiments. I move amendment 49.

At stage 2, I lodged amendment 70, much of which—happily—is reproduced in amendment 27. I welcome amendment 27 and will support it, but I ask the minister to clarify two points. What does "entering into public service contracts" mean? Is he concerned that there may be an imbalance between the RTP in the west of Scotland, which will have maximal powers to carry out public projects, and the RTPs elsewhere in Scotland, which will not have such powers?

Will the RTP in the Highlands have the power to stipulate a public service obligation for flights within that area?

Proposed new section 5(2)(e) does not refer to schemes; it refers only to "elements". Without prioritisation of schemes, there is nothing.

Could the minister define a heavily populated place?

My colleague Bruce Crawford will deal with the substance of amendments 17B and 17C and I will address the remaining topics. We all agree that the voluntary partnerships throughout Scotland have done excellent work. In my area, the Highlands and Islands transport partnership has shown that it can work cohesively and well while covering the largest geographical territory in Scotland. However, the SNP believes that we need to go a step further—if we are to have regional transport partnerships, they should have strong powers. I was pleased to work with other members of the Local Government and Transport Committee on the issue and I support the recommendation in paragraph 9 of the committee's report. We broadly welcome the minister's amendment 17, which is the most important amendment with which we will deal today. The purpose of giving the RTPs a duty to come up with a strategy is to give them not simply power and influence, but responsibility. If the RTPs are to take the politics out of transport, they will have to take some rather hard decisions. That might be why proposed new section 5(2)(a)(ii) states that the RTPs must have regard to "what can be done, taking account of cost, funding and practicability". We support amendment 17, although it is unfortunate that the provisions were not in the bill originally. If they had been, we would have had a coherent debate on the provisions now. However, as someone who always looks on the brighter side, I welcome the late arrival of amendment 17 and will offer suggested improvements to it, which will add to it. There is one fundamental issue that I will come to last.  Under amendment 17E, the regional transport partnerships would have to have regard to promoting "wider public access to all forms of public transport provided within the region". I am surprised that there is no specific reference to public transport in amendment 17. Of course, there is a reference to "the safety of users of public transport", but that is only one aspect of public transport. Given that there is a lack of bus services, particularly in rural areas, I would like the RTPs to have a duty under the bill to promote wider public access to public transport. I know that members of the committee will be with me in spirit; I hope that they are also with me in substance. I cannot see what the objection would be to including amendment 17E in the bill. The minister says that he has longer speaking notes—no doubt we will hear from them later. However, in the absence of any reason why we should not have a specific reference to wider access to public transport, it seems very surprising indeed that the provisions that amendment 17E would introduce were not included in amendment 17. On amendment 17G, it is important that the regional transport partnerships make specific provision for each mode of transport. Amendment 17G is a rewording of an amendment that I lodged at stage 2. The regional transport partnerships' work needs to be comprehensive and must cover all modes of transport. I did not list the modes of transport on this occasion, because I think that I might have omitted some rather obscure ones in my stage 2 amendment—unicycle, hansom cab, that sort of thing—but I hope that the RTPs will have that specific duty. The main argument that I will advance today is that, for the RTPs to work, they should not just provide a strategy as specified in section 5, as it will be amended by amendment 17. To fulfil the provisions of proposed new subsection (2)(e), they must work out a scheme of priorities. They cannot just produce a wish list of transport schemes that they might want to see in place. In the Highlands, the list might include dualling the A96, A9, A82 and A85, and having three times as many air flights to all the islands, but that would be no use at all. What the RTPs need is a list of priorities—a top 10 or a top 20. That will involve difficult decisions and consultation by the RTPs with the electorate, the people and everyone who has an interest. Unless the RTPs come forward with such a list of priorities, the danger is that we will simply end up with a wish list. If the RTPs do come up with a list of priorities, that will have a number of benefits. First, instead  of having futile debates about everything being impossible when we know that it is not, the public will be asked to focus on what can be achieved, Secondly, it will be of huge benefit to central Government for each region to have a clearly stated list of priorities. An RTP would not be bound by that list, but it would be strongly persuasive. Thirdly, the regions that do their job properly and set out a comprehensive list of priorities will be in a strong position to argue their case when it comes to funding. If the minister does not accept my amendments, as he has indicated is the case, I hope that he will tell Parliament why he feels that they are a bad idea. Proposed new subsection (2)(e) in amendment 17 will not require the RTPs to take the really tough action that Scotland needs.

I point out to the minister that, in the last line of amendment 10, the word "section" appears to have been omitted.

Can the minister respond to my argument that, although there are some schemes that can and will be brought forward, there are not enough schemes, because there is not a sufficient preparation pool?

Will the member give way?

rose—

I will spoil the newly emergent consensus by asking Mr Ballard whether he accepts that part of the reason for the 12-month slippage in the M74 project is the threatened court action by Friends of the Earth Scotland and JAM74—joint action against the M74. Does he support that court action and, if so, how does he square that with his new commitment to maximise efficiency given that, by his actions, he causes further slippage, delays and underspends?

The motion's title begins, "Financial Management", which is a much wider topic than the matter of whether we manage to reduce the underspend. Des McNulty said that the Executive should be congratulated on the reduction in "expenditure slippage", which I think was a newly-crafted phrase. However, what counts is not as much what we spend as what we get. The efficient management of large amounts of money is what matters and that is the main topic for the debate. I want to address transport, which is in my portfolio, and to use two examples to demonstrate that the Executive has failed to use its substantial resources effectively. First, let us consider the intended repurchase of the Inverness airport terminal private finance initiative. The PFI was approved by the Labour Government in 1998 and the terminal cost £9.6 million. A £3 million grant was awarded and Noble and Company Ltd, the merchant bank, provided the remaining capital of around £6 million. This week, Nicol Stephen  announced in Inverness that the PFI contract would be bought out. We do not know the buy-back price, but we expect it to be around £25 million. The merchant bank that currently owns the PFI has already received nearly £9 million, which means that under the PFI investment by the Labour Government—it was initiated by the Conservatives; I will not leave them out—a private sector merchant bank invested £6 million and eight years later the current owners will receive a return of £34 million, £35 million or £36 million. That represents a 600 per cent return in eight years. Can any member who supports PFI, whatever their perverse ideological reasons for doing so, justify that deal? The Scottish Executive tried to buy out the PFI contract a couple of years ago and I am informed that at that time a lower price was agreed, but the negotiations were not completed. The precise reasons for that remain cloaked in official secrecy—it is helpful to be able to argue for commercial confidentiality when one needs to cover up one's economic incompetence. However, there is an opportunity cost of around £20 million, because that amount of money would have been available if Inverness airport terminal had been built through conventional procurement by the Government. In effect, £20 million has been wasted. Secondly, let us consider the M74 extension. I am an ardent supporter of the project, which is necessary for the economy of central Scotland and Glasgow and will reduce fatalities. Indeed, the number of fatal road accidents in Glasgow has fallen from 141 in 1967, before motorways were built, to 13 in 2003. The economic arguments for the project are compelling. Of course, the Executive likes to indulge in its favourite weakness of premature congratulation. I know that Mr McCabe does not believe Executive press releases, but I remind him that a press release from the Minister for Transport and Planning on 11 October 2001 was entitled, "M74 extension to begin". However, in 2005 there are no obvious signs that a yard of concrete has been laid. The Executive likes to make premature announcements; it also likes to hold public inquiries that cost £1 million when it has already made up its mind before the first word of evidence is heard. What is happening now is far more serious, which brings me to my main point. The Executive has not followed a prudent management policy in its procurement programme. Its particular failing was identified by a witness who gave evidence on behalf of the civil engineering sector to the Local Government and Transport Committee on 9 November 2004. Neil Johnstone of the Institution of Civil Engineers said:  "The existence in the programme of several substantial or chunky projects presents challenges for programme management. One way to deal with that would be to have flexible responses ready to deal with hiatuses in the delivery of any project. That could be achieved by creating a preparation pool of projects".—[ Official Report, Local Government and Transport Committee, 9 November 2004; c 1385.] Delays can occur in projects for all sorts of reasons. If the Government is to fulfil its role of ensuring a steady stream of work for the civil engineering sector, it has to have a prepared pool of projects that can fill any hiatuses. What has happened with the M74? I have here a confidential document from the Scottish Executive Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning Department on the Scottish motorway and trunk road programme at February 2005. The only major project for 2006-07 was to have been the M74; that was the only A-category project of more than £150 million. B-category projects are valued at £100 million to £150 million, and there are no B-category projects in the programme. Instead of having work of a value of up to £500 million to do, the construction sector is suddenly without that work. What has been the major problem in the construction sector over the past decades? Boom and bust. What has prevented the construction sector from bringing back apprenticeships and creating stability in employment? It was the boom-and-bust economy, to which the incompetence of successive Governments in failing to create a preparation pool contributed.

We certainly have many more people on invalidity benefit than we have had before. It all depends on how statistics are measured. I was addressing specific points on the lack of the creation of a preparation pool and on the lack of a sound approach to managing procurement contracts. The minister has not responded to those points and neither has the Minister for Transport.

I see that Mr Purvis is going to try to enlighten me. Here is his chance.

No, it is not. The M74 project involves three contracts with a total value of around £500 million. If Jeremy Purvis wants to study the document, I will give it to him later. In it, he will see that the planned programme does not contain enough projects of sufficient size to fill the gaps.

Projects are being brought forward but it will be interesting to see details on the timing. There are not enough projects because the Executive has not prepared its work properly and is not running public finances properly. The Executive presents ideas as plans but they are not plans at all because the details have not been thought through. Whether it is the SNH relocation—a decision that was taken for purely political reasons—the concessionary travel scheme that was announced in December 2004 but for which the details had not been worked out, or the lack of a preparation pool, it seems to me that the Executive has failed to heed the basic lesson that it should have learned from a gentleman who lived in a house just across the road from this building. That gentleman bequeathed to the world the process of rational analysis as the means of governing. His name was Adam Smith. Instead of applying sound management to the expenditure of the public purse, the Executive is far more concerned about tomorrow's headlines, premature announcements and political hits. As long as that is the case, the Scottish public will be rightly sceptical about what we get for the increase in expenditure about which we have heard this morning.

Members of all parties welcome Derek Brownlee, the new Tory in the Scottish Parliament, so I begin by referring to an old Conservative. Winston Churchill suffered an enforced departure from the constituency that he held in Dundee when he was beaten—in 1923, I think—by a candidate for a party that I believe advocated temperance. We say that the drinking culture in Scotland is deeply ingrained, as indeed it is, but there was a counterpart to that culture, which approved of temperance and frowned on alcohol. It might no longer exist, except perhaps in pockets of Cathcart and the Western Isles and even in parts of the Highlands. The culture has changed. I confess to having a particular interest in consumption of alcohol. When I am under the influence, the world seems to be a happier place, problems seem to have much simpler solutions and I am even capable of becoming dogmatic. Humphrey Bogart said that the source of many of the world's problems was the fact that other people are "three drinks behind". Although there is an element of truth in that, the serious point to which many members alluded is that too many people in Scotland are six, nine or 12 drinks ahead, which is a far greater problem. The written submissions that Alcohol Focus Scotland and the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland provided to the Local Government and Transport Committee contained the most fundamental analyses of the problem. ACPOS said: "Legislation, unfortunately, does not change ingrained culture". Members made the same point in the debate. Drinking to excess is acceptable in Scotland. ACPOS pointed out that in little more than two decades, from 1980 to 2003, the number of licensed premises in Scotland rose by a fifth—3,000 more pubs opened during the period. ACPOS argued that as drinking increased, licensed premises increased in number. The association found it difficult not to accept the proposition that the more licensed premises there are and the longer such premises remain open, the more drinking there will be. I find it hard to resist that logic, although I know that it can be challenged. However, for that to happen, the culture must change. Cultures can change, of course. In evidence, Jack Law of Alcohol Focus Scotland compared Scotland with other countries; in his interesting speech, Kenny MacAskill stressed many of those points and therefore spared me the temptation to be dogmatic. Jack Law pointed out that over the  past 30 years other countries have succeeded in substantially reducing consumption of alcohol per head. I do not quite know how the statistics are calculated—other than through lengthy liquid research—but France, Italy and Spain have reduced consumption of alcohol per head by 47, 37 and 18 per cent respectively. A substantial culture change has clearly taken place in those countries. I echo what Kenny MacAskill said: we should resist the temptation—a temptation that seems to exist in society—to blame young people and to say that they are the source of the problems. I am not saying that any particular member said that, but there is an underlying assumption that it is the case. It is not the case. Young people are not the problem; they inherited this Scotland from us. We, not they, created the problem. The Local Government and Transport Committee did a good and thorough job. The SNP played a substantial part in that, just as we play a substantial part in all the work of this Parliament. Members know that, even though they may feel that we go on a bit from time to time—not me, obviously. The minister has accepted many of the committee's recommendations, and we welcome that. However, we can go further. The police have stated that their advice on licensing applications used to be able to go beyond simply providing details of convictions. A senior officer in Lothian and Borders police has repeated that point recently and I hope that the Executive will accept it. The standard of proof that is required in matters relating to licences is a civil standard of proof. It comes down to the balance of probabilities, so further information from the police is essential. I encourage members of the Local Government and Transport Committee to support our reasoned amendment because doing so would enhance the motion and would be entirely consistent with what committee members decided. We drew attention to the fact that the Finance Committee had said that more robust financial details were required. The Local Government and Transport Committee was therefore "not able to determine whether the Financial Memorandum is adequate." If he reads page 92 of the committee's report, the minister will see that Mr Crawford's reasoned amendment borrows the committee's wording. It is complete rubbish to argue that supporting the reasoned amendment means voting against the bill. The reasoned amendment can enhance and supplement the motion. There is a serious problem in the lack of detail on licensing standards officers. As the committee found, we do not know what LSOs' functions will  be. We do not know what they are for, we do not know what they are to do, we do not know how many there will need to be and we do not know how much they should be paid. The police think that even the limited information that is available shows many defects. LSOs should not have the power to enter unlicensed premises, such as our homes. It seems to me that that particular part of the bill should not have been included until it contained much more detail. To say that LSOs should have a starting salary of £15,000 to £30,000 rather suggests that the Executive just has not worked things out. Lack of forethought seems to be the hallmark of the Executive's approach to formulating legislation. If the Executive could take one lesson from me, I would suggest that the Executive should kick binge legislating.

The committee expressed concern that the role, function and salary of licensing standards officers are opaque. Will the Executive tell us how many officers there should be, what the total cost will be and who will pay?

I congratulate Jackie Baillie on all her hard work. I will allude to Karen Gillon's reference to the plight of people with learning disabilities who live in parts of rural Scotland, who are often extremely isolated. Linda Fabiani explained movingly some of the consequences that that can have on a human level. This week I received a reminder from a constituent in Badenoch and Strathspey that there is no supported accommodation for adults who have learning disabilities in that area—even though the area is considerably larger than greater London. I am pleased that there are plans for a small unit and I hope that that work can be progressed fairly quickly. Linda Fabiani mentioned two feisty females, Madge and Jeanette, who gave a bravura performance before the Public Petitions Committee. Jenny Fullarton and Kenneth MacLennan followed them in speaking to that committee. They got a very fair hearing and I am pleased to see that the convener of the committee, Michael McMahon, is here this evening. As Eleanor Scott suggested, they came before the committee because they wanted to explain their experience. "The same as you?" has had widespread support but initially, as the minister will know, some of the parents of children who have learning disabilities had to be persuaded that it was deliverable, practical and that it would work. They know more than anybody else can ever know the difficulties of looking after children who have  profound learning disabilities. Those parents were persuaded after a while because the Government said back in 2000 that there would be no more long-term residential learning disabilities hospitals by 2005—their hopes were raised. As was mentioned, on 16 March there were 33 long-stay residents in the learning disabilities unit at Raigmore hospital. I am told that there were previously 38. The problem is that hopes were raised and then dashed. We should all recognise that and I do not say that in a party-political sense. There is no single solution and nobody is arguing that one size fits all. Each person who has learning disabilities has the right—we should remember this—to make choices, as we do. We should never speak of people as if they have no right or capacity to make choices. In that respect, rather than repeat points that have been made eloquently by others, I put in a plea for the role of advocates such as Jenny Fullarton, who not only speak out for people who are not always able to speak for themselves, or who might on occasion be unable to do so, but also build up a bond of trust and confidence that allows children especially, but also adults, who have learning disabilities to achieve their potential. I have no doubt that the minister and everyone here wishes to see the implementation of "The same as you?" The core and cluster model might be worthy of support, especially for people who have stayed for a long time in residential hospitals and who have built up a rapport and friendship with others. It is not necessarily easy for people in such situations to make quick friendships; they might be slow to build up trust, so that model is one option. I praise the work that has been done by Highland Council, by Councillor David Flear and many others. I am pleased to say that since March there has been progress in respect of five tenancies, so it is not all doom and gloom, even from Fergus Ewing.

I note that the Lord Advocate said "At the present time" and that the legality of the convictions has been tested on many occasions. However, he will be aware of the work that Robbie the Pict has carried out on the matter, with considerable legal scholarship—perhaps more than in the work of some of my learned friends. Does the Lord Advocate accept that the authority to levy the tolls rested on an assignation document that, as Robbie the Pict has pointed out, was never signed? Can the Lord Advocate state where that challenge was tested in the courts? If he cannot do so, will he say what remedy, route or other means can be taken to finish this unfinished business in Scotland?

I raise a constituency question, of which I have given the First Minister notice. He will be aware that, this week, Lochaber was dealt a crushing blow with the threat to Arjo Wiggins paper mill in Corpach and the possible loss of 130 jobs. There is a consultation period of 90 days, however, and I invite the First Minister, as a sign of the Scottish Executive's commitment, to arrange for the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning to meet next week the directors of the company, in order to ensure that every possible measure to avert the closure—whether by diversification, a new purchaser or other means—is found.

Shocking.

To ask the Scottish Executive how many school nurses there are; whether it considers that there are sufficient numbers of such nurses; whether it has a target for the number that there should be, and what its policy is in this regard. (S2O-7020)

I am sure that the minister and the Parliament would wish to acknowledge the excellent role that school nurses play and the wide range of services that they now operate. Is the minister aware that, in England, the Labour Government is committed to there being one school nurse for every secondary school catchment area? Will the Executive match that commitment?

Does the First Minister agree that, although a road user charging scheme may be introduced in 2020, many businesses, especially in the haulage industry in Scotland, face a serious threat in 2005? I invite the First Minister to play the role of Baldrick to Westminster's Captain Darling and to ask him to send to Field Marshal Blair back at Chateau Downing Street a simple message—that too many Scottish businesses are being sent over the top, too many Scottish jobs are being sacrificed by General Brown and it is time that we had a cunning plan.

Presiding Officer, I begin by offering my apologies for my having to leave the debate before its conclusion because of other commitments. On Monday this week, I had the pleasure of attending a new Maggie's Centre at Raigmore hospital in Inverness. It was an extremely happy occasion. I know that the minister has taken a very close interest in such matters; some years ago, she spoke very courageously about her own experience. That improvement at Raigmore has followed other improvements. For example, there is a new accident and emergency unit and a new breast clinic. Staff have told me of many other services that are now on their wish list, which include a day-care centre for ambulatory care. We are seeing improvements in the NHS and it behoves us to acknowledge that because debate on it has, from time to time, been characterised by a jarring and malignant tone.  It is relevant to point out that there would not have been a Maggie's Centre in Inverness had it not been for the generosity of numbers of individuals and families in Scotland, such as the MacTaggarts and the Cayzers. Those people made their money in a private sector that some people think should be banned. We should all give our whole-hearted support to the philanthropic efforts of people who want to give something back to Scotland. In the short time since publication of the Kerr report, I have sought to consult people in my constituency and I have to say that the report has been broadly welcomed. A number of GPs have said that they like it and welcome the fact that the significance of rurality and transport problems have been recognised. There is a suspicion that NHS politics will stifle some developments and prevent their being realised, but the initial reaction has been to offer broad support. I want to talk about the recommendation on page 31 of volume 2 of the Kerr report, in which Kerr recognises the impact of the working time directive. The hours of junior doctors will be reduced by 40 per cent by 2009. Kerr concludes that a rural general hospital model should be central to providing services in rural areas. I fully support that recommendation and I want to stress how important it will be to the Highlands—not solely to the Belford hospital in Fort William in my constituency, but in other Highland towns such as Oban and in island towns such as Kirkwall, Lerwick and Stornoway. In the light of Professor Kerr's strong recommendation, does the Executive now accept the model of a rural general hospital? I hope that the minister will comment on that. Kerr has not defined precisely what the rural general hospital model should be. He talks about "core services", but what are the core services? I have spoken to consultants at the Belford hospital over the past few days and I suggest that, at core, a rural general hospital should be a hospital in which services are consultant led. Obviously, the services would not always be provided by consultants, but they should be consultant led and should be provided 24 hours a day. Those services would include general medical services and surgery. To me, those are the core services. I am no expert and I am not a health professional, but I do know about the importance of places such as the Belford hospital. Over three months from January to March last year, a study was carried out by consultants and others at the Belford, which sought to calculate and quantify the impact of downgrading the hospital and of loss of consultant services. That study proved that the number of emergency admissions that would have to leave the area would increase by three or four times. Those people would also have to travel  huge distances over long periods. The study also showed that the number of elective surgery treatments that would have to be dealt with elsewhere would increase by about 200. Does the minister accept the importance of generalist training for the workforce in the new rural general hospitals? I certainly welcome the recommendation to establish a centre for that purpose. Logically, it should be in a rural part of Scotland—preferably in my constituency. I hope that the minister will acknowledge the importance of training generalists. If such training is not provided, where will we find the consultants, nurses and allied health professionals to staff the rural general hospital model in the future? I believe that the kernel of the Kerr report offers a blueprint that will serve Scotland well, and will serve rural constituencies such as mine very well indeed.

rose—

On the topic of admitting when one was wrong, were the Tories wrong to introduce trusts and boards in to the NHS?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Mr McMahon is obviously curious about SNP policy, but he would have heard it clearly stated earlier, if he had listened. Can he tell the Parliament which part of the committee report refers to SNP policy and in what way that is relevant to his summing up on behalf of the committee?

I share that sentiment. Does the minister feel that a park-and-ride scheme should be incorporated into the link between Glasgow airport and the city centre? That would make a significant impact by taking cars off the M8.

I was not a member of the Local Government and Transport Committee when it began its deliberations; I came in at the end. I convey the apologies of Bruce Crawford, who is not able to be here. I am happy to see David Mundell in the chamber, making what may be his valedictory speech, which we look forward to. The Scottish National Party recognises that the bus is the predominant and key mode of public transport in Scotland, and we welcome and recognise the improvements that have been made over recent years. Those improvements have resulted from a large number of factors and through people working together. They have come about through extra money being put into the provision of buses; through the ingenuity of local authorities, Strathclyde Passenger Transport and other bodies; and, not least, through the  commitment of the big three bus companies and the other bus companies. Ironically, perhaps, much of the improvement that there has been has not resulted directly from the vehicles that were created by the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001. It was envisaged by the then Minister for Transport and the Environment, Sarah Boyack, and others that quality contracts and quality partnerships would be the way in which we would achieve that success, whereas, in fact, the success has been achieved through voluntary arrangements. The SNP recognises that there is a role for regulation and that there is a case, as Bristow Muldoon has said, for regulation. We do not agree with renationalisation. Although no SSP member is in the chamber at the moment, perhaps we will hear from them later.

Brian Adam reliably informs me that they are on the bus. It is clear that quality contracts and quality partnerships are a solution that, when examined closely, has been found wanting. In its evidence to the committee, the National Federation of Bus Users estimated that a pilot scheme in West Lothian might cost £1.5 million. The SPT estimated that the cost would be £1 million. Plainly, it would be folly to enter into such models at such cost if the money could be better used to increase the frequency and improve the quality of the service to the passengers and the public. The SNP recognises that it is necessary to tackle congestion where it occurs. Bristow Muldoon was quite right to say that the committee—for the reasons that he gave—did not study or take evidence on congestion charging. I hope that that opportunity will come. With reference to the Edinburgh scheme, the SNP believes that although local authorities should at that time have had the authority to consider such schemes, that particular scheme was wrong. What alternatives have been presented? The debate has not moved forward significantly since the Edinburgh referendum debacle. The SNP recognises that park-and-ride schemes have played a role. As we heard from Stagecoach, the Ferrytoll initiative has been a massive success. As the local member for Inverness, I believe what the director of Stagecoach, Robert Andrew, said in his evidence: such a facility, coupled with other anti-congestion measures, would be a great advantage and would keep cars out of the city centre. The SNP and an SNP Government would ensure that public sector workers had the opportunity to avoid driving to work in the rush hour. The merit of that proposal, which I have mentioned in the chamber before—I look forward  to the current minister or his successor developing it—is that the costs would be minimal. I commend that proposal to the chamber. In rural Scotland and in most parts of my constituency, other solutions are required. Brian Souter recognised that the best solutions to the problems will come not from big central locations, but from community-led partnerships such as we see in Badenoch and Strathspey. He proposed in his evidence the excellent idea of taxi buses that could be operated like post buses and extended to take in other services in local areas. Those are the types of solution that are being developing, that will be developed and which we can all support. I turn to the national concessionary scheme. The SNP supports in principle a scheme that will benefit our senior citizens and those with a disability. [ Interruption. ] We will continue to do so, whatever alarms are going off around us—and I am not referring to the sound of Kenny MacAskill's lectern falling. When the minister announced to the Parliament on 22 December that there would be a national concessionary scheme, he won support for it in principle. However, it has emerged subsequently that the details of the scheme appear not to have been thought through. Several months after the announcement, in a letter that I have obtained from the project manager, she asks local authorities whether she can have details of the 16 local schemes that operated before. Should not that have been done before the minister announced the national scheme? In a report by the MVA Consultancy Group Ltd, which reported in draft in April, the consultants raised the pertinent question about the cost of the scheme. The minister has not given the total costs; he has given maximum costs. However, the consultants say that it is not clear whether any financial modelling has been done. Surely that modelling should have been done before the minister made the announcement to Parliament. It is not clear how the smart card system will operate. There will not be a machine for every bus, as was the intention; the system will be operated manually. The scope for fraud is thus greater, as the MVA report recognised, and there are many other potential problems. The purpose of the SNP as the Opposition is to probe such deficiencies, but there is not enough time today for me to go over the vast deficiencies that exist in the proposed scheme. I hope that the minister will come back to Parliament before the recess, as he promised to do, to let us know what is happening to implement a scheme that the SNP, of course, warmly welcomes.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has made any estimate of the impact on the economy of the effect of fuel costs and the European working time directive on the haulage industry and whether this impact will be significant and adverse. (S2O-6823)

Does the minister agree that the majority of haulage businesses in Scotland are staring liquidation in the face as the inevitable  consequence of the rocketing cost of fuel and the working time directive, which forces haulage firms to take on more drivers at a time when they cannot afford to increase their costs? Can he set out any measures that the Executive can take to help the Scottish haulage industry in its time of need?

Over the past four years, my constituents in Lochaber have harboured real fears about the future of the Belford hospital in Fort William. The minister has exhorted us to change our mindset and to think more about communities and less about hospitals. Does he agree with my constituents that downgrading of that hospital would be a long-term threat to their community? Does he endorse the concept of a rural general hospital, which Professor Kerr supports on page 41 of his report? Will the minister take this opportunity—for the first time in Parliament—to guarantee to my constituents in Lochaber that there is a future for the Belford hospital in Fort William as a consultant-led, 24/7 local hospital that provides acute care?

I, too, congratulate Nora Radcliffe on securing the debate. It is good for the Parliament to have an opportunity to debate the matter before the Executive makes a decision on the application. I have had a small number of letters on the matter from constituents and the two sides—for and against—are equally balanced; those who oppose and those who propose do so with equal vehemence. I am attracted by the idea of the beaver being brought or, as most people argue, brought back, to Scotland. However, the onus is on SNH and the ministers to make their decision on the basis of clear evidence, but it is difficult to  get evidence on some of the issues that are involved. For example, were there beavers in Scotland in the past? Some people say that there were not, but it seems that most people say that there were. I have read the study by Kitchener and Conroy. I will focus on the decision that the Scottish Executive made in 2002, when the application was not accepted and more work was requested. I ask the minister to focus his remarks on the issues that were mentioned at that time. In a letter to John Markland, Allan Wilson asked for more information about the potential risks to agricultural, forestry and salmon interests and for a thorough assessment of any public health risk. He added: "It would be helpful to know more about the experiences of other countries where European Beaver have been introduced, including any longer term impacts." I wrote to SNH, which supplied me with information about the European experience, but there is a key need for evidence from other countries where beavers are found or have been introduced. I did not get any detail from SNH about the experience of those countries, but merely a conclusion, which stated: "There are now 24 countries which have reintroduced beavers, and at least 157 reintroductions have been recorded overall. Occasionally there have been some localised detrimental effects on land uses." I have heard anecdotal evidence from a tree surgeon who had just returned from Estonia and who said that he could not believe the damage that had been caused to trees there. Perhaps it was caused by Canadian beavers—I do not know. It is said that European beavers do not destroy trees, but I would like to know whether that is the Scottish Executive's view. Above all, I would like to know what evidence SNH has provided about the experience in other countries. Has it provided evidence from each of the 24 countries and will it make that evidence public? It did not make such evidence available to me, and I made a freedom of information request. Perhaps I should go back and ask for more information. I would also like to know what the quarantine experience and the exit strategy involve. I understand that the quarantine period is six months, but in what circumstances will quarantine be carried out? Does it involve a possible element of cruelty? What is the exit strategy? If we introduce or reintroduce beavers, would not it be cruel to then take them back if it did not work out for us? The Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals should give an opinion on that. We remember the cull of hedgehogs. Who was responsible for that? It does not seem like such a good idea now. I make those points to ensure that they are made and not because I know the conclusion. It is not possible to reach a clear  conclusion without the evidence for which the Scottish Executive asked in December 2002. I concur with my colleague Rob Gibson that some delay has occurred, but we are in 2005 and the issue is not a huge problem. I would have thought that SNH could have provided the information by now. I am slightly concerned that SNH might have a conflict of interest because it proposed the introduction of the beaver and has been asked to be the arbiter of all information that relates to the decision. The Executive is responsible for that conflict, because it gave SNH both jobs.

I recognise the excellent job  that is done by the local firemaster in the Highlands and Islands and by the fire board, which is led by Councillor Slack. However, does the minister accept in principle that it is absolutely essential that the auxiliary units continue to be able to combat outdoor fires in Scotland and that their work is vital to the communities that they serve? Does he also recognise the importance of the role of tackling road traffic incidents and that Newtonmore auxiliary unit should continue to perform that service? Will he urge the firemaster to consider that case once again?

Will the minister give way?

On a point of planning procedure, will the minister state whether it is legitimate for a public local inquiry to proceed after the Scottish Executive has purchased land voluntarily? If so, was the inquiry on the M74 extension made aware in the course of its work that plots were being acquired voluntarily? That question is not affected by any litigation, which relates to the merits of the argument. It is an important point, because The Herald and other newspapers argued that there is an element of sham if land is purchased in advance of, and pre-empting the outcome of, such an inquiry.

Will the member give way?

I am grateful to the member for giving way. Will the Greens tell us how many roads there should be? Should there be any new roads or motorways anywhere? Are they against the internal combustion engine and, if so, does their opposition also apply to public transport such as buses?

I am grateful to Rosie Kane for  allowing Parliament to debate this matter. It is a shame that the debate is not many times longer, because that would allow the paucity of the SSP's arguments to be exposed fully. The Scottish National Party has debated the M74 issue twice. On each occasion, it concluded by a huge majority that the economic and social case for the project is overwhelming. First, the Kingston bridge is the most congested part of Scotland's traffic system. Secondly, the completion of the link will, in effect, provide a ring road round Glasgow. Thirdly, it will allow traffic to be taken from the city-centre roads. We do not often hear the argument that that in itself contributes to road safety. There has been a reduction in the number of fatal road accidents in Glasgow from 141 in 1976, before the motorways were built, to 13 in 2003. There is less traffic in the city centre today than there was in 1961, despite the fact that there has been a threefold growth in traffic in Glasgow as a whole. On Saturday, I met a Glasgow cop who said that he is looking forward to not having to take bits of bodies off the roads. I hope that when the Greens reply to my speech, they will recognise the safety argument.

It falls to Phil Gallie and me to put the environmental case. It is also rarely mentioned that the cost of rectifying the polluted land that is part of the project is estimated at £50 million. If the land is not to be part of the missing link in the motorway, who will pay that sum? I hear no answer, because there is none. No one will pay the £50 million and the land will remain polluted for all time, unused and unusable. A leading businessman from my part of the world told me recently that he intended to set up a head office in the central belt of Scotland, in order to expand his Highland business south. It took him less than one minute to dismiss the west of Scotland from his plans, because of the time that his staff would have to spend on the M8 and the Kingston bridge sitting in their cars, doing nothing, getting paid and polluting the environment. I want businesses to come to Glasgow, not to be driven away from it.

No. The SNP wants to turn its fire on the Scottish Executive, which promised that the project would begin long ago. In October 2001, it issued a press release that stated, "M74 extension to begin".  Another press release, from May 2002, stated: "Work on M74 missing link to start next month". Perhaps I missed the start of that work. Of course, the planning inquiry was a sham, because the Executive had spent £41 million on buying up land and factories that could be used only as part of the motorway. What on earth was it to do with that land if it did not go ahead? The Executive press releases announcing the inquiry never said that its purpose was to determine whether the project should go ahead; the intention was only to allow views to be heard. Frankly, that was typical Labour spin. The problem that we now face is that if the legal action that is threatened by the Trots and the Greens succeeds in delaying the project, the effect will be—

I hope that I will get extra time.

The legal action that is threatened might prevent the M74 project from going ahead in accordance with the timetable. There is no plan B; if the project does not go ahead, the workers in the companies that would have got the work will have no work to fill the gap. Skilled Scottish workers might be handed their P45s as a result of the legal action that is threatened by the SSP and the incompetence of the Greens.

The debate is on the area tourist boards and I pay tribute to the Highlands of Scotland Tourist Board. That board has been led by David Noble, who always displayed friendliness to one and all and who has joined us this afternoon. I pay tribute to the tourist information centres throughout the Highlands and Islands, particularly in smaller places such as Strontian and Ballachulish, which are in my constituency, and also to those in larger places such as Inverness and Fort William. They all play a part. They greet and meet people and they can make a difference to people's enjoyment of Scotland as a destination. Alasdair Morgan was right to say that the focus of the debate is on the committee's report and is narrow, but Alex Neil was correct to invite colleagues to speak to the wider industry. Alasdair Morgan quoted Peter Lederer, who has stated that the exercise, with all its costs, has not in itself led directly to extra visitor numbers. Despite that, it is clear that there is consensus among virtually all the members who have taken part in the debate that many good things are happening that all of us can welcome and support. I said "virtually all" because I listened attentively to Jamie McGrigor. When I was doing so, it suddenly became clear to  me that the answer for me was definitely no when I saw the poster during the election campaign with the slogan: "Are you thinking what we're thinking?" The positive contributions to the debate are to be welcomed. Jamie Stone and other members echoed what Brian Adam said about the importance of genealogy. Dennis McLeod's work in promoting the Scottish diaspora is an untapped source with huge potential for visitors to Scotland. Chris Ballance was right to spell out that tourism needs to be an all-year-round business for Scotland. If a business must be compressed into six, seven or eight months, trying to make a reasonable return on it is extremely difficult and prices will be pushed up. I am pleased that Chris Ballance recognises the corollary. Cheap flights, direct access and access for people from other countries are needed to bring people to Scotland. I am delighted that the Green party supports such air travel.

We should invite everybody to come to our country, wherever they hail from. The Greens are trying to have things two ways, which is a grey approach to politics, if I may say so. Members are correct to highlight the importance of conferences, not least in Aviemore, which is in my constituency. I hope that the minister, although the matter is not within her purview, recognises the consensus that exists among virtually all members that the Inverness airport private finance initiative should be bought out, as that would allow the moneys from revenue—which are currently £2 million a year—to be unleashed to bring more people to Scotland. All members—except perhaps one—would be pleased about that. I hope that the minister will take on board the industry's comments on the problems that migrant workers face in learning English. After the pilot scheme is over, there is no opportunity to go on longer schemes, although the enterprise net is charged with that. There are problems in that respect. People cannot even open bank accounts. Small businesses in my area are taking on workers from many parts of the European Union, but they cannot get bank accounts for them. That is a serious practical constraint, and the banks need to engage directly to a greater extent with the Scottish Executive in that respect. I conclude, as always, by saying that the SNP is absolutely committed to Scottish tourism business.  We think that the Executive's target of increasing visitor numbers by 50 per cent by 2015—which is in eight years' time—is too modest and that we should aim for higher targets for an even better tourism industry for our nation.

Does the minister agree that one of the greatest things that we could do for the well-being of this country is to provide every child with the opportunity to take part in outdoor physical education and sport every year? The minister mentioned barriers. He and I have been in correspondence about the swingeing costs of public liability insurance to private sector providers of outdoor sporting opportunities. Does he agree that, as the insurance companies have shown no sign of cutting their extortionate premiums, sportscotland should investigate the possibility of establishing a Scottish block policy to which every business could subscribe, thus obtaining cheaper insurance cover and, possibly, commission for sportscotland in the by-going?

We all share the objectives that are set out in today's documents. We all agree that in principle we support the expansion of the role of further education colleges to include S3-plus school pupils. As Fiona Hyslop said, the documents were presented to us late last night, and I have not had an opportunity to study them thoroughly, but they appear to have the characteristic hallmarks of the programmes that the Executive launches, because while the ideas are good, it is unclear that the details have been thought through. It is desirable to provide more opportunities for schoolchildren, but I want to focus on the impact that the proposals could have on colleges that provide both further and higher education. Our task is to distinguish between the important and the essential. I suggest to the minister that the essential issue for many colleges, including Inverness College in my constituency, is that the proposals will not address the financial problems that some colleges have faced for several years. If Inverness College were to be a participant in one of the pilot studies, it is unclear whether the impact of the new programme would compound the college's already difficult financial situation. I have a letter from the principal of Inverness College, which states: "The College's funding for the year is based on a target of student activity, which is sent to all FE Colleges in April for the coming year. For the past 3 years, there has been no increase in this target figure (and consequential funding for the College), although the demand for some courses due to external factors has increased dramatically (e.g. in Construction)." Inverness College has a deficit of about £3 million, about half of which is attributable to the notional cost of pensions and half of which is historical. The college has already paid off £2 million of deficit. At present, a large number of staff are facing their P45s, at a time when the college could and would like to take on more adult students for  construction courses. I put it to the minister that the immediate priority that faces him, as the minister responsible, is to sort out the institution's existing problems. I am mindful that a huge amount of effort by a large number of people is going into solving the problems, but the problems remain and there is no suggestion that they will be solved. I had a meeting with Roger McClure, who argued that it would be wrong to use public money to eliminate or pay off part of the deficit of colleges, which, as he argued, have been poorly managed, because that would not be fair to colleges that have been well run. We all understand that argument, but it does not detract from the fact that colleges that have been badly managed in the past or are badly managed at present can address their problems only by making staff redundant, cutting courses and eliminating opportunities for students, which is what is happening now at Inverness College. Obviously, I welcome new ideas and aspirations, but I contrast them with the current unpleasant and unwelcome reality in which many of my constituents who have a professional pride in their job now see their P45s arriving.

We do not know what the impact will be because the documents do not say that. We know that the sum will be £41 million but, as Fiona Hyslop said, we have no idea what the impact will be on capacity, training or the number of staff. We know that pilot studies will be carried out, but we do not know where. We do not know the detail. Although the programme is worthy in principle, my question is whether it has been fully thought through. I have had only a short time to study the available information, but it does not seem to me that the answer is yes. When Wendy Alexander, who I think was in the chamber earlier, occupied the minister's role, she made a contribution of around £7 million to reduce the deficit of some colleges. We can debate whether that was a proper use of public money, but what is not in dispute is that, unless the deficit that Inverness College faces is tackled, the victims will be the students, the potential students and the staff. The new policy is rather like someone setting out on a journey, marching into the unknown without a map, a compass or a rucksack. I wish the minister well on his journey.

The debate has been characterised by very general comments. We have heard warm words about good intentions and high hopes and members of all parties have expressed sentiments with which I am sure that we can all agree without difficulty.  However, beyond the high-level debate, we should consider what is happening on the ground. I am pleased that the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning has returned to his seat, because although I acknowledge that, as the motion says, there has been increased investment in Scotland's colleges, I want to talk about the predicament of Inverness College in my constituency. Some weeks ago, at the invitation of a trade union, I met lecturers at Inverness College to discuss its financial plight. The minister will be aware that for many years, as the result of past mismanagement, the college has had a deficit of more than £5 million. The rules say that the college must pay back the money and, as the minister knows, I have argued that that means that today's students and lecturers must pay the price of past mismanagement, much of which arose from the policy of incorporation and the way in which it was introduced by the Conservatives. Be that as it may, the first problem is that a £3 million deficit remains and a 10-year recovery plan means that the college is technically insolvent. The second problem is that the rules have changed; I am told that by Professor John Little, whom I met last Friday. In a letter to me, Professor Little says that he was told that the college must make an operating surplus and that it must pay for depreciation. That is a change. It is an extra burden, the effect of which is that the college faces staff cuts right now. Inverness College also faces a drain on its resources: for every £1 that the college receives by way of higher education funding, it pays 44p to the UHI Millennium Institute. Professor Little told me that that is the case and the staff agree. My question for the minister is simple. How can it be fair for the colleges that will become part of the University of the Highlands and Islands to also have to pay for their existing structures? We welcome the fact that the colleges are to be part of the embryonic University of the Highlands and Islands, for which—as the minister knows—we have campaigned for decades, but why does the burden of developing degree courses and all the preparatory work have to be borne by today's students and lecturers? Tomorrow, I will meet Bob Cormack of UHI to discuss the matter further. I will also discuss the matter next Wednesday morning, when I meet Roger McGuire of the funding council. A point of principle is involved, and if Mr Purvis thinks that it is funny, I say to him that neither my constituents nor his minister agree with him. I hope that, in closing, the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning or his deputy will explain how it can be right that colleges have to pay for the only university that Scotland is creating. We  welcome the university. We hope that it will lead to opportunities, new businesses and possibilities that will, in turn, bring people back to the Highlands—that is what we all want. That said, the university's development costs seem to be funded substantially by the college. Unlike some members, I do not call for extra funding for every pledge of the day—it is not my style to do that. It would be better if we were to spend far more time on looking at how the existing budget is spent. Last Friday, I was told that £2.3 million of Inverness College's budget will be spent on doing maintenance work on a building that the college hopes to vacate in four years' time. The college will have to spend all that money for health and safety reasons. I ask the minister to look into that situation, because it sounds pretty perverse and against everything that most people would see as common sense. I understand that some money may have to be spent, but spending £2.3 million on maintenance will mean 20 to 25 staff being dismissed and students losing the opportunity to pursue courses and other opportunities at a time when we are hearing fine sentiments and warm words on the creation of UHI, which we all agree is desirable. An issue that relates to the lifelong learning strategy and retaining skills is the situation at Ardtoe. I believe that Ardtoe representatives met the Minister for Environment and Rural Development last Friday. The minister was asked for a funding package of £200,000 per annum, and I am told that Mr Finnie said no. If I am wrong in saying that, I am delighted to be wrong. On Monday of this week, the boards of the Scottish Association for Marine Science met and decided to put Ardtoe into liquidation. The staff were not told about that decision and learned of it from a press release. Indeed, two of them were at a conference that Lewis Macdonald attended. They had to read out a press release to the conference saying that Ardtoe had been made bust. How can that be right? More important, how does it square with the warm words? How can it be right at the very time that Ardtoe, as part of SAMS, is to be part of the UHI that both the minister and I support and have always campaigned for? How can it be right that Ardtoe is axed for the sake of £200,000, a figure that is one tenth of the health and safety budget for Inverness College? The issues are serious. Although I do not expect an immediate answer, I expect an answer and so do my constituents.

Will the minister give way?

It is difficult to disagree with the notion that we should be investing in skills to get people into work. However, with regard to people who are already in work, I understand that, in December, those who work at the research facility in Ardtoe sought, in a letter to the minister, support of £200,000 a year, which they calculated was necessary for the institution to survive. They have not received a formal response, although I understand that the minister will meet me and the workforce. Will he ask his civil servants to re-examine the issue, so that the skills that are involved in vital research can be preserved in that  remote and rural part of Scotland, where the jobs are highly skilled and there are no alternatives for the people who work there, two of whom have been recruited from South Africa and Canada respectively in the past few weeks?

As the minister knows, the Scottish National Party has supported the M74 project from the outset. Given that his arguments are correct, would it not have been better for the project to have gone ahead five or six years ago? Given that the cost has doubled, does he agree that the money that would have been saved could have been used to fund other projects, such as the duelling of the A9? Is he concerned about what will happen if there is any delay to the M74 project? In the words of the trade representative body, there is no plan B and any delay may lead to Scottish workers being handed P45s and chasing construction work down south.

This morning, I gave the First Minister's office notice of the question that I wish to ask. It concerns the Ardtoe marine research institute, which is based in Ardnamurchan in west Lochaber. Just yesterday, the board of the Scottish Association for Marine Science announced that SAMS Ardtoe Ltd would be placed in liquidation. The liquidator arrived today. The staff learned of the decision yesterday. There are few jobs involved, but they are essential to this remote rural part of Scotland. The workforce believes that it has a future and wishes to explore every possible option for survival, so that it can continue to provide its expertise, possibly to the university of the Highlands and Islands. This morning, the workforce instructed me that it wishes to send a delegation, led by me, to meet ministers in both the Environment and Rural Affairs Department and the Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning Department in order to explore a future for Ardtoe. Can such a meeting take place as a matter of urgency?

Jean Turner mentioned the health debate that was held in the chamber on Monday. Does she agree that the Kerr report should take on board the contribution from Dr David Sedgwick from the Belford hospital, advocating the model of a rural general hospital?

Obviously, there is a case for the proposal. However, can Karen Whitefield explain why shop workers should be exempted from working on the two days but not, for example, bar staff?

The Scottish National Party agrees that we need to focus on economic growth—as Bill Aitken said—but is the Scottish Conservatives' way to achieve that to follow Teddy Taylor's advice and scrap the Parliament, or is it to follow Murdo Fraser's advice and increase Parliament's fiscal powers?

We all agree with those sentiments about alcohol, but can the minister reconcile them with the current proposals to remove limitations on opening hours to enable 24-hour opening? How does that square with the sentiments that he expressed?

The minister has just informed the chamber that he is working tirelessly to get future European funding for Scotland. We all recognise the past importance of that funding and we hope that it will play an important role in the future. I have a very straightforward question for the minister, which I hope he will answer using one of the options that are rarely tried—yes or no. Has the Executive set out in a position paper to the European Commission its views on what Scotland should receive?

Will the minister give way?

rose—

The minister should bear in mind that the hundreds of people who have contributed to the process so far may be unimpressed by the number of people in the debate who have chosen to play the man, not the ball. Can he give an unequivocal assurance that there are no technical problems or barriers that might lead to a delay in the implementation of the proposed national concessionary scheme for older and disabled people by the planned date of April 2006? Can he give an unequivocal assurance that the scheme will be implemented on time?

Will the member take an intervention?

Since Mr Muldoon obviously did not hear what I said, I repeat that we support national concessionary schemes and that, if the bill goes ahead with just that element, we will support it. However, that is not what the bill is doing. It will introduce a variety of measures. Does Bristow Muldoon support the committee's position that, unless there are strong powers and secure funding for RTPs, the committee should not support the bill either?

The Rev Fraser Aitken, in his amusing time for reflection speech today, pointed out that we may seek paradise, even if we do not necessarily arrive there. Certainly, our aim in Parliament is to increase the store of happiness in Scotland. In general, the Local Government and Transport Committee tried to find a way forward by consensus on the main proposals in the bill. I thank the clerks and the extensive list of witnesses who helped us in our work. Undoubtedly, the main element of the bill is the proposed creation of regional transport partnerships. I was pleased that, at paragraph 9 of its report, the committee reached a clear conclusion that "the ability of RTPs to deliver transport improvements will depend largely on the RTPs having strong powers and the required level of funding." In evidence, Dr Iain Docherty pointed out that the Executive hinted in the early days that RTPs would have strong powers, but now that the bill has made its public appearance, there is nothing in it to show what those powers will be; there is only the duty to create a strategy within 12 months. Therefore, in that respect, the bill is little more than a blank page. I hope that the minister will, in his concluding remarks, say clearly whether he accepts the committee's recommendation that the draft statutory instruments that contain the meat of the proposals be produced at least 14 days before the start of stage 2. Indeed, that procedure should happen with any bill that does not contain the meat of the matter for us to consider. The Scottish National Party's position is clear. Yes, there is a trend in Scotland towards regional government. Yes, transport policy should be delivered as far as possible from the bottom up rather than by diktat from the top down. Yes, RTPs should have strong powers. However, if RTPs do not have strong powers or secure funding, the problem is that they may simply represent another layer of quangos in an already over-cluttered governmental terrain. It is for that reason that the SNP will abstain in today's vote. Sharp-eyed members who have read the committee's deliberations closely will know that we made that position clear at the end of those deliberations. The SNP supports the concessionary travel scheme but, logically, our position is that we will abstain from voting until we know what is going to happen at stage 2 and what powers are going to  be introduced. For example, what exactly is the "key role" that SPT is to play? We have all—in the past 24 hours and previously—had lengthy deliberations with SPT, which is worried that its ability to deliver the Glasgow airport rail link will be constrained by various technical aspects of the bill. Perhaps the minister can say whether its fears are groundless. If all he can say is that SPT should play a key role, is that clear enough to allay the fears of committee members who argued clearly and unequivocally for strong powers? On funding, the evidence from various councillors, not least those from the Highlands and Islands strategic transport partnership and the councillor from Shetland, indicated that the costs of running RTPs may be as much as twice the cost of the existing voluntary partnerships. Unless RTPs are secure in their funding, they will not be able to attract, recruit and retain the right people and they will not have the institutional stability to operate properly. That has not been explained, either. On the road works commissioner, the SNP is not convinced that the proposals will improve on the performance of the roads authorities and utilities committee (Scotland) at present. On concessionary travel, I would be grateful if the minister would simply confirm that the scheme—which the SNP welcomed in principle—is still on course for implementation in April next year, that he is confident that the problems that he referred to during the ministerial statement have been addressed and that the smart cards are capable of fulfilling the task. For those reasons, and given that the SNP opposes RTPs unless they have strong powers and secure funding but supports a national concessionary scheme, we shall be unable to support the measures as they stand.

I add my congratulations to Alasdair Morrison on lodging his motion and I appreciate the way in which he expressed sympathy for the victims and condolences for the bereaved and acknowledged the bravery of the individuals involved. Money will never bring back loved ones, nor will it compensate for the loss of family. Members have already covered many of the issues extremely well. The one issue that I would like to stress is the desire to focus on preventive measures. When I visited the people who had been affected by flooding following the tidal surge on the River Ness on 12 January, I was struck not only by the immediate devastation of lives—which I had also felt when I had visited people whose homes had been destroyed by flooding on a previous occasion in Inverness, which had affected people in Drakies, including Councillor Janet Home and her husband—but also by the abiding concern that we must get it right for the future. I praise Highland Council for its work in connection with river flooding, although the incident to which I have just referred was a tidal surge. Much more needs to be done and will be done in that regard. I have received an assurance from Mary McLaughlin that particular problems in the Huntly Street area and around the River Ness in general will be attended to. That is most welcome. The question of the Bellwin formula has been raised and Highland Council has briefed us all as to whether the formula should be revised. There is a case for a review. In reviewing the 50 or 60 parliamentary questions that there have been about the Bellwin formula, I discovered that very few focused on the possibility of a review. One that did was asked by my wife, Margaret Ewing, and was answered on 27 November 2002. It elicited the response: "We keep the criteria under review".— [ Official Report, Written Answers , 27 November 2002; S1W-31656.]  It did not say "constant review", but I am sure that that is implicit. I do not believe that the scheme has changed since that time. That is not a point of criticism against the Executive, but there is a basic problem: unless damage reaches a certain  threshold, there is no compensation. The threshold is £500,000, which was not reached in the case of Highland Council. A further problem is that the Bellwin scheme deals only with the revenue side. I may be wrong but, as I understand it from the information that I have, the capital costs are not really covered. Therefore, there is a need for regional funding. Of course, regional funding may not be sufficient if the more alarmist or extreme predictions of the effects of climate change come true, because the whole of the south of England might disappear—a prospect that even we in the SNP would view with considerable consternation. We cannot say that only the Highlands and Islands will be affected, but we can say that severe weather has always been of concern in the Highlands and Islands and that it seems to be becoming much more marked, as members have said. If that is so and if we can foresee the likelihood of more extreme weather leading to more damage, more carnage and more costs, I submit that that strengthens the arguments for a review of the Bellwin formula. As Alasdair Morrison said, there is no magic wand. I do not think that any member believes that there is a cave in which lots of money is hidden that can be taken out to solve all the problems of the world. I conclude by saying that if my wife were not in Malawi leading a parliamentary delegation as part of the Make Poverty History campaign, I am sure that she would be here. I know that she has extensive experience of the impact of severe weather, particularly flooding, in Moray. Such problems have occurred throughout Scotland and I look forward with great interest to hearing the minister's response. I am pleased about the tone of the debate which, I hope we would all agree, is appropriate as a tribute to those in the Western Isles who suffered such tragic loss.

Does Donald Gorrie agree that the Maggie's centres are an excellent source of advice to many people who suffer from cancer, especially breast cancer, and that the creation of Maggie's centres in places such as Dundee, Glasgow and, soon, Inverness is greatly to be welcomed?

Does the minister agree that marking fences as Elaine Murray suggested reduces the risk of loss of capercaillie and other birds through their flying into fences? If we accept for the moment that there is such a risk—of which I am by no means convinced—marking fences will reduce that risk massively, therefore that practice  should form a central part of deer management.

It is always a pleasure to follow one of life's poachers, John Farquhar Munro, especially when I am speaking out on behalf of Scotland's gamekeepers. I echo the sentiments that John Farquhar Munro expressed on the vital role that they play in deer management. As a former mountain rescue team member and hillwalker, I believe that there is a place for the co-existence of walking, mountaineering and sporting activities; that is what we should seek to achieve. However, the events at Glen Feshie last January have caused widespread anger among those  people who work with deer. The Veterinary Association for Wildlife Management wrote to the DCS chairman to express "concern at the serious shortcomings in animal welfare that apparently accompanied the cull. Hinds were left severely wounded, having been shot in the abdomen or hindquarters, for at least 20 minutes before they were put out of their suffering." When we debated the Protection of Wild Mammals (Scotland) Bill, we accepted that cruelty took place if the fox was not seen off within 10 or 15 seconds. It is beyond my ken how anyone can say that leaving on the hill for 20 minutes a hind that has been shot and is suffering is anything other than cruel or barbaric.

I accept the former proposition, but not the latter. Frankly, gamekeepers would be angry at the suggestion that that is part of their normal practice. Moreover, the SGA's response was that the report to which Eleanor Scott refers was an unacceptable whitewash and cover-up. That is a matter of record. Deer must be managed, but those who are involved in working the land must play a key role in that process. The tone of people who appear to be opposed to gamekeepers surprises me. On one hand, they say that we must be reasonable, but on the other they insist that gamekeepers should not be involved in the working groups or have a seat at the committee tables. In my view, that position is inherently contradictory. Gamekeepers and the SGA are not involved in performing as many of the land management roles as they should be involved in performing. We should leave the Victorian century behind and accept that sporting estates play a useful and valuable role, not least in my constituency of Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber. Not all landowners are Jeremys and Sebastians—cravatted former Etonians with more inherited money than brains. It is not helpful to characterise landowners. Many of the landowners in my constituency play as significant a role in the community as anyone else; they certainly employ a great many people. I do not think that I will get their votes, given what I have said, but nonetheless the truth must out. Some gamekeepers think that capercaillie will become extinct. The capercaillie, as an  endangered species, is being attacked—at will and willy-nilly—by protected species including the pine marten. I hope that the minister will spell out the way in which he will ensure that Scotland's gamekeepers will become fully involved in the process. The gamekeepers' organisation, the SGA, which is one of the fastest-growing membership organisations in Scotland, should become involved as a full partner around the table in discussions to find a solution. We need to find a solution that people such as Cameron McNeish, a fellow columnist from the Strathspey and Badenoch Herald , and I could all agree on. We need a solution that represents all the interests in Scotland that go to the mountains and love the deer.

The First Minister said that the tendering process is required by law, but neither he nor the Minister for Transport has published any evidence to substantiate that assertion, yet it is an assertion that will determine the fate of the CalMac workers. Does the First Minister believe that the Minister for Transport was being disingenuous in citing the comparison of Spain? Although the Spanish company, Transmed Shipping, was the subject of an adverse ruling, it suffered not one penny by way of a fine. Indeed, no cost whatever has been paid by Transmed or Spain; no loss of service—

Spain was given 12 months after the ruling in which to comply. Therefore—

The scare story that the law will be broken if we do not tender is just that—a scare story with no evidence whatever behind it.

I agree with Frank McAveety that what matters is how Governments spend money and whether they do so effectively and efficiently. I agree, too, that projects such as the M74 should be supported—and are supported, I believe—by mainstream opinion in Scotland. There is a certain consensus in respect of those aims. I want to address the topic of transport in relation to the budget. We know that there are huge challenges facing Scotland, not just in the Highlands, which I represent, but throughout Scotland. We know that the sum that is required to bring our road network up not to a top-class standard but just to a reasonable standard is £4,000 million over 10 years. We know that our rail system in Scotland, although it is improving, is second class in comparison with that in continental Europe. We know that our air services in comparison with those of Ireland are inferior, fewer and less frequent, although we are a larger country. That is not a legacy in which successive Westminster Governments can take a great deal of pride. However, I will be characteristically positive—as members would expect me to be—by offering some free and unsolicited advice to the Executive. The advice is that the Executive should cancel a new policy on which it is about to embark. I refer to lorry road user charging, which is about to be introduced to deal with the problem of the foreign freight lorries that come into Britain but pay no vehicle tax. In addition, those lorries do not generate any fuel tax because their drivers bring their fuel into the country. To tackle that problem, the Government has decided that it will introduce road user charging of 15p per km, but only for lorries. Because of a fuel duty rebate, the charge will be revenue neutral. The only extra income will come from foreign vehicles and will amount to around £140 million a year. However, the technology to collect that £140 million a year might cost between £500 million and £600 million. Mr McCabe's colleagues down south are about to embark on a system that will cost approximately three times more to run than the revenue it will raise. The matter is reserved, but we will be landed with the consequences in Scotland.

That is the theory, but the practice is different. The scheme that the  Government proposes has a lower cost for using motorways and a higher cost for using trunk roads. That will encourage lorry drivers to go on longer journeys to avoid paying more than they need to. The scheme will encourage longer journeys, which is something that fuel tax does not do. If people have to pay as they go, they will travel by the shortest possible route. I am sure that the Executive will ignore the advice that I have given it. Sadly, it is clear that we have inefficient Governments in London and Scotland. The public expect us to try to use money effectively, but that is not happening in the Scottish Executive's work in the transport area.

Every year, we hear the  argument that non-Government parties should produce a complete alternative budget. Will Des McNulty remind me whether Tony Blair produced an alternative budget before 1997? The answer is no, is it not?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I am sorry to raise the matter, because time is constrained, but I seek your guidance. We know that it is not competent for members to intervene in the last minute of a speech. Does not that imply an obligation on members making speeches not to make personal attacks on other members in the last minute? Do not such attacks display a lack of courtesy to the members concerned?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will reconsider spending levels in respect of the maintenance of roads, in light of the view of the Society of Chief Officers of Transportation in Scotland that a 10-year programme costing £3.87 billion is required to bring them up to a reasonable standard. (S2O-5040)

Although that increase is welcome, the minister will be aware that SCOTS also said that the "additional £60 million ... falls well short of the funding needed to redress the current backlog" over a 10-year period. Can he continue to earn the high opinion that I hold of him as an intelligent individual by agreeing with me that, unless the work is done this year to maintain our road network, this year's pothole will become next year's crater and the cost of dealing with it will escalate? Does he agree that priorities should be reassessed and higher priority should be given to the state of our roads, which are in a state of decay and disrepair that borders on decrepitude?

I am in agreement with much of what the minister says, but I would like to ask him a question. If, the London crossrail investment, which some people say might be as much as £10 billion, or any similar massive investment in the infrastructure of London and the south-east of England is off balance sheet—which is to say, it has nothing to do with Network Rail—is it not the case that no Barnettised share will come to Scotland as a result?

rose—

The Scottish National Party exists to transfer power over our affairs to the Scottish Parliament, so it will come as no surprise to members who have followed the debate closely that we have long argued that rail policy should be devolved to this institution. The motion is necessary for that to occur, so we will support it later this afternoon. I am pleased that Bristow Muldoon, the convener of the Local Government and Transport Committee, has altered his view. He argued the contrary case in Holyrood magazine. On the question whether rail policy should be devolved to the Parliament, Kenny MacAskill said yes and Bristow Muldoon said no.

I am delighted to give way to Bristow Muldoon on the basis that he has seen the light.

No, I would disagree with that. Bristow Muldoon defended the SRA, which brings me to my second point. Powers are being transferred to our Parliament not because the Executive sat down with Her Majesty's Government and said, "We believe that these powers should be transferred to the Scottish Parliament." Powers are being transferred because the UK Government decided that the SRA should be abolished. The devolution of powers is welcome, but it is certainly an unintended consequence of the policy move of scrapping a quango. I turn to parliamentary scrutiny. I and other members of the Local Government and Transport Committee took part in the 13-hour, quadruple marathon session last week. However, just as the delayed train at platform 8 was unfortunate, it was extremely unfortunate for this Parliament that the huge volume of information that I now have in my hand was not presented to Parliament until after the interval at the end of the meeting last Tuesday. That may not have mattered for our own contributions, but—and this is a serious point of principle—it prevented rail industry experts from Scotland and elsewhere from making their input to the committee's deliberations. That was a lacuna, especially because on 2 November I raised all the issues on the criteria that would be used to determine Scotland's share. The key question is whether, after we have the powers, resources will follow. It is too early to reach a final conclusion on that question—not least because the deal that has been struck, as the minister has stated, is an interim deal. Once the work that is described in the rail review has been undertaken, will the minister bring the final deal before Parliament? What role will Parliament play in that? What is the basis of the calculation of the figure for enhancements of around £17 million? No explanation has been given. On cross-border services, I understand that the Chartered Institute of Logistics and Transport in the UK has already ventured the opinion that there is a risk that an undue proportion of the costs of maintenance of Scottish track that is used by southern freight services will be borne from our share of the financial cake. I ask the minister about that. There may be nothing to criticise, but we do not yet have the answer to the question.  A serious deficiency is that Network Rail will not be devolved. We will therefore have no direct route of accountability for Network Rail, which, according to the ORR's statement, is 31 per cent inefficient. There will be no rail passengers council for Scotland—or, if there is, it will have no statutory power to require Network Rail to provide information. The SNP is happy to support Sewel motions when they transfer more power to this institution. That is why we will support the motion this afternoon. My final comment is this. If it is possible to find a way of achieving responsibility for financing the rail industry and the rail network in Scotland, another hoary chestnut against independence will be gone. That will show that the process of Scotland becoming independent will not be impeded by the financial and technical tasks of allocating responsibility for the railways.

To ask the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body whether it will ensure that the defence of the court action against the claims by Sir Robert McAlpine will be fully prepared, including taking precognitions from those who were involved in the decision to select Bovis as the construction managers. (S2O-5162)

I make it absolutely clear that, as far as I am concerned, the SPCB is not the target or the enemy but has accepted legal responsibility for a matter that arose before the Parliament existed. In that spirit, I ask whether, given that Lord Fraser concluded in his report that there was no satisfactory explanation for the selection of Bovis, Robert Brown agrees that, unless there is an explanation, the lawyers who are entrusted with the responsibility of conducting the case will be in a vulnerable position. Further, will the precognitions that Robert Brown says will be taken include responses to unanswered  questions from all the civil servants who were involved and aspects of the selection process?

Will the SPCB ensure that that task is pursued vigorously in the short term?

Is the minister aware that, as of recently, there is no longer any dentist in Fort William that is willing to take on new NHS patients, following the cessation of NHS services by one practice? Given that the area that is covered, Lochaber, is larger than the Lothians, will the minister make interim arrangements for locum visiting dentists or persuade the existing practices to review the refusal to take on new patients? Will she urgently discuss with Highland NHS Board the need to have a salaried dentist locally to serve the people of Fort William and Lochaber?

I congratulate Jamie Stone on his ingeniously broad interpretation of the wording of the motion, which is itself extremely broad. The kernel of the motion is a concern with how we can increase employment in the agriculture sector in rural Scotland, with particular regard to farmers who produce food. The crofting counties have not specifically been mentioned. The recent change—as from 1 January—in the scheme that provides assistance for young people in crofting counties has created a new barrier. Young crofters can no longer obtain loans, only grants, as part of the scheme. The minister will be aware that the average cost of building a house in the crofting areas is now £80,000. However, if crofters can get a grant of only £11,500 in a low-priority area, they cannot readily get a building society or bank loan, because, unless the land is decrofted, there is no security of tenure. That is a real problem. The scheme has just been introduced, so I do not expect the minister to announce this afternoon that it will be reformed—not even if my arguments are particularly persuasive, which I believe they are. However, I hope that there will be an early review of how the scheme performs, perhaps even before the impending election. The previous session's Rural Development Committee did a lot of good work on the broad area that the motion addresses. It pointed to barriers that must be removed if diversification is to be made less difficult. Planning law is key, as it restricts the development of farm steadings in many areas. In my area, a great many farmers have turned to tourism development. They have had assistance from the agricultural business development scheme and a few—it was only a few, contrary to Lord Sewel's promise—had assistance from its predecessor, the agricultural business improvement scheme. In my area, tourism development has been a modest success. I hope that that will be replicated throughout Scotland, because such development offers greater opportunity. What can the Executive do? It is plain that, in the public procurement of food, a lot more can be done. I was interested to hear Nora Radcliffe's description of the talk from the gentleman from  Aberdeen, as my impression of the public procurement of food is less positive than hers. It arises from a meeting that I had with the food tsar, Gillian Kynoch, in which I sought to advocate the benefits of venison as a food—it is more nutritional than any other meat. I do not wish to be unkind to the lady who is the food tsar, but I am not sure in which century the bureaucratic procedures that she outlined to me will permit venison to find its way on to the plates of schoolchildren or workers in any public sector organisation with a canteen for which there is public procurement. There is plainly a problem and it is up to the minister to sort it out. Dairy farmers are on their uppers in a great many places, because they sell at below cost. Why on earth cannot schoolchildren have access to milk in their schools? An answer that I received just this afternoon to an oral question that was not reached in question time said that the evidence for the nutritional value of milk was equivocal. Equivocal? The minister should ask the National Osteoporosis Society whether drinking milk is good or bad. If young children drink milk—as they should—that will do much more than anything else of which I can think to develop healthy bones, so that when those children enter the latter part of their lives they do not suffer from the horrible, crippling disease of osteoporosis, which is a scourge for many of our senior citizens of both sexes.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether lack of water and sewerage services in rural Scotland is impeding economic growth and, if so, what action it is taking to address any such provision of these services. (S2O-4853)

That answer fell far below the normally high standards of adroitness with which the minister evades questions he has been asked. I put it to the minister that three measures could be introduced. First, septic tanks could be allowed instead of the hugely stringent requirements that exist at present. Secondly, the environmental  assessment rules that apply in areas that are subject to designations could be revised in order to ascertain whether they are unduly burdensome and cause delay and unnecessary expense. Thirdly, the minister could bring forward the programme and timescale for the existing work from the quality and standards III programme so that areas such as Badenoch and Strathspey in my constituency, and others throughout Scotland, can get the necessary services that are a sine qua non of development and economic growth in our country. Will the minister introduce those measures?

Over eight years.

rose—

rose—

Will the member give way specifically on the point about slithering?

To ask the First Minister whether tolls will still be charged for crossing the Skye bridge on and after 1 January 2005. (S2F-1327)

I am gratified that, within 24 hours of my lodging that question, the Executive has taken such action. It is a welcome development and an improvement on the situation in respect of the previous 2,000 or so questions that I have asked. If it was right to scrap the tolls in 2004, why was it not right to scrap the tolls in 1999, when the Scottish Parliament had a chance to build a good reputation for itself? If the reason for the decision to scrap the tolls is that this particular private-finance initiative project is, in the First Minister's words, a "discredited, Tory PFI", how quickly will the First Minister move to scrap the discredited Tory PFI for the Inverness airport terminal?

This is an extremely serious debate. There is no doubt that the arguments that have been advanced by David McLetchie seem to be correct. Although I am no legal expert in this field, it seems to me to be self-evident that in an electoral process one cannot have leading  questions, biased propositions or the use of language that contains positive or negative statements. Neither can one have material accompanying the ballot paper that is plainly biased towards one side of the argument. That is so basic that I find it extraordinary that anyone—far less reputedly responsible politicians and officials—could put forward such a ludicrous suggestion. It is a waste of taxpayers' money that Midlothian Council and possibly West Lothian Council, which may come into the action if it is raised and has to proceed, would both be using public funds to take on another council. Three parties would be involved and the taxpayer would pay for the whole lot. In his reply to the debate, the minister should state what role the Scottish Executive plans to play. I will mention the case that Brian Wilson raised at the time of the devolution referendum in 1979. That case clearly established the principle that in a referendum there should be equivalence of treatment between one side and the other. That meant that the yes side in that devolution campaign, which of course failed, had only one shot on television—one party-political broadcast—and the no side had one. I did not like that at the time, but I had to recognise that there was a certain fairness about it. The idea that those opposed to the congestion charges should be denied the opportunity to submit material is preposterous. An election was held recently in the Ukraine that many of us have seen described as a rigged election. It seems to me that there is a touch of the Ukraines about the whole process in the City of Edinburgh Council's proposed referendum. It is incumbent on the council to withdraw the referendum. If the council does not withdraw the referendum and proceeds with it, I suspect that any result—we are not here to debate the merits of the proposals, but I mention that the SNP is against them and would advocate that people vote against them—would have no validity because, for the reasons that have been outlined, the referendum is flawed. The Electoral Commission has given an opinion to that effect. I hope that in his closing remarks the minister will indicate the legal power and responsibility of the Executive in this regard and, perhaps more important on a practical level, what it proposes to do.

On behalf of the Scottish National Party, I warmly welcome the minister's announcement. I say that not just because of the impending festive season but because the SNP has, as the minister knows, given full support to the scheme. We particularly welcome the scheme's extension to 24-hour access on buses and the agreement that there should be some concessionary travel for senior citizens and people with a disability on ferries, which we also called for. My questions to the minister are offered, as always, in the spirit of critical support. First, the minister quoted two figures as maximums, but can he give the actual estimated costs of the scheme? It is important that we get the costs right. Secondly, does he accept that some of the money—some people argue that it is £10 million or more—that is intended at present to be used by local authorities for the 16 concessionary schemes is not so used? Could that be a black hole? Will he make available to the Local Government and Transport Committee the computation that sets out the figures? It is essential that the costings are accurately estimated and that we know the cost of the proposed smart cards.  Finally, can the minister indicate whether the Executive has considered and made a study of the impact that the new scheme may have on senior citizens and people with a disability moving from rail, on which they may travel at present, to the free bus services? Has the minister considered that issue, which is obviously important? The scheme will allow many senior citizens and people with a disability to get out and about; so what His Eminence the Cardinal said earlier—"Let me oot"—will be possible once the scheme comes in.

Will the minister give way?

With the minister and, I believe, Mr McGrigor, I had the pleasure recently of attending Scotland United's tourism conference in the recently opened Macdonald Aviemore Highland conference centre, where I heard a number of inspirational talks about the future of Scottish tourism. Philip Riddle of VisitScotland gave one of them. Nicola Sturgeon, Brian Adam and I had a shortened version of that presentation just this week. One of its points is that research shows that Scotland and the Scottish people have qualities that bring people to our land. The qualities are to do with the enduring nature of Scotland, its drama and its human side. Mr Riddle's thesis was that our character brought people here, which surprised me. As somebody who is capable at times of being personally difficult, dour, even confrontational and as expressive as a slab of granite from time to time, I was surprised by Mr Riddle's view. However, having considered it for a moment, I think that each of us is an ambassador for Scotland, and that applies particularly to members of the Scottish Parliament. We are in a privileged position and I am proud to say that, in order to deliver the duty that I feel is incumbent on me, I have taken it upon myself to be an unofficial tour guide for this building. I show a great many people around it, albeit with, I suspect, an alternative script to that which is provided by the official guides.

I normally prefer my own scripts. Any contributions will be considered in the millennium to come. We should praise the efforts that many people in tourism have made. There is not enough time to mention them all. I believe that Donald Macdonald persevered for a long time to set up the conference centre in Aviemore because of his commitment to Scotland. David Noble of the Highlands of Scotland Tourist Board has displayed diplomatic skills that are way beyond my ken. [ Interruption. ] I see that I am achieving a great deal of consensus this afternoon. David Fox-Pitt is perhaps less well known. He is the driving force behind the Caledonian challenge, an event in which a huge number of people participate. He has raised £1 million for charity by getting people to walk the 54 miles down the west highland way. When Michael Matheson and I took part in the event one year, we got lost and did 56 miles—but that is MSPs for you. David Fox-Pitt has set up other events, such as the Loch Ness marathon and Maggie's monster bike and hike along the north shore of Loch Ness. Those are the types of events that we should be promoting. I hope that EventScotland will help Mr Fox-Pitt. At times, the debate has resembled a travelogue, an advertorial or a non-hitchhiker's guide to the locality, so I wish to focus on some of the serious points that have been made. Mr Adam raised five pertinent and important questions, which I hope that the minister will answer. I think that Mr Riddle would agree that there is some doubt about whether the figure of £4 billion is accurate. That is not to say that I am rubbishing it, but I am not sure whether we are capable of measuring so precisely the contribution that tourism makes. That is worthy of another look. Iain Smith and, in particular, Alex Fergusson commented on visitscotland.com, which I am extremely worried about—I think that the issue will come back to haunt us. I hope that the problems can be resolved, but I am not sure that the path ahead for visitscotland.com will be easy. The fact that Scotland can be a costly destination was mentioned by a number of speakers. I am pleased to hear that the Greens are now in favour of the motor car, because that is how the people whom they are so keen to get to Scotland come here. We welcome that conversion.

John Swinney, Adam Ingram and others mentioned the problems relating to bureaucracy and red tape, which are affecting the  hotel in John Swinney's constituency, the Robert Burns museum in Adam Ingram's area and Castle Tioram in my constituency, where the problem has not been resolved for about seven years. So far in the first and second sessions of the Parliament, there have been six tourism ministers. Ministers come and go, but the problem of Castle Tioram must be resolved in this session. I look forward to meeting the minister on that next week. We are a country of 5 million people and there are 6,400 million people in the world. Even I, with my limited mathematical skills, can tell that 999 out of 1,000 people in the world are not Scots. That represents a huge potential market and opportunity for us. The SNP has taken a positive but critical approach today. I hope that our contribution to the debate will be seen in that light and I look forward to hearing the minister's response to what has been a useful debate.

Can the Greens tell us where they would put the houses?

I do not disagree with a great deal of the minister's analysis, but will he respond to the point that I raised about the wider threat to beef production as a whole, in which abattoirs play a significant part, which is the possible influx of huge extra quantities of beef from South America—perhaps an extra 100,000 tonnes? Does the Executive have a view on that? If so, what is it?

I congratulate Eleanor Scott on securing the debate. The principle behind the motion is desirable in theory, although in practice what it calls for would be extremely difficult to achieve. Lochaber, which is in my constituency, has no killing facilities. Four or five years ago, the Scottish Crofters Union considered a proposal for an abattoir there, but the proposal was deemed to be unviable, not because the capital could not be raised—it could—but for two other reasons. Those reasons were the difficulty in sustaining revenue and the difficulty in sustaining volume. Those problems will not go away and would not be solved by state aid, even if that were legal. I am not sure how the proposition in the final part of the motion could be achieved, because the granting of direct subsidies to create slaughterhouse facilities would place existing slaughterhouses at a competitive disadvantage. There might well be a special case for islands, as Maureen Macmillan and George Lyon suggested, but I cannot see how such support could easily be given without unfairly disadvantaging slaughterhouses such as Raymond Miller Ltd in Grantown-on-Spey. I spoke to the company today and was told that it faces a serious problem. Eleanor Scott alluded to the problem, which is the huge bureaucracy and hassle of running a slaughterhouse. I have invoices from the meat hygiene services inspectors for £4,000 one month and £5,000 the following month. Apparently one of the bureaucratic difficulties that slaughterhouses face is that they must pay inspectors for the whole day, even if the inspectors finish early. What can the minister do about that? I suspect that the matter is  reserved and that the answer will be that he can do nothing. There is a serious problem that has not been mentioned. Although people who run abattoirs are becoming increasingly involved in direct sales and retail in order to try to cut out middlemen and increase their revenues, what will happen if there is a continued flood of meat from south America? The minister will no doubt correct me if I am wrong, but I understand that the United Kingdom Government wants to make it easier to import meat from south America. I believe that the UK Government seeks to increase the quota by 100,000 tonnes; because the United Kingdom wants access to south American financial markets for UK financial businesses, such as banks and City firms, it arguing that the limits be increased. That means that the current tariffs of 40 per cent would go. What effect would that have on abattoirs? It would put them out of business. In this debate, we are considering the overall viability of abattoirs. I hope that the minister will at least let us know whether the Scottish Executive agrees with me that the current quota system should be maintained and not liberalised. If it is not maintained, it will become extremely difficult to establish new facilities.

It would be ungallant of me not to congratulate my wife Margaret on securing the debate—it would also be rather risky. It is a rare experience for me to have the last word and I begin by congratulating the efforts of the Highland senior citizens network, which recently carried out a survey of the views of 2,000 senior citizens. It is interesting and gratifying that relatively few respondents considered that their heating was "poor", although given that only 50 per cent of the sample replied, perhaps the people with the most serious problems did not participate in the survey. However, the survey highlighted the incidence of fuel poverty in the Highlands and other areas that have a large rural hinterland. A recent answer to Christine Grahame's parliamentary question,  S2W-11715, included a table that demonstrates that the incidence of fuel poverty is far higher in island communities than it is in urban areas: there are 18,000 fuel-poor households in the Highland area and 4,000 fuel-poor households in the Western Isles. That is a worrying trend, which I hope will be addressed. Government money should be spent sparingly and sensibly; I wish that instead of frittering money away on matters such as transferring jobs in Scottish Natural Heritage to Inverness the money could be spent on pensioners. I hope that John Swinburne agrees with me. We should bear in mind other factors. Through a trust fund, Scottish Gas provides the useful here to help scheme, whereby people who need help can receive £350. One such person might be the gentleman who replied to the survey that I mentioned saying that he had had to curb his heating bill because he had had to spend £700 on a new door. He should contact Scottish Gas on 0845 600 0294.

That is a serious suggestion, and if I can do anything about it I will make sure that Scottish Gas receives that application. We also need to invest in infrastructure, as has been pointed out. In conclusion, for even longer than Margaret has campaigned, the SNP has campaigned, with Duncan McKellar, who was the first SNP councillor—

Will the minister give way?

Will the member give way?

I make no apology for addressing solely the nephrops fishery on the west coast of Scotland. Yesterday, the Commission's opening position was revealed and, under that position, the nephrops quota for the west coast would rise by 12.4 per cent. I hope that the minister will tell us why it would rise by that percentage, because the fishermen do not know and they need to know. However, that increase would simply take us back to the TAC of 2000, before the 10 per cent reduction, which should be reinstated—we have argued every year—on the basis of the facts, because the science shows that prawns are in plentiful supply. The Mallaig and North West Fishermen's Association has asked me to ask Ross Finnie to build on the opening position and seek a further increase, which it believes to be fully justified by the science. Mallaig is a community in which almost nine out of 10 people depend on fishing, and prawns are now the most valuable fishing stock in Scotland, but they do not receive the attention that white fish receives. Of course, we  are concerned about fishing interests everywhere, but there has been a misunderstanding and the Commission has taken a flawed approach. That must be addressed in the negotiations. I am confident that the minister will seek to address that and I make my remarks in the hope that they will be taken as an entirely positive contribution to that effort. In November, I attended with John Hermse and a representative from the Clyde Fishermen's Association a meeting with Ken Patterson of the Commission—I gather that John Farnell was ill that day. It emerged that the Commission has been too quick to accept the advice of ICES on the west of Scotland stock. I suppose that the Commission has been effective in reducing fishing effort on stocks that it considers to be in danger, but healthier stocks have been subject to unjust restrictions that are not required by the science or the facts. Where have the flaws occurred? The most recent evidence on the level of stocks on the west coast, which was taken by camera, showed that nephrops stocks have increased by 30 per cent—not the 12.4 per cent increase that has been granted in the quota. That camera evidence was rejected for the west coast, but I am told that for Fladden in the North sea last year, the same method of taking evidence was accepted. If it was valid last year, why is it said to be unsafe this year? I hope that we can get to the bottom of that, as we need to. If prawn stocks have increased by about one third, the Commission's approach has no justification. My main point is that a serious misunderstanding of the bycatch issue has occurred. As the minister knows, there are two types of nephrops fishery: the inshore directed creel fishery, which has no cod bycatch whatever, and trawlers, which account for 75 per cent of the nephrops stock and have a cod bycatch of 2 per cent, as the minister said. However, boats that seek white fish also have a nephrops bycatch. Therefore, the fundamental flaw for me and Robert Stevenson of the West of Scotland Fish Producers Organisation is that the Commission assumes that the nephrops fishery is mixed, which it is not. That flaw has led to the difficulty—to which the minister referred—of the bycatch rate being regarded in some areas as much higher than is the true bycatch of the nephrops sector. I hope that I have explained that properly. The issue may seem technical and I know that not everybody here necessarily spends all day studying such matters. As members can imagine, it took me some time to understand it. If, as Robert Stevenson of the West of Scotland Fish Producers Organisation argued, a simple misunderstanding of the nephrops fishery has occurred and if, as  ICES should accept, the size of the nephrops fishery has increased by 24 per cent, surely it is time for the minister to argue in his negotiations from the standpoint of the fishermen's representatives. I hope and imagine that he will. I am afraid to say that I have more confidence if he, rather than Mr Bradshaw, leads the negotiations. I invite the minister to consider seriously those points, which Robert Stevenson and I have made in writing. I hope that we will receive an answer before the negotiations take place, if that is possible. Most important of all, fishermen do not want subsidies. That is the non-solution that Mr Ruskell proposed. Fishermen want to fish. When it is right to fish and the science says that no threats to fish stock exist, they should fish. I urge the minister to listen carefully—as I know he will—to the good counsel, solid advice and actual knowledge and experience of Robert Stevenson and of John Hermse and his ilk, who represent Scotland's fishermen. If he does so, I am confident that we will have a better deal for the west coast of Scotland, because the case is based on science, fact and argument. The Greens' comments about the approach of politicians do only themselves a disservice.

I think that the point that I sought to make during questions on the environment and rural development might have been misunderstood. There is some cod bycatch in most types of nephrops fishery, although I argue that it is negligible. However, the concept of the so-called cod association has been introduced into the negotiations and it bases the bycatch on cod that are caught rather on measurement of the total stocks. The association therefore seems to me to be misleading, worthless and inimical to the successful outcome of the negotiations that the minister is entrusted to pursue.

Does the minister agree that, although a 12 per cent increase in the nephrops quota for the west coast is welcome, prawns are in even more plentiful supply? In the negotiations that he is shortly to undertake, there are two crucial aspects of a technical nature, on which I have written to him. First, there is camera evidence, which has been disregarded for west coast prawns, but which has been accepted for Fladden previously. Will he argue for the acceptance of that evidence? Secondly, does he agree that the so-called cod association formula is a misinterpretation, is misleading and should not play any part in informing the important negotiations?

The minister will be aware of the west Highland health solutions group's excellent, cross-party, non-partisan work with regard to Oban hospital and Belford hospital in Fort William, which has provided a pilot interim solution. Does he agree that it would be extremely useful to meet the consultants who have given of their expertise and experience so that he can discuss the aim—which all parties support—of ensuring that rural general hospitals provide acute care 24/7 in places such as Oban and Fort William in my constituency and hear the consultants' ideas on training, recruitment, the importation of elective surgery and the not-always-beneficial influence of the royal colleges? Will he meet David Sedgewick and others for a fruitful, productive and positive discussion on those issues?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. In the light of the defeat of the Executive's proposals in relation to this afternoon's debate, I seek your guidance on the consequences. In particular, will the Executive withdraw the consultation paper, which Parliament has voted down?

The key issue in the debate is that the minister has contended that we need to go to tender because we require to accept the lowest price. I have stumbled across paragraph 2.4.9 of the "Clyde and Hebrides Lifeline Ferry Services Service Specification" document, the footnote to  which indicates that in certain circumstances ministers need not accept the lowest tender; in fact they could accept a higher tender. If that is the case, what is the point of the tender process and the costs involved in the whole exercise?

Will the member give way?

In such debates, it would be better if we, as elected representatives, had the benefit of our constituents' views, especially when matters are highly controversial and extremely complicated, such as those that are dealt with in the papers that we are discussing. I hope that the Executive will take that on board. I do not doubt one whit the minister's bona fides on the matter, but I sometimes wonder what our civil service is planning behind the scenes. People who are expert in the matter have not had the opportunity to contribute to the debate. Of course, they will have the opportunity to contribute in the 14-week  consultation period, but would it not be better to have the debate after the consultation, with the benefit of people's views? I think that it would, but a radical change would be required by the Executive in how it conducts its business.

The information is certainly fresh. There simply has not been time for us to study the documents. I thought that the minister had accepted that. The SNP's position has always been to support lifeline ferry services to our islands. The cost of travelling from our islands to the mainland has always been far too high. That is why, in our amendment, we not only reiterate our principled stance but advocate that islanders should not be excluded from whatever national concessionary travel scheme is introduced. That scheme should be extended to travel by ferries. The minister might have intervened at this point to give us more good news—perhaps not today. I was reassured slightly by the fact that when Bruce Crawford raised the matter with the minister at the Local Government and Transport Committee, the minister seemed to regard that idea favourably, at least.

The minister is not wearing a Santa Claus costume, but I welcome his words in that spirit. As far as the main issue of the tendering is concerned, the Executive is going to have to do better. Political debates in Parliament should not really be about legal arguments—this is not the place for that. However, many people who have a long track record in this matter take a different view from that of the Executive—something that will be explored in time to come. Those people include Professor Neil McCormick, one of the most distinguished jurists in Europe, and Brian Wilson,  who has a long-standing interest in the matter. Brian Wilson has said that we are going along "a completely unnecessary road. I do not believe that Europe was ever interested in forcing"—

Can I just finish the quote, please? I know that George Lyon will not like listening to it, but I want to make it through to the end. Brian Wilson said: "I do not believe that Europe was ever interested in forcing this tendering process on what to them is a localised operation. The civil servants who conned ministers into this process, in the early days of devolution, have a lot to answer for." He went on to say, in a subsequent statement: "I have been in touch with competition officials at the DTI who are delighted with the Altmark judgment and confirm that, as far as they can see, it means that Caledonian MacBrayne does not need to be subjected to competitive tendering". Whether Brian Wilson is right or wrong—

I will give way in just a second.

I ask Mr Lyon to restrain himself. Whether Brian Wilson is right or wrong, the issue is that the public are entitled to have the fullest information on this matter. I will give way to Mr Lyon.

I look forward to the repetition of that argument. That simply proves that we are having this debate at the wrong time. We should not be debating legal issues today. We should be debating the social issues and the economic future of the people who live on the islands. Because of the late publication of the documents, the debate is becoming—as we see from Mr Lyon's intervention—an arid exchange of legal opinions that takes us no further forward. I move amendment S2M-2117.1, to leave out from "commends" to end and insert: "believes that lifeline ferry services must be provided and an element of public subsidy will be required for that aim; further believes that the proposed national concessionary travel scheme should be extended to ferry travel; calls on the Scottish Executive to provide documented evidence showing that EU law requires that the tendering process which the Executive proposes must be undertaken; is concerned about the potential impact that this process may have upon the employment conditions of staff working on ferries, and notes that many passengers have voiced serious concerns about both the efficiency and effectiveness of the current ferry services provided by Caledonian MacBrayne which require a thorough and independent investigation."

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I gave notice of this point of order around noon today, which was the same time at which I received the documents that the Executive published today in relation to this debate: a consultation paper and a specification and tender document that, combined, are about 250 pages long. I seek your guidance as to whether the Executive should provide a better and adequate period of notice, particularly when a debate relates to a legal proposition. This debate does that, as is manifest from the wording in the motion. The legal proposition is argued in the documents, so we could not apply ourselves to it when framing our amendments, which had to be lodged before the documents were available. Do you agree that the Executive's approach does a disservice to the great number of people who would have liked to be able to put their views to their elected representatives in order to inform this debate? I seek your guidance as to whether this sort of occurrence, which is becoming somewhat frequent, can be regarded as unacceptable and something that we must bring to an end.

If Mr Smith had been present at First Minister's question time, as I was, he would have heard what the SNP proposes to do with an element of the savings: freeze the council tax. Do the Liberal Democrats support that or not?

Does the minister agree that we live in one of the gloomiest countries in the world at this time of year, when darkness descends in the early afternoon? Is he as surprised as I am at the number of drivers who persist in driving along roads such as the A82 with no headlights in half-darkness, fog or even snow? Will he adopt the Scandinavian model of having drivers use dipped headlights at all times and advocate that as part of a road safety campaign?

West Lochaber, in the constituency that I represent, depends to a great extent on fish farming; it has since the inception of the industry. There is consensus on the objectives for the industry among all parties, except the Greens—I am genuinely sad that we cannot unite behind a considerable Scottish success story.

I will take both members, if they want.

What Mr Harper says is not the same as Mr Ruskell's comments in last week's debate on supermarkets, when he said that he did not know whether we should allow salmon to be sold in shops and that he reserved his judgment on the issue. I agree with the Green party and Mr Harper in one respect; the industry is not sustainable. However, it will certainly not be sustainable if it cannot sell its products in the shops, which is what Mr Ruskell could not bring himself to state last week. Robin Harper takes a slightly different view this week; indeed, he seemed to take two different views in his speech. He argued that salmon could perhaps be sold in the shops, but he was not prepared to say whether anyone should eat it. No—eating it is too risky because that secretive organisation, the FSA, which I presume operates like the mafia in Sicily, is unwilling to share all its dark secrets with the Green party. Like the FSA, the Food and Drug Administration in the United States of America immediately rubbished the Pew-funded research. It would behove the Green party to admit the principle that activist-funded research is commonly carried out to a far lower standard than other research, and that its claims are invariably promoted in the press and not subject to independent peer review or published in scientific journals. I was going to deal with the issue later because I want to discuss really important issues—rather than the Green party—but it is not good enough for Robin Harper to say simply that he did not endorse the Pew  research; he must join the rest of us and state that it has been discredited. I hope that Dr Scott will clarify the issue later, if possible. I turn to issues that are more pressing than the various policies of the Green party are on what is an important Scottish industry. I was concerned when the Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development mentioned that some EU member states are opposed to the necessary measure of the introduction of a minimum price for imported salmon. The SNP hopes that the efforts to which Alasdair Morrison and the minister referred are successful. Those efforts are rather overdue and have been called for for a long time, but we must look forwards rather than backwards. I hope that the efforts are successful, although we must always remember Rob Gibson's point that a substantial proportion of the industry in Scotland is Norwegian owned. The introduction of a minimum import price is necessary. We read that Norway has been subsidising its industry by perhaps as much as £100 million a year. If the factual investigations to which the minister referred corroborate that, I hope that our approach will allow the introduction of the necessary measures because we may otherwise lose even more businesses and jobs in areas that can ill afford to lose them. The Crown Estate commission receives about £1.7 million a year in rent from the seabed, a large proportion of which comes from fish farming, which receives little in return. I have had lengthy correspondence and meetings with the CEC on the issue and, to be fair, it has reduced the rent from previous levels, largely because of pressure from Parliament. Rather than make the issue a party-political one, if the minister and members of other parties simply acknowledge that the industry can ill afford that burden, that might result in a further reduction of rent by the Crown Estate commission. Last week, after I had given Mr Ruskell the opportunity to explain Green party policy, I had an excellent lunch in the fine restaurant in this establishment, which comprised a smoked salmon starter and salmon fillet for the main course. The Food Standards Agency recently published advice that most people would benefit from a ninefold increase in their intake of oily fish, which surely presents a huge potential market in our country for the industry. Let us hope that every party in Parliament will get behind that aim and support a great Scottish industry.

Is Robin Harper aware of the evidence that was presented to the Rural Affairs Committee in the first session of Parliament during  that committee's scrutiny of the Salmon Conservation (Scotland) Bill? That evidence showed that decline in wild salmon and trout stocks began long before the inception of fish farming.

Does Robin Harper agree that Scottish farmed salmon should be available for purchase by consumers in Scottish retail outlets? Yes or no?

Does the industry receive anything in exchange for the £1.7 million that it has paid to the Crown Estate commission in relation to that body's 2003 report? Is it not time that that money was returned to the industry, which receives little or no benefit from it at the moment?

Brian Monteith points out that the debating champions were pupils from state schools. Does that account for the fact that no members of the Labour Party or the Scottish Socialist Party are present for the debate? Are they absent because they are afraid of Brian Monteith's debating skills or because they believe that they have perfected their debating skills to the extent that they have no need to attend the debate?

Will the member take an intervention?

Why not?

Will Mr Ruskell answer the question that his colleague refused to answer earlier? Should Scottish farmed salmon be available for purchase by consumers in supermarkets or anywhere else in Scotland? Yes or no?

George Lyon will be aware that the Food Standards Agency's advice on the matter was originally issued in July last year and confirmed this year. Why, after almost 18 months, have the chief medical officers not clarified their position? That delay is completely unreasonable and it has not been explained.

The impact of supermarkets on small shops and primary producers is not a topic that has become important in the past few weeks during which it has become the topic of press releases from the Green party; that impact has developed over at least the past three decades. In my constituency—as, I suspect, in all members' constituencies—we have seen predation by supermarkets and its effects on small shops. In my constituency, Nairnites leave to go to Forres supermarkets on one hand and Inverness supermarkets on the other. The impact of that on the high street has been inexorable, consistent, persistent and has happened over a matter of decades. We all agree about that, but we disagree in at least two respects. First, the alleged solution that has been proposed by the Green party would be completely ineffective. The Greens call for "an independent overseer of the code of practice who will proactively ensure that it is enforced"— a sort of Rambo of the protection world, or an Arnie Schwarzenegger who would arrive on the scene to protect primary producers and small shops from supermarkets. The idea belongs in the realms of fantasy.

This seems to be a good point at which to give way.

I suggest to Mr Harvie and his colleagues that the thoughtful, helpful and practical suggestions that are made in the NFUS briefing are a good read. We all agree that some of those suggestions should be adopted. However, the Government has a role to play and other measures to tackle the effects of supermarkets should at least be seriously considered. First, bargaining strength is notoriously unequal. Since the Tories in their wisdom decided to abolish the milk marketing boards there has been an absence of collective bargaining strength on the part of the dairy sector. Without that strength, it is difficult to envisage how a legislative solution could be effective. Secondly, as Richard Lochhead said, the Government does not seem to have used its influence, which is huge. I refer to the Government's ability not necessarily to make legislation or to amend the regulatory regime—as the Greens propose—but simply to state that enough is enough and that farmers must get a better deal. If the Prime Minister decided to depart from his usual topics of the day and devote attention to the matter, Tesco et al would listen. Our devolved powers could be used to address supermarkets' rateable values and to shift the burden of business rates from the small shop in the high street to Tesco in the business park outwith the town. I have corresponded with rates assessors on the matter and the Executive has the power to do that. The Greens decided to debate food, so I would be interested to know whether they have come to a view on matters about which I sent an e-mail to Shiona Baird on 25 February. That e-mail followed disgraceful and false stories that a report sponsored by the Pew Charitable Trusts put about in relation to the salmon industry. The research was shown to be bogus and Scottish Quality Salmon helpfully provided us with the facts and the truth. Ms Baird attended a meeting at which I suggested a way of helping to promote salmon as a vital part of a nutritious diet, which is of particular value in the cognitive development of the unborn child—

The member will get her chance. I suggested that it would be useful if a representative of each political party agreed to participate in a photocall, at which we would eat farmed salmon and show that we acknowledge  salmon to be a valuable part of our diet. However, Ms Baird did not respond to my e-mail that asked the Scottish Green Party to participate. The Greens did not say, "Yes; not only is salmon safe to eat but it is a valuable part of our diet." The Greens did not acknowledge that the FSA suggests that two portions of oily fish per week should be eaten as part of a healthy diet. I wait for the Greens to make those statements. If the Greens want to pose in the role of the farmers' protectors, I suggest that they start by having clear and unequivocal policies.

Ms Baird decided not to answer my e-mail of 25 February. Farmed salmon is an essential part of a nutritious diet and it would be helpful if the Scottish Green Party would say that. Apparently it will not do so even now. For the Greens to cast themselves in the role of farmers' friends seems to be a spectacular example of political miscasting. It is like asking Norman Wisdom to play Dirty Harry, or Arnold Schwarzenegger to play Mozart. The Greens are good in their new role as blatant populists—

The Greens have espoused the grey politics that they said that they would eschew and the yellow politics that we heard from Allan Wilson yesterday, because they are afraid to come off the fence and give a clear view and a serious policy on food or virtually anything else.

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

Does Alex Johnstone agree with the SNP that part of that strategic approach should be for community benefit? Does he agree with the SNP that a far smaller amount of money should be paid to landowners for rental of the land and that that money would be put to far better use if it was paid to the communities by way of community benefit?

Maureen Macmillan mentioned Alasdair Morrison's constituency, the Western Isles. Does she agree that the recent comment by Angus Graham that RSPB Scotland's objection to the substantial proposed development in the Western Isles is not something that we should welcome? Does she also agree that we should invite RSPB Scotland to explain why it has decided to object in that case but not, apparently, to other wind turbines in Scotland as well as its criteria for saying that some projects are bad but others are not?

Will the minister address the private sector concerns that I raised in my speech about the fact that good sylvicultural practice in respect of thinning and fertilisation is not being followed? There are concerns that the production of high-quality saw logs is being jeopardised.

Will the member take an intervention?

In my constituency, forestry and the forest industry in relation to the paper, panel and construction sectors as well as the sawmilling sector is of fundamental importance. The debate should focus on the controversy of the Executive's failure to focus on the serious economic concerns of the forestry industry.  Richard Lochhead and Alex Fergusson have already alluded to some of the serious problems. In politics we must be able to distinguish between what is important and what is essential. Leisure, tourism and environment interests are important, but unless we have proper planning and the correct approach to the needs of the industry we will neglect the essential aspects of forestry policy.

Not at the moment. We acknowledge that the Forestry Commission plays a role in ensuring that there have been long-term contracts to ensure what is essential for the sawmilling sector—namely continuity of wood supply. If a sawmill does not have a reliable supply of high-quality saw logs, it cannot survive. That is where the Forestry Commission has played a role, with secure, long-term contracts at difficult times such as a couple of years ago, when, as Mr Finnie indicated, the economics made it unviable to take the trees from the forest. Things have improved since then, but the important aspect of the debate lies in recognising the long-term nature of this vital, proud Scottish industry. There are some serious criticisms that I really hope the minister—whom I welcome to his new role—takes on board. Richard Lochhead has alluded to the failure of the Forestry Commission to maintain proper plantation levels. How will it fill gaps in the future if the private sector is simply not able to supply the sawmills? It is my information—from some pretty reliable sources in the Highlands—that thinning has been ceased and that the supply of fertiliser has been massively reduced. Unless proper sylvicultural practice is followed, Sitka spruce will become of an unusable quality. That is a major concern, and other members have referred to it. If the wood is unusable, it is useless. Why is the Forestry Commission not following proper sylvicultural practice, especially if the figures to which Alex Fergusson referred—the cost of forest management being £38 per hectare in the public sector but only £4 a hectare in the private sector—are anywhere near correct. How can it be the case that so much money is being spent while proper practice is being neglected? The Liberal Democrat speech contained a record number of questions asked without a single answer being provided. One question was whether there should be a new large-scale sawmill or a new second line, as was proposed for the sawmill near Irvine. I think that that proposal was shelved, and that the investment went instead to China. At the moment, the answer to that question is no. If there were a massive new mill in Scotland, that would jeopardise the supply of saw logs to  Brownlee and Co, John Gordon and Son, Walkers, Howie Forest Products and all the other proud, successful Scottish businesses, almost all of which have been around for more than a century. They do not need lessons from people with degrees in forestry about how to run their business; they need a proper focus on the needs of the industry. Forestry is a successful industry. It is viewed as a heavy, dirty industry. James Jones and Sons invested £18 million just a few weeks ago. Now, it is a high-tech, high-quality industry. The clusters group has done some good work although, frankly, we are still waiting for the conclusions on some of the topics that have been discussed in conferences and seminars and that have featured in consultants' reports over the past four years, in particular on e-commerce, plastic wood, chemical derivatives and the use of spruce in joinery. The establishment of the centre for timber engineering at Napier University—the CTE—is welcome, despite the abrupt departure of Professor Choo. All in all, we must focus on the real needs of the industry. The £13.5 million transport fund is welcome. However, it is no use simply having new ways to transport timber by sea. That is happening already at places such as Lochaline. It is no use unless there is also assistance with freight facilities grants for the provision of loading equipment. We cannot just create a pier and take the timber off without loading equipment. It costs about £250,000 for a crane. Ferguson Transport (Spean Bridge), based in my constituency, is the only such operator in the Highlands. It was turned down recently. Why? How does that help? Unless help is to be provided with loading equipment, how can timber be taken away by sea? There will be 400,000 lorry trips to sawmills each year in five to 10 years' time. That is my estimate, based on statistics referred to by Allan Wilson from David Howat's booklet. That is twice as many trips as at present. We welcome that £13.5 million, but will it really tackle the problem? In any event, nothing will happen for a year yet, despite the fact that I, Alex Fergusson and others had a debate about the matter in Aberdeen, and have been pressing for measures on timber transport since the Parliament was formed. We need a level playing field. That is crucial, and that is what we must focus on. The Chancellor of the Exchequer, Gordon Brown, is creaming off billions of pounds of taxation on fuel, with a rate of 75 per cent—he is creaming off extra billions every year. The cost that the tax on fuel poses to the industry is absolutely colossal. It would be very encouraging indeed if the minister, in his winding-up speech, could speak for Scotland and say enough and no more—there must be no more  increases in tax on fuel. The rate of tax on fuel is already about the highest in Europe, and there must be a freeze on it.

Finally, I hope that the minister will explain why "The Review of Land Managed by Forestry Commission Scotland" was withheld until today.

If that is the case, why does the individual on the forestry cluster recommend that there should be a target?

What is the answer?

But what is the answer?

Will the minister give way?

To ask the First Minister what role the Scottish Executive will play in decisions about how many more casinos there should be in Scotland. (S2F-1153)

But the Prime Minister has expressed the clear view that he wants around 40 more Las Vegas-style casinos to be established as a form of economic regeneration. Does the First Minister share that view? Does he have a vision of the Scotland of the future as a sort of Nevada of the north with one regiment but umpteen casinos? Does he share the concerns that have been expressed by the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland, which are highlighted in today's Scottish Daily Mail , that supply will create demand and that casinos will become part of everyday life?

Will the minister give way?

Will the member give way?

I welcome the minister to his new portfolio of housing. I wish to make some specific suggestions that I believe could tackle a chronic shortage of affordable housing in many parts of rural Scotland—not least, in my constituency. In many parts of my constituency, such as Badenoch, there is a complete blockage of development because of the lack of access to water and, especially, sewerage. As John Swinney pointed out in an intervention, that problem is not going to be solved for around three years or, in many areas, possibly a decade. I recently read the published reports of Scottish Water Solutions, which showed that the company is ahead of target by, I think, 170 per cent. It follows logically that one solution that the minister will investigate—he has said that he is speaking to Mr Finnie about this—is to accelerate the programme, which is currently set under quality and standards II, and to bring forward Q and S III. Unless that happens, the shortages in places such as Newtonmore simply will not be addressed—they cannot be.

I always thought that Presiding Officers must be mind-readers—that was precisely the point that I was about to make. It has been made so well by Mr Tosh that there is no point in my repeating it. Housing officials in my constituency have told me privately that septic tanks and small-scale sewerage works can be used to solve the problem. I invite the minister, in response to a point that has now been made by two parties, to intervene to ensure that smaller-scale sewerage works, which can work, will be part of the solution that we all want to the chronic shortage of affordable housing. The problem in rural Scotland is not the fact that there are too many second homes; it is the fact that there are not enough first homes at affordable prices. I invite the minister to read the report that was produced in the Parliament's first session by the Rural Development Committee under the excellent convenership of Alex Fergusson. The report made specific recommendations on how farm buildings and unused buildings on private estates might be brought into the housing market. In addition, it recommended a total rethink of our approach to planning in rural Scotland. Frankly, the romantic idea that the vast acres must be left as a wilderness belongs to a century other than the current one. Without a sea change in our approach to housing in rural Scotland, we will be simply unable to tackle the problem. I also urge the Minister for Communities to work closely with his colleague who has responsibility for forestry to encourage the use of wood in construction. Scottish building companies have taken a lead on that, but much more needs to be done. Before my five minutes are up, let me read from a letter that I received last month from an English couple—the gentleman is a bricklayer—who wrote: "We are a married couple with a child coming up to 3 years old. We heard on Westminster Hour on Radio 4 last year that the Minister for Scotland said he wanted people to move to the Highlands. Having worked in the area, we thought, as there are no work opportunities for us ... in Doncaster that moving to Inverness seemed a good opportunity." It seemed a good opportunity for them to make a new life. The SNP welcomes new citizens to  Scotland, including those who come here from England. However, people are currently unable to move here because of our chronic shortage of affordable housing. There is a will across the parties to tackle the problem, but we need to provide specific solutions, some of which I hope I have outlined in this speech.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer, of which I have given you brief notice. I seek your guidance as to the interpretation of chapter 9 of the standing orders with regard to the introduction of an Executive bill. This afternoon I noticed that the Executive has introduced a bill—namely the transport bill. The press release is entitled, "Transport bill ... before Parliament." However, it is not. The Scottish Parliament information centre does not have the bill and, therefore, MSPs cannot see it or comment on it or fulfil our function of democratic scrutiny of the legislation. Presiding Officer, I ask you to offer us your guidance on whether the Executive's actions display discourtesy to the chamber. If that is the case, what guidance might you offer to the Executive in order to enable it to ensure that it avoids such transgressions in future?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

Is it in order for the First Minister to accuse a member of this Parliament of deceit?

I begin by declaring a small shareholding in BT. Sadly, it is a modest one. The constituency that I represent is the second largest in Scotland—and indeed in Britain—and includes rural communities from Ardnamurchan to Auldearn, from Drumochter to Dalcross and from Nairn to Knoydart via Loch Ness. If the proposal to remove pay-phones goes ahead, there will be about as many pay-phones on the shores of Loch Ness as there are annual sightings of the loch's most famous resident. Broadly speaking, I endorse the arguments put by members of all parties who are representatives of rural constituencies. Rather than repeat arguments that have already been made, I shall ask the minister to address what seems to me to be a fundamental illogicality in the current process.  In order to stop the proposed removal of any public pay-phone, all that is required under the existing rules is that a written objection to the proposal is made providing reasons for the objection. The rules do not define what the reasons are. If there are any reasons at all, the mere intimation of an objection will bring the proposal to a halt. That seems to me to be bonkers, but that is the regulatory regime in which BT finds itself operating and in which we, as representatives of largely rural constituencies, are making the valid points that have been put in this debate. In particular, we have been pointing out that nowadays, when 99 per cent of households have either a telephone or a mobile phone and only 1 per cent lack that access, the primary role of a pay-phone should be—for the reasons identified by Rosemary Byrne, John Swinney, John Farquhar Munro and Sylvia Jackson—as an emergency service for locals and tourists, in areas where there is no mobile coverage and for use to alert the emergency services. It is an emergency facility, but under the same rules as apply to objections—and perhaps the minister could address this point—there is no power for BT to replace pay-phones with emergency phones. That seems to me to be absurd. Thirdly, we understand that, although BT has put forward these proposals, it is only following the procedure that was set out in Oftel's direction of last July, which says that BT must consult community councils. Mr Ruskell made the rather bizarre and onerous proposal that BT should consult every community in Scotland. Even if BT were to consult even every community in my constituency, I think that it would take several BT employees an entire year to do so. BT is only doing what it has to do. Will the minister confirm whether BT consulted the Scottish Executive on whether the consultation procedure should be enhanced? If so, what was the Executive's response? Even more perverse is the fact that, at the same time as BT is proposing the closure of a great number of pay-phones throughout Scotland, Ofcom is undertaking a review of the universal service obligation for pay-phones that could change the criteria for the retention of pay-phones. Surely the cart has been put before the horse. Does that not illustrate amply the utter idiocy of operating under a regulatory regime of which Westminster is in charge? Would it not be preferable if our Minister for Transport—whom I am sure all members would wish to support as appropriate—had the power to introduce a regulatory regime that determined the rules before they were applied to a given situation? Living as we do in the real world, we have to recognise that the present situation needs to be addressed.  Does the minister agree that any savings in expenditure that BT achieves through the closure of pay-phones—most of which will be in rural Scotland—should be reinvested in Scotland? Has the Scottish Executive asked BT to make that investment in Scotland, for Scotland and, in particular, for rural Scotland?

The minister is aware that the A82 is part of the trans-European network and that it is the main trunk road for the west of Scotland north of Glasgow. He is also aware that part of that road comprises a single track. Traffic is directed on to a single lane by traffic lights that are described as temporary, but that are now entering their fourth decade of good service—the minister is a mere youth in comparison. Does he agree that the stretch between Tarbet and Inverarnan is around four decades overdue for upgrading to normality? From his extensive international experience, part of which he shared with us in his previous answer, can he give one example of any other European nation in which part of the trans-European network comprises a single-track road?

It is important to recognise the NHS as a whole. No one has mentioned the ambulance service. First, I want to mention something that happened as a result of a decision that was taken purely for financial reasons by Highland ambulance service in the summer. It decided to institute the use of single-person crews. If anyone travels up the A9, the A96 or the A92 and they are in a road traffic accident and suffer a spinal injury, or if any of my constituents has a heart attack in their home, and an ambulance arrives with one person, it will be impossible for them, or for people suffering from many other conditions, to receive a proper service. The ambulance service did that without any consultation. NHS Highland did not even know about it. Has the Minister for Health and Community Care intervened? Not entirely, because what happened is still allowed to happen in exceptional circumstances. This week, I received an anonymous letter from a female ambulance driver, who stated that she is afraid to go to her job, because she is afraid to go out by herself. Of course, many neds know that ambulances are good places to get drugs, yet there are still single-person crews. Will the minister stop it? Answer came there none. The second issue is the out-of-hours service, on which proposals have been made by NHS Highland. I do not demonise people on health boards, because they have a job to do. In some ways, they do the dirty work of the Labour Party. The original proposal was that not one GP would be based in Badenoch and Strathspey. The area is around the same size as, or bigger than, the whole central belt, yet that is what the board came up with. Fortunately, as a result of two public meetings that I attended and huge work on the part of the local GPs, led by Boyd Peters, who proposed a safe and workable alternative plan, we have persuaded the health board to change the plan and put a GP in Aviemore. However, the small print is key, and I am not sure that the health board can deliver. The third issue that I want to advance in the short time that I have available today is Belford  hospital. On 11 November last year, 2,500 people—more than one in five of the population of Lochaber—turned out on a windy, cold night to express their complete contempt for the idea that the Belford should be downgraded and should no longer be a consultant-led, 24/7 hospital with accident and emergency, but should become a cottage hospital of some sort. From the presentation at that meeting, it was absolutely clear that that was what was going to happen, but it did not happen, because 2,500 people turned up. Eight days later, I met the Minister for Health and Community Care and I put to him the following argument, which goes to the nub of the debate: the health boards cannot deliver the solutions because they do not have the powers.

I will take an intervention from the minister if he wants to contradict anything that I am saying. I suggested to the minister that he should consider a number of things that have to be done so that we have, in the long term, a 24/7, consultant-led hospital in the west Highlands. Those include, first, recognising general surgery as a speciality. It so happens that the Belford hospital has the second-best record in Europe for dealing with trauma. Each year, 1.1 million visitors go through Lochaber, yet it has been considered that the hospital should be downgraded.

No. Mr Lyon will get his turn later no doubt. Secondly, there should be more importation of elective surgery. That needs to become a facet of the Scottish health service, so that consultants in the smaller hospitals have a critical mass of operations to carry out. The real arguments were advanced in a letter from Dr Neil Arnott in response to The Herald 's excellent campaign. Dr Arnott asks who is running the health service in Scotland: is it the Labour-Liberal Executive, or is it the various royal colleges? He made three points. His first point was that, despite the Executive's white paper promise that it is opposed to centralisation, the royal colleges are driving a centralising agenda. Secondly, he made the point that there are serious potential "threats of consultant posts not being recognised by national panels." Who is responsible for that? The answer is the royal colleges. His third point is that the alleged lack of clinical safety through "skill decay" is being used as the reason for closing units. Mr  Chisholm's amendment refers to services being maintained "unless there are genuine issues of clinical safety". The significant part of that is the word "genuine". If the Executive, as it seems to be intent on doing, is just following the line of the royal colleges and applying the rules willy-nilly to teaching hospitals and hospitals such as the Belford or those in Oban and Wick, inevitably we will be unable to find the right solutions for Scotland. Dr Arnott has said that; David Sedgwick—God bless him—has said that; the GPs and consultants from around rural Scotland are saying that. When will the Executive take those points on board?

Many of the difficulties that face local health boards, and all of us, come from the European working time directive, which was brought in under the Conservatives, who had several years to deal with its impact. What exactly did the Tories do to prepare for the impact of the directive?

Will the minister give way?

As the Minister for Transport will recall, the Minister for Finance and Public Services said this afternoon that a direct rail link from Edinburgh city centre to the airport would be one of the next steps forward. If, as the Minister for Transport claims, those estimates for future passenger numbers were carried out extremely carefully, did they assume that there would be a rail link? If so, in what year was it assumed that the rail link would come into existence?

I think that it was John Paul Getty who said that the world had been running out of oil since he was a boy. We know what the Greens' diagnosis is, but what is the prognosis? For example, would the Greens scrap package-deal holidays from Edinburgh, or would they simply tax the flights so that prices would double, treble or quadruple? What exactly is the Greens' answer?

I follow with interest the argument about which flights the Lib Dems do and do not support. To which routes would the Liberal proposal to have an aviation fuel tax apply? Would it apply to all air travel or just to some? How much would it cost per passenger?

Does Mr Ballard not agree with the comments of my colleague Mr MacAskill that it would be better for the environment if there were more direct flights from Edinburgh to European destinations rather than passengers having to go through London? That could reduce the links from Edinburgh to London that Mr Ballard has criticised.

Will Mike Watson give way?

The leader of our party is otherwise engaged at our party conference.

However, I would like to put on record the fact that the Scottish National Party business manager argued—rightly, in my view—that this debate is taking place too soon to allow us to come to a proper conclusion on the events. She minuted her dissent; the debate could have taken place next week. I think that it is important to put that on the record.

Will Des McNulty give way?

rose—

rose—

With respect, I will make this point as carefully as I can. The Minister for Finance and Public Services has said that when Mr Dewar addressed the Parliament on 17 June 1999 he made it quite clear what the landscaping costs would be. However, Mr Dewar did no such thing. He referred to the fact that there would be landscaping costs. Moreover, in an e-mail to The Sunday Times , Lord Fraser has said that in hindsight perhaps it was "disingenuous" of the late Mr Dewar not to have made it clear that landscaping costs would be an extra £10 million.

Will the minister give way?

The people of Scotland have been perplexed, appalled, angry and frustrated by the Holyrood fiasco and the process that has led us to where we are now. The fiasco has caused, in the public, a mood of disenchantment, disengagement, disdain and even, among some, detestation of us as elected representatives. I do not like saying that, but I believe that it is true. Anyone who disagrees with the idea that that feeling will not dissipate straight away should get out a little more. Lord Fraser's report and inquiry have done much good work. They have shone a light into the areas of the Whitehall system of government that we inherited from Westminster, which were inaccessible—and, I believe, are largely inaccessible now—to voters. Lord Fraser's main conclusions are in line with the arguments that the Scottish National Party has been advancing all along. To illustrate those arguments, I quote from Lord Fraser: "In my view at relatively early stages a number of decisions were taken which were fundamentally wrong or wholly misleading. It is the consequences of those decisions which have caused the massive increases in costs and delays." Those decisions were as follows. First, there was the timetable set by the late Mr Dewar. Secondly, there was the choice of site, which was driven by Mr Dewar, who was apparently biased against Calton hill. Thirdly, there was the choice of a contract that left the risk with the taxpayer, the choice of architect and the selection of the construction manager. All those decisions have come in for severe criticism in the report.

I believe that the exact phrase is that he "did not favour the Calton Hill site." As another member has said, it repays reading the report very carefully. Those decisions were made. The timetable was unrealistic. We were supposed to have been here three years ago and the building was supposed to have been completed in two years. Lord Fraser said that the £40 million to £50 million originally set "was never going to be sufficient to secure the construction of a new Parliament building of original and innovative design." I challenge one of Lord Fraser's findings, which is the selection for particular criticism of Mr Bill Armstrong. Lord Fraser has failed to quote from a memo from which Bill Armstrong quoted at length. The memo is a crucial cautionary note, which says that, in the use of construction management, it is necessary to produce "information to a required format and timetable". That did not happen, so putting the entire blame on construction management is a bit like a worker blaming his tools. In addition, Lord Fraser does not consider a reply put to him by Bill Armstrong describing a meeting that was chaired by a civil servant and apparently not minuted. It is important to put that on record, as it appears that unfair criticism has been directed towards one individual. There were two opportunities for the Parliament to have intervened: on 17 June 1999 and in April 2000. In both cases, the SNP, the Conservatives and a handful of others voted for a pause. We voted for a Holyrood halt, we voted to consider the facts and we voted for an appraisal of what those facts were, which would have involved considering other site options. In neither case did the Parliament support the view that we took, because, on a whipped vote—as we now learn, contrary to the lecture that we received from the late Donald Dewar on 17 June 1999—every Labour MSP present voted in accordance with the party whip and the opportunities were lost. We now know that the project was not in good shape at the point of handover. It was neither healthy nor viable and it was subject to delay.

I commend to Mr Lyon a good reading of the papers. I turn now to the role of the former Minister for Finance. The role of Mr McConnell, who is not at the debate but has chosen to be elsewhere for reasons that he has not had the courtesy to explain to the Parliament, was key in the run-up to the first debate on 17 June 1999. [ Interruption. ] I cannot speak any more loudly than I am doing to make myself heard over the usual chorus of the guilty on the Labour benches.

I take it that that is a not proven verdict, Presiding Officer. It was the role of the Minister for Finance, as it is now the role of the Minister for Finance and Public Services, to be the steward of the public purse. Every £1 million spent on the Holyrood building was £1 million less available to spend on public services. Because the inquiry revealed documents that would normally have been kept secret for 30 years, we now know that the Minister for Finance received a great deal of information in the run-up to that key debate. We must ask what information he was given and how he reacted to it. Mr McConnell was appointed as Minister for Finance on 19 May 1999 and, having asked for a briefing about the costs, received one from the principal financial officer, who indicated among other things that the cost required for landscaping was estimated to be between £5 million and £10 million. Only a week later, on 26 May 1999, he was advised in a memo from Barbara Doig that the landscaping might require a budget of £10 million, so the cost had gone from a possible £5 million to £10 million in a week. If I were to get a statement of the amount that I owe on the loan secured on my house that said £50,000 one week and £100,000 the next week, I would be pretty worried, and that would involve thousands of pounds, not the millions of pounds about which Mr McConnell was informed. Mr McConnell, the late Mr Dewar and the senior civil servants had a meeting about the Holyrood costs and the request for a budget increase that was made to Mr McConnell as Minister for Finance. That meeting took place on 2 June 1999, a fortnight before the key debate that could have called a halt to Holyrood and caused a rethink. At the meeting, the landscaping costs were discussed. The minute of that meeting, which Mr McConnell has accepted as accurate in so far as he says that he is able to recollect what was said, stated: "In presenting the revised estimates" to Parliament,  "it would be important to make clear what the landscaping costs were likely to be." When Mr Dewar stood up in Parliament and made his speech, he made no reference to what the landscaping costs were likely to be, even though it was agreed that that should have happened. Because Mr McConnell, for a reason that I cannot understand, was not called to give oral evidence to the Fraser inquiry, we can only speculate about why that information was withheld and whose decision it was to withhold it from the Parliament, which therefore made a literally uninformed decision. Lord Fraser has indicated and concluded that Parliament was misled. He bases that on the fact that the civil servants state in their evidence that the cost consultants' reports were kept from the late Mr Dewar and Mr McConnell and that they showed that the cost of construction was £89.2 million, including various elements, rather than £62 million plus contingencies of £6 million. Their evidence is that that information was not provided to Mr Dewar or to Mr McConnell. I am afraid that it gets worse for Mr McConnell. The largest part of the extra £21 million related to risk allowances. I have in front of me a copy of the memo that Mr McConnell received at the time. On page 2, under a paragraph to which we might have thought Mr McConnell would pay attention, as it is headed "Cost Estimates", the memo says: "Their latest cost estimate comparable with the feasibility design stage cost estimate of £50 million is £62.2 million ... (This figure excludes VAT, fees, contingencies, risk allowances, fit-out, loose furniture and artworks, site acquisition, etc.)" The memo gave the then Minister for Finance the job of ensuring that he got the truth about the figures. Did he look at the next page, which sets out a table of the items that I have just mentioned? If he had done, he would have seen that risk allowances were not in that table. I will tell members my question to Mr McConnell. He is not here to answer it, but perhaps he phoned a friend and Mr Kerr will reveal all later. Mr McConnell knew that risk allowances existed. He was a maths teacher, I believe, and he performed various functions for the Labour Party, although perhaps like me he had no idea what risk allowances were before he came to the Parliament. Did he ask, "What are risk allowances?" Did he ask, "How much are risk allowances?" Each of those questions has four words. The cost of the Parliament has increased from an estimated £40 million to £430 million. I put it to the Parliament that Mr McConnell did not ask those questions. He cannot have asked them; if he had, the civil servants would surely have told him the answer. Then, alarm bells might have rung for  the late Mr Dewar and he could have called a halt. The consequence of not asking one of those questions comprising four words is that each word has cost the Scottish taxpayer a potential £100 million. It gets worse still for Mr McConnell, I am afraid. He also did not ask whether the programme was running to timetable. We might think that he could have asked that. Paragraph 3 of the memo says: "The programme is very tight." Did Mr McConnell ask whether the programme was running into delay? We know from the Holyrood inquiry website—although Lord Fraser does not appear to have mentioned this in his conclusion—that Barbara Doig was advised by Martin Mustard on 17 May 1999 that the programme was facing three months' delay. Lord Fraser has not noticed this at all, but the politicians were told that the programme was running according to schedule. The information about the delay was concealed, apparently by the civil servants on the project. Did Mr McConnell ask whether the project was running on time? If not, why not? We all want to move on, but I think that the people of Scotland want the truth in order to be able to move on. It was obvious that we did not get the truth at the debate on 17 June 1999. It is obvious from the memos that I have mentioned that it was withheld by civil servants, by Mr McConnell and, sadly, by the late Donald Dewar. That has meant that truth was the first casualty of devolution. My colleagues will talk about various parts of our detailed amendment, which tackles the mischief of a culture of secrecy, a lack of candour, arrogance and a lack of honesty. We want a system of governance in which people are trusted with the facts and in which people are told the truth. If we do not have such a system of governance—and we do not have it now—we cannot move on. I believe that the SNP amendment offers a way to allow us to move on. Mr McConnell has failed to tell the truth to the Parliament. He has failed to do us the courtesy of appearing in the debate today. He has failed to live up to the pledge that he made on 3 May last year that, after the inquiry, no questions would remain unanswered. He failed to give oral evidence to the Fraser inquiry. He has failed in those respects. He has let Scotland down, he has let himself down but, worst of all, he has let down the very principles on which this Parliament was founded. I move amendment S2M-1727.3, to leave out from "and invites" to end and insert: "agrees with the key findings of the report that the choice of site for the Parliament, the setting of the timetable for  construction, the fixing of the budget of £50 million for construction, the selection of construction management for its procurement, the choice of architect and the appointment of the construction manager were decided by the Scottish Office before the Parliament was elected in May 1999 and that it is the consequences of those decisions that have caused the massive increase in costs and delay; further agrees with the finding that the Parliament was misled in June 1999 with regard to the costs of the project and that there is no greater democratic misdemeanour than misleading the Parliament and deplores the fact that there has been no ministerial accountability; regrets that the First Minister was not required to give oral evidence to Lord Fraser about his role as Minister for Finance in 1999; further regrets that the inquiry was set up without the necessary legal powers to require the appearance of witnesses and the production of documents and other material and agrees with the condemnation by Lord Fraser of the BBC's management for its refusal to co-operate with the Inquiry; calls upon the Scottish Executive to seek the powers that are presently reserved to Her Majesty's Government to make Executive civil servants fully accountable to Executive ministers and believes that, without such powers, essential reform of the Civil Service cannot take place; considers that the freedom of information legislation should be amended as soon as practicable to ensure that there is a presumption in favour of disclosure of information in relation to the use of public money in public sector contracts and that civil servants' advice to ministers is not protected by the 30-year rule, and calls upon the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body to take every possible step to ensure the recovery of any costs incurred as a result of negligence or breach of contract and to provide a proper means by which parliamentary scrutiny can be brought to bear upon its performance of its duties in taking these steps."

Yesterday, Lord Fraser suggested at his press conference that Labour ministers should have asked more searching questions about the Holyrood costs. Given that the First Minister was Minister for Finance at that time, does he regret failing to pose the right questions then to his civil servants?

Will the member give way?

If that is the case, how have 3,000 jobs in Ireland been relocated so far without one single redundancy?

I suspect that the attention of the press and media today might be elsewhere, on a building in Scotland. This debate is about building a better Scotland and is based on an excellent piece of work by the Scottish Parliament's Finance Committee. The SNP supports the committee's approach and is encouraged by the basic response of the minister. The relocation or decentralisation of public sector jobs is based on the idea that every part of a nation should benefit from the presence of people who work in the public sector in all its forms. All parties are committed to that principle. In the UK there have been various reviews of how far the process should be carried through. After all, we well know that in Edinburgh and London we have two capital cities that get the cream, while many parts of Scotland—and, I dare say, many parts of England and Wales—do not benefit at all. The purpose of a relocation policy is to redress that basic injustice. The Flemming review in 1963 recommended that 57,000 staff should be relocated from London, but only a third of that number were relocated in the period following that review. In 1973, the Hardman review recommended the dispersal of 31,500 posts, but only 10,000 were relocated. Perhaps inevitably there is a tendency—this is not necessarily a bad thing—for the initial target not to be met. Our task is to identify a policy of relocation that is directed specifically towards the needs of our country. As is so often the case, the debate that we are having was stimulated by a hard case, which of course was the controversial relocation of Scottish Natural Heritage from Edinburgh to my constituency in Inverness, on which there was a total lack of consultation. The staff were not consulted at all. I believe that 93 per cent of them expressed the view that they did not wish to move, despite the obvious advantages of living in Inverness, not least of which is the representation that the constituents enjoy from all its MSPs.  The DTZ Pieda Consulting report on the relocation—which, incidentally, cost £20,000—recommended that Inverness should not be the preferred location. The problem that I have with what happened—I put this point to the minister and his answer is referred to in paragraph 31 of the committee's report—is that the decision appears to have been taken against the advice not only of DTZ, SNH and the staff but, I suspect, of the civil service. One of the lessons from the Holyrood debate is that the civil service in Scotland has to be more accountable. We are entitled to know what its advice is, most certainly on issues of controversy. That is not to say that every letter and e-mail can be made public, but there is a strong case for reforming the way the civil service operates, so that the fundamental memos that are given to ministers and on which decisions are taken are made public not after 30 years but after a short period. The minister rejected that proposal, which is a shame. My other point about the SNH relocation, and this post-dates the report, is that to make the relocation workable and to persuade the staff to move to Inverness through financial means—bribe is too strong a word—they are each being paid a moving fee of £10,000 and then, after a year, a staying-on fee of £10,000. From informal discussions that I have had, I suspect that the unions could not believe their luck when they negotiated that package.

Not under the model of relocation policy that I would like to be in place. I do not believe that the SNH case is a wise precedent. I put it on record that I welcome jobs coming to my constituency but, as I believe that there is scope for considerable savings and more efficient spending, my point is that relocation should not be carried out at any price. We have a duty to look after the public purse and I do not believe that £20,000 per person is a price that should be paid. The estimates for the cost of the SNH relocation have followed the track of a mini-Holyrood process. The initial estimate has been doubled and, in recent parliamentary answers that I have received, either the Executive will not say how much the move will cost or—as I suspect—it does not know how much the move will cost. That seems to me to be like the Holyrood process in miniature.

It may be abandoned de facto if the staff do not move. We do not know whether they will move, which is the point that Mike Pringle made earlier. I will touch on the evidence about the policy in Ireland. Elaine Murray and I had an extremely useful and interesting visit to Ireland and we learned a great deal during the arduous days that we spent there. The Irish Minister for Finance announced last December that more than 10,000 jobs would be relocated from Dublin, with the aim that half of public service jobs would be located in Dublin and half outwith it. That policy is visionary and ambitious, but it also has certain features that commend it, not for replication but as a matter of process. First, to address Maureen Macmillan's earlier point, the policy is based on the voluntary principle, which means that there should be no redundancies. From my reading of the Irish newspapers, I believe that the response to that has been reasonable. The Finance Committee has recommended a new and logical approach that has been carefully thought out and agreed by all members of the committee and which should be followed. That approach is that we should carry out an audit to find out which public sector jobs can be relocated effectively and whether that should involve whole departments or parts thereof. There should also be an examination of which parts of Scotland should be the recipients of the benefit of those jobs. With respect, the minister has not really responded to that specific recommendation. It is incumbent on the Executive to give a clear answer on whether it will support that recommendation. If it supports the recommendation, it will be responding to the requirement that we all raise our game; if it does not, it will be ducking that challenge. Given that I am a politician who always tries to be consensual, I hope that the Executive will choose to do the former, not the latter.

The kernel of the committee's report starts at paragraph 97. It suggests a new approach, which is that each department in the public service should carry out an audit and that, in tandem with that, consideration should be given to which parts of Scotland require some benefit. Will the Executive commit itself to that fundamental recommendation in the committee's report?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I gave notice of this point of order yesterday. I seek the Presiding Officer's guidance on what appears to be a manifest breach of protocol by the Scottish Executive. Next week, we are to debate the Finance Committee's report on relocation, which is a substantial piece of work. Paragraph 17 of the protocol between the Scottish Executive and the Parliament states that, normally, the Executive response should be provided within two months of the publication of any committee report. Paragraph 17 further continues that if the Scottish Executive anticipates that it will be unable to comply within that two-month period, it is required to provide an explanation of why it cannot meet that deadline and also give a timetable of when its response will be published. It has done neither and it is therefore in breach. Next Wednesday's debate must be informed by a response from the Executive. I therefore seek the Presiding Officer's guidance as to what remedy there is under standing orders against an Executive that breaches the rules so flagrantly. Does the rule book simply apply to others? Before close of proceedings today, will the Minister for Parliamentary Business give a clear explanation of what is happening and say when the report will be published?

Further to that point of order, Presiding Officer.

There might not be an opportunity for the Finance Committee to deliberate on that matter before the debate, which is scheduled for next Wednesday. In the circumstances, will the Minister for Parliamentary Business make a statement about what is happening?

I am one of those who has campaigned and will continue to campaign for the full dualling of the A9 to Inverness. Does the minister accept the case in principle? If so, when will it be delivered? Can he specify the year, decade, century or millennium?

Now that we have a Scottish Parliament building fit for a Parliament, should we not have a civil service directly accountable to the Parliament? In short, should there not be a Scottish civil service for the Scottish Parliament?

Many members have kindly asked after the health of my wife, Margaret. After speaking to her earlier this morning, I am pleased to be able to say that it is hoped that she will be discharged from Dr Gray's hospital in Elgin in the next few days. However, she will need to spend several weeks rebuilding her strength. She has asked me to express her thanks to all members who have kindly asked after her. We cannot thank enough the staff who have looked after her at Dr Gray's hospital. As you know, Presiding Officer, I have taken more than a passing interest in the Holyrood project as it has unfolded. Now that we are here, let me say this about the building: I like it. I hope that before the main event in this process takes place we can resolve a matter on which I sought guidance some weeks ago: is Holyrood pronounced with a long O or a short O? When I discussed the question with a member of the press who is not very supportive of this institution, he came up with the line, "Some say Holyrood, others say Hollyrood, let's call the whole thing off." We can all agree that none of us—even in the Conservative ranks—would support that for a moment. I suspect that, as more people in Scotland have the opportunity to see this building for themselves, the majority will like it. This is a subjective matter and it is not an issue on which we should force people in any way to form a view. However, I suspect that people will come to the conclusion that we now have a building that is fit for a Parliament, but a Parliament that has the powers only of an assembly. I want to address remarks that the Minister for Justice made this morning. We all want to address offending and reoffending so I want, as a result, to highlight an example of a method that is used not to deal with offending after it has happened or to prevent its recurrence, but to prevent offending in the first place and to turn younger people away from offending towards a life without criminality and antisocial behaviour. Over the summer, some of us might have seen a programme called "Bad Lads Army", which followed the transformation of a group of young men from feckless individuals who practised a life of crime into good citizens. I am not advocating that we go back to the approach that was shown in the programme; however, as the minister knows, a modern version of that, called operation youth advantage, is already operating in Scotland. The scheme has been pioneered by the Army, working with the Northern constabulary and Grampian police, and asks young people who have been identified by the police, the social work department  and schools as having already embarked on small-time crime—such as graffiti, minor theft, vandalism and foul language—or who it is thought are on the cusp of going into big-time crime, whether they would like to participate in a residential course conducted in an army barracks. Most of them say yes, and when the parents are consulted, most of them also say yes. When individuals who had been on the course—which exposes young people to physical exercise, lessons on citizenship, information on addiction and so on—were evaluated after a year, the results showed that almost none of them had reoffended. Surely that example should be replicated throughout Scotland. I made this same speech—you know that I enjoy doing that, Presiding Officer—15 months ago on 5 June 2003. I made the same points then and felt that the minister listened attentively, which I can see that she is clearly doing now. I pursued the matter thereafter with two parliamentary questions that asked for the scheme to be replicated throughout Scotland. Unfortunately, the minister replied: "it is for individual police forces to decide on the extent of their involvement. As a result, the Executive has made no representations to the Ministry of Defence about extending the scheme."— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 5 September 2003; S2W-2071.]  That is an opportunity lost. In her other response, the minister added: "it will be for individual forces to decide on the extent of their involvement."— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 17 June 2003; S2W-679.]  However, I do not believe that that is good enough. The public are not interested in whether a policy is left, right or centre or whether it is politically correct or not; they are interested in what works. As I and the SNP have argued, an approach that exposes young people who have led feckless, reckless lives that are devoid of discipline, to the sort of techniques that we have seen on the television programme that I mentioned, that the public understand and that work so spectacularly, should be replicated throughout Scotland. Listening to the First Minister's speech yesterday, I was reminded of Miss Tallulah Bankhead's famous saying: "There is less in this than meets the eye." Now that we have new leadership in the SNP and now that its members have so wisely elected Nicola Sturgeon to lead us in this Parliament, we will continue to do as I have done this morning and offer, in the spirit of our new democracy, a positive idea that works and that can really tackle antisocial behaviour before, not after, it occurs.

Colin Fox says that the programme should be funded from the profits of the drug companies. However, one of his colleagues previously suggested that the assets of all drug companies should be expropriated. What profits would be available to fund his programme after that expropriation?

It would be churlish of me not to welcome the execution of a U-turn by the Westminster Government, even though it has taken five years. Does the minister recognise the parlous economic state of the salmon farming industry in this country? Does he agree that, in order to safeguard it, three simple measures will be required? Those measures are, first, to remove  the rental charges exacted by the Crown Estate; secondly, to heed the arguments put forward by Scottish Quality Salmon and others with regard to the regulatory regime that applies here but not in Norway or in other countries; and, finally, to promote salmon as a healthy part of people's diet and as being especially beneficial to the cognitive development of the unborn child.

I reintroduce a consensual note by suggesting that all parties agree that we desperately require more affordable housing with suitable infrastructure. Does the minister agree that one of the barriers to that is the high cost of land? If so, is that cost not due simply to the short supply of land that is suitable for housing? Does the minister agree that the remit of the Forestry Commission, which is perhaps the largest landowner in Scotland, should be extended to providing affordable housing and to using its millions of acres so that young people in Scotland can have, as well as a job, one acre to call their own?

Ted Brocklebank alluded to the fact that, on Monday of this week, four volunteers performed for their country in an international fixture against Wales. What he failed to mention was that Scotland won that fixture. It behoves me to congratulate the four volunteers: Robin Harper, Richard Baker, Stewart Stevenson and the team captain, Jamie Stone, on doing something that many members present would admit, if they were honest, that they would not volunteer to do. I wish our team success when it takes on the Daily Mail team in the challenge that is coming up—although I gather that Ted Brocklebank's decision about which team to support might be affected by conflicting loyalties.

Certainly. [ Interruption. ] Jamie Stone is the sort of Liberal who sits with the Scottish Socialists. [ Laughter. ] Karen Whitefield was right to mention carers. In thinking about the debate, it occurred to me that, although carers are volunteers, they do not volunteer to become carers. Most carers, particularly those who look after an elderly parent or relative, are carers not only because they want to be but because they have to be—they have no choice about it. That is why it is particularly important that Crossroads and other organisations that care for carers should continue to receive our support. If I can be serious for a moment, the real nitty-gritty issue in the debate is the administrative and bureaucratic burden that is placed on people through having to raise money only to make payments that seem unduly burdensome to the care commission, for example. Those payments take up a great deal of the money that it takes a lot of effort to raise. I hope that the minister might address that issue.  I also hope that Stewart Stevenson will write an autobiography. I am sure that, if he does so, he will be spoilt for choice for a title, such were the number of roles that he has played. One such title could be "I Was Alex Salmond's Chauffeur", which I gather was a voluntary but expensive role. Another possible title is "I Was Jimmy Shand's Laundryman". I believe that that was a role for which he was paid, which perhaps means that it does not qualify as a voluntary role. All of us have participated as volunteers. Members can believe this or not, but I am an ambassador for the girl guide. I have carried out many duties in that role. Some weeks ago, I was honoured to be asked to present prizes to girl guides, one of whom was a girl of 11 who won a prize for bravery. She had taken a first-aid course that had included artificial resuscitation. One day, when she was being driven by her uncle, the car crashed and overturned several times. The girl was unhurt but she had the presence of mind to get out of the car and then break a window to get back in to administer first aid to her uncle; she also alerted the emergency services. I think that members will agree that she showed extraordinary presence of mind for a girl of her age. Had it not been for the fact that she had taken a first-aid course through the volunteer effort of the girl guides, goodness knows what might have happened that day.

I will give way to Jamie Stone—he was a bit slow on his buzzer earlier.

I agree entirely, which is why I thought that it was appropriate to mention that example. I may not take many more interventions from Jamie Stone in future on account of the fact that he has a higher brain power than me. I thought that I was safe today, however. I know that this seems unlikely, but I was young once and served in a mountain rescue team for a number of years. The first thing that I did was to drive the Land Rover—which was called Alf, after its registration plate—into a stank. The vehicle was rescued but thereafter I displayed my lack of prowess in various activities. Members of  mountain rescue teams play an essential role and I am pleased to welcome the fact that funding has been secured, on a three-year basis of £25,000 per team, for the Cairngorm, Glencoe and Lochaber teams, which carry out most of the call-outs. I also want to mention the auxiliary fire service in my constituency. It plays a vital role, but is under threat. We all have examples to give and anecdotes to relate. I think that this is the last speech that I will make in the chamber. Apparently there is a new building down the road, about which I have read. I volunteer to go there—indeed, I am looking forward to it. Some members—I am thinking of Christine Grahame and me—volunteer for posts that others describe as akin to a thankless task, or even a poisoned chalice. We volunteer because we want to—that is why all volunteers carry out the work that they do. We want to encourage that spirit in Scotland. I hope that, on that point at least, all members can agree with Fergus Ewing.

I thank the minister for providing me with an advance copy of his statement, which is entitled "Statement on Efficient Government" and announces proposed savings of £500 million from the financial year 2007-08 that will rise to £1 billion by 2010. If, as the minister has therefore admitted, public money has been wasted in Scotland, why is this statement being made only on 24 June 2004, five years and 23 days after the Labour-Liberal Administration assumed power? Is that not proof positive that there has been financial mismanagement by the Executive? The statement announces a three-year plan to attack waste, bureaucracy and duplication in Scotland's public sector. If such a plan is required now, why was it not introduced four or five years ago? As for the £205 million underspend by Scottish Water, that has been paid for by Scottish Water's domestic and business charge payers. Surely if that money is to be used to pay off debt, it should pay off Scottish Water debt. Instead, it has been diverted for other purposes that might be worthy but were not part of any reasons or explanations that people were given when they received their water bills. Did the Scottish Executive consider using the £205 million underspend of Scottish Water resources from water rate payers to reduce Scottish Water debt or to refund more than 20 per cent of the water charges pro rata to domestic and business ratepayers? I hope that the minister will give a straight answer to that question. If such matters were considered and rejected, will he kindly explain why?

I apologise for not being here at the beginning of the debate. I was detained on another matter. I express my regret for any discourtesy to Des McNulty, the convener of the Finance Committee. I thank Susan Duffy and all the clerks for the excellent back-up and support that they provide to the Finance Committee. I also thank the committee's advisers and all those who have contributed to the committee's report, which is a solid piece of work. I got the impression that whatever habits Ted Brocklebank has in spending his evening hours, they have perhaps not included the studying of the budget report. We heard a rather polemic speech  from him today. As we read in the newspapers of the celebration of Bob Dylan's achievements, it strikes me that, for Ted, the answer is very much blowing in the wind. We are reminded that the country's experience under the Tory party could be described as redolent of desolation row. As someone who specialises in taking a non-partisan approach to politics, I suggest that there is a galaxy of talent on the Finance Committee. Without naming anybody in particular—they know who they are—I pay tribute to all the committee members for the contribution that they have made. We heard from Wendy Alexander—as a friendly critic or a critical friend, in a role that I am sure we would all seek to play—a specific criticism that I hope that the minister will address, although he did not do so this morning. She pointed out that there has been no response from the Executive on the provision of time-series data. That is a serious point that has been made by other members of the committee.

I mean this kindly: it is the adequacy of the response that sometimes concerns us. I am speaking for the committee and not in a party-political role, as members will have gathered by my moderate tone. Committee members of all parties identified that we are not spending enough on the provision of housing—in particular, affordable housing. How that can be done and the problems relating to it are the subject of debate and have been touched on by many members. I hope that the minister will take that specific budgetary recommendation on board.

With respect to the member, we need to ensure that we have a modern market economy in which the housebuilders will not be crippled or nationalised or have their businesses confiscated.

Mr Sheridan asked the question and I have given an answer that he does not like. The committee also recommended that there should be an increase in capital spending. That  was highlighted recently when it was identified that a large volume of capital spending on infrastructure of all types—especially sewerage capacity, roads and housing—is required. I hope that the minister will take that on board. Much of the committee's report relates to the questions of performance, productivity and efficiency. I imagine that the people who are watching and listening to this debate, as well as people throughout Scotland, will see those as the key areas of failure for this institution in its short life of five years. In paragraphs 72 to 83 of the report, the committee makes specific recommendations on how public money can be used effectively, responsibly and efficiently. The Holyrood building—which, as Jeremy Purvis said, has taken up some of the committee's time—has come to be seen as a symbol of this institution and an example of what has gone wrong. I hope that other members agree that the Finance Committee and the Parliament have a great opportunity for a fresh start when we move to the new building. That fresh start can perhaps be characterised by all of us doing our best and making constructive contributions to the debate, as most members have done this morning. Some members have touched on the Executive's targets, some of which are rather curious. For example, there is a target of testing the feasibility of linking data sets and a target of holding six open meetings of the Scottish Food Advisory Committee. It is rather surprising to have targets of that nature, many of which are statements of policy or practice or are so vague as to be meaningless. The one target that we do not have is a target setting out what economic growth Scotland should achieve. That was remarked on by the committee as something that should be seriously considered. It is like Inverness Caledonian Thistle Football Club setting targets for acquiring a sufficient number of footballs, for cutting the grass each week and for all its players watching Archie Gemmill's goal in 1974 at least once monthly but not setting a target for winning the league.

Which is the same speed that the records that Frank McAveety writes about go round at. I thank Des McNulty for taking a co-operative approach with me. I have very much enjoyed working as the committee's deputy convener. Indeed, I have made a particular contribution in the role of deputy—[ Laughter. ] However, I am aware that no man or woman is indispensable and that there are many other worthy candidates around.

We are covering interesting terrain. Does the Green party actually believe in economic growth? If not, does it believe in economic contraction?

To ask the Scottish Executive which individual is responsible for compliance with court deadlines in connection with any civil litigation in which the Executive is involved. (S2O-2697)

I had expected an answer to the question that I asked. If a solicitor in private practice had missed a deadline for lodging an appeal, the solicitor would not only be negligent but would be held responsible for the consequences, especially if those were financial consequences. Surely there are three people who could be responsible: the Lord Advocate, the civil servant who is in charge of the department or the Minister for Justice. Does no one in the Executive accept individual responsibility? Is no one ever to blame? Does the buck never stop?

I thank the minister for  personally providing me with a copy of the statement just before the start of these proceedings. The minister knows that the Scottish National Party has already presented a detailed policy in support of a local income tax. We will take the opportunity to present our ideas to the review. However, does the minister acknowledge that the reasons for the groundswell of opposition to the council tax are that the tax is not directly related to ability to pay and that bills rose by 40 per cent under the Conservatives and have risen by a further 34 per cent under the Labour Party since 1997? The inherent unfairness of the tax has been exacerbated by the burden of high bills. If the minister believes in fairness, does he think it right for a senior citizen couple to pay more than £2,000 when their sole income is the pension? If he does not think it right, will he join the growing support for a local income tax? I want to ask a specific question about timescales. As far as I can see from the papers that have been provided to us, the review and its remit have been announced but we do not yet know who will sit on the review group and we do not yet know when it will report. It has taken more than a year for today's announcement to be made; are we to wait another year—or two years, or three years—before we know the outcome of the review? Is this a case not so much of kicking the whole issue into touch, but of kicking it out of the political stadium in order to save faces in the Liberal Democrats' half of the coalition? The Liberal Democrats promised to axe the council tax, but not, apparently, until 2011. I would be grateful if the minister would clarify whether there is a specific time within which the review must report to the Parliament.

As the text of the SNP's amendment acknowledges, the Highlands and Islands is home to perhaps some of the most ingenious and resilient characters in Scotland—none more so than Rennie McVicar, whom I had the pleasure of meeting last Thursday in Strontian to launch her business. It is a website business—www.scottish-holiday.info—which, without any financial help whatsoever, Mrs McVicar has launched to promote Scotland throughout the world in 12 different languages. Anybody who keys in the phrase "scottish holidays" will go to her website. It is a shame that VisitScotland, which receives £1.5 million of public funds, could not have thought of that, but I am proud that Mrs Rennie McVicar thought of it and that she is carrying out her business in west Lochaber. By and large, this has been a positive and good-humoured debate. I hope that the opportunity to debate the Highlands and Islands will become at least an annual fixture. I want to use my limited time to continue in my characteristic vein of relentless constructiveness.

As one person who is relentlessly positive to another, I give way to George.

The idea of having a strategy that would promote Scotland as being a place for dumb losers would seem to be a bit bizarre. That is why we recognise that we want Scotland to be smart and successful. Although those aims are worthy, the problem is the lack of a coherent strategy to achieve them. I want to return to the positive note. I ask the minister to intervene to persuade Mr McAveety to bring about something that all parties have supported—namely, the restoration of Castle Tioram, which is being promoted by a local man from Lochaber, who followed Ted Brocklebank's example of going furth and coming back to his native heath. He wants to invest £5 million of his own money in refurbishing the castle as his home. Although he has the support of the local people and of a cross-party delegation, which I led, I am afraid to say that Historic Scotland continues to block the way to a move that all elected representatives have supported. It is recognised that housing—or the availability of housing that is within the reach of young local people—is a key issue in the Highlands. I have a suggestion to make. The lack of available land with servicing that is suitable for housing is a major problem. Dr Murray will confirm that that is almost as much of a problem in the south of Scotland as it is in the Highlands. Why is it that the major landowner in Scotland has not come forward with a coherent, detailed and thought-out strategy? Why has the Forestry Commission not produced proposals to make available massive parts of its land estate for housing? That land is already publicly owned. It is a strange omission that that has not been dealt with. I will move on to a matter that Ted Brocklebank has already mentioned, in which the minister has a personal interest. As the local member for Inverness, I am devastated that Inverness Caley Thistle's rightful place in the Scottish Premier League—or the self-preservation league, as the fans call it—has been denied to them by the SPL, which, as the minister will recognise, has meant the loss of around £1 million to Aberdeen. I make a plea to all members for them to support the motions of John Farquhar Munro, Maureen Macmillan and me. If those motions are supported by a clear majority of MSPs in the Parliament, we will send a clear message to the SPL about what we believe the outcome of the pending appeal should be. Fuel has been mentioned. I do not want to disappoint members who eagerly await my remarks on that topic. I ask the Executive to indicate at what point—at what price per litre—it will say to Gordon Brown, "Enough is enough." Is that price £1 per litre? In Port Ellen, fuel already costs 98p a litre, as George Lyon can confirm. At  least three parties have raised the matter. It is of massive concern because, for most people in the Highlands, a car is a necessity, not a luxury. I am sorry that the Greens take a different view. I am afraid that I could not understand their amendment anyway—it seems to be an escape from reason. In conclusion, the SNP praises the success of Inverness Medical in coming to Inverness—in spite of the fact that the proposal was passed by only one vote on the local planning committee, because the Labour party representatives were not too keen on it at the time. We praise the success in Aviemore: we praise the funicular railway. However, we acknowledge that there are failures and our amendment sets out a comprehensive strategy for dealing with them. In many cases, such as that of Castle Tioram, not a penny piece of Government money is required to overcome the hurdles; all that is required is a Scottish Government that behaves like a Government and tells the civil servants that they are servants, not masters.

Far be it from me to defend the Executive, but is Eleanor Scott aware that all the money that was paid to Inverness Medical has been paid back? Is it really Green policy that we should not have Inverness Medical in Inverness?

Murdo Fraser boasts about the Skye bridge public-private partnership. Is he really holding it up as a model of financial prudence? Is it not the case that it was the most expensive, extortionate and ludicrous deal that Scotland had seen until, of course, Jack McConnell foisted Holyrood on us?

Will the member give way?

Murdo Fraser answered the question that I was going to ask, but did he notice that, at the recent transport seminar in Inverness, Bristow Muldoon said, "Oh well, we can look at all these things and maybe we'll call the transport minister in front of the transport committee"?

We support the minister's comments about the UHI. However, this week I learned that Inverness College is apparently planning to close the media course and that a decision is to be made later today. Will he join me in making representations to Professor Little that the decision should be considered very carefully indeed, because the course is valuable and represents the positive things that we all want to encourage?

Will the minister take an intervention?

If that is the case, why have objections to the scheme been raised only now and not in any of the previous years in which it has been operating?

I congratulate Jamie McGrigor on bringing this important issue to Parliament. It is proof that Parliament is able to debate issues that are important, albeit to a relatively small sector of society. What we want to learn from the debate is that the Scottish Executive is able to respond to the  serious concerns that exist, some of which have been raised in the debate. I refer, for example, to a letter that I received from Mr MacKenzie of Dingwall & Highland Marts Ltd, who has been involved in the business for the past 40 years. He says that he believes that, during that period, the quality of stock has improved tenfold as a result of the scheme. He states: "To withdraw this scheme would be turning the clock back to where inferior cross bred animals were being used for sires or no livestock would be kept at all." Mr MacKenzie knows the real fears—and there are fears; I must disagree with Alasdair Morrison on that—better than most, if not all, of us. I refer also to John Kinnaird, another person whose experience we should respect. He states that the withdrawal of the current bull hire and ram schemes and the introduction of a replacement grant scheme is "a draconian step". Mr Kinnaird is not a man given to hyperbole. I have also noted that, in the Highland papers, many members of the Liberal Democrats have spoken out clearly against the scheme, and I hope that we will hear that criticism expressed tonight.

I have seen some comments to the effect that George Lyon and John Farquhar Munro are not enamoured of the Executive's policy in that regard. If I am wrong, I am willing to be corrected, but I hope that there will be cross-party support for Mr McGrigor's message, which I endorse. I will raise two concerns in particular. One relates to the widely held beliefs that the farms at Beechwood and Knocknagael are to be sold off and that that is the motivation behind the policy. We have seen some active consideration of that proposal in papers that have come before us, and I ask the minister point blank whether he has received advice on that issue and whether he will make it public to everyone concerned. I have constituents on both farms and I have visited them. I have had concerns about the proposed eviction of a constituent of mine at Knocknagael, although my dealings on that were with Mr Finnie. My second concern relates to the state-aid rules. I have read the correspondence that has passed between the NFU and a Mr Perrett on the matter, and it seems to me that the state-aid rules are being raised as a pretext on which to withdraw the bull hire scheme. It is surprising that only now, three decades after accession to the European Union and 100 years after the inception of the bull hire scheme, the Executive has discovered that the scheme somehow contravenes state aid.  I ask the minister—I see that I now have his attention, for which I am always grateful—to engage in debate with the NFU. The NFU argues that there is no contravention of state aid and that the 50 per cent rule is not breached. It also argues that, in the computations that Mr Perrett sets out in his e-mail, he has inflated the costs of the existing scheme. He has brought out figures that state that the subsidy element is nearly two thirds. The NFU states that, in other comparisons—for example, the nitrate-vulnerable zones scheme—no account has been taken of administrative costs. Will the minister engage with the NFU and, because of the widespread concerns, will he withdraw the plans to replace the current scheme until there has been a full and thoroughgoing consultation with all the people involved, almost all of whom will have experience and knowledge to bring to bear on the topic, which is vital for the Highlands and Islands of Scotland?

Will the member give way?

Over the past five years, I have noticed that in debates some members have a tendency to use exaggerated, excited and overheated comparisons—they have a tendency to hyperbole. This morning, the Tories did not disappoint us when they said that other parties' approach to the NHS was "Stalinist". It occurred to me, as a simple person, that the contrast between Stalin and the NHS is not difficult to grasp. Stalin carried out mass extermination and killed people, whereas the NHS is in the business of preventing death and saving people's lives. Jean Turner made the point that making a political football of issues such as this turns the public off more than anything else. As someone who engages in the hurly-burly of political life, I think that it behoves us all to seek a positive solution. Just this week, a manager named Richard Carey helped one of my constituents by intervening to ensure that that patient, who has a brain tumour, no longer has to travel to Glasgow—a trip that he found extremely irksome and difficult because of his condition—but can receive pioneering treatment in Inverness. It is fashionable to knock health managers, but my extensive experience of dealing with them suggests that, in most cases, they go out of their way to make the NHS work in difficult circumstances. My first substantial point relates to one of those difficult circumstances. How can health authorities run their budget when they do not know what that is—not only at the beginning of the year, but at the end of it? It has been the practice to give health authorities extra money at the end of the year.  That money is not unwelcome—no one would throw it back in the face of the Minister for Health and Community Care, were he here. However, how can authorities plan and run their budget if they do not know what it is? The situation is absolutely extraordinary. I hope that the Health Committee's budget report to the Finance Committee will pick up that point. I want to talk about the Belford hospital, as there is a cross-party consensus that the campaign to safeguard, continue, maintain and improve the consultant-led acute services at the Belford must have the support of all. However, the local health authority does not have the jurisdiction, competence or power to deal with some of the issues that need to be addressed there. Those include new methods of training, a different approach to recruitment and retention, a more flexible interpretation of the working time directive—I have seen Lothian NHS Board's second submission to the Audit Committee, which opens the door to many positive ideas in that area—and the recognition of a new specialty, that of the rural general surgeon. If we do not recognise such a specialty, I fear for the future of hospitals in rural areas. Members such as Duncan McNeil have highlighted that issue in the past. We have a common interest in retaining such services in Oban, Fort William and elsewhere in rural Scotland. I turn to the speeches by SSP members. In its amendment, the SSP proposes "that the pharmaceutical companies should be brought into public ownership". I correct a remark that I made earlier to Carolyn Leckie and take the opportunity to set the record straight. I said that it would take the budget of the next two decades to buy out just two of the leading companies, GlaxoSmithKline and AstraZeneca, but I was wrong. Since then, I have calculated the figures. To buy out just those two companies would cost £115 billion. It would take only 14 years—there would be only 14 years when there would be no NHS whatever.

I declare an interest—I have a small holding in GlaxoSmithKline. However, I do  not object to the SSP's proposal because of the fact that if Carolyn Leckie were the Minister for Finance and Public Services I would receive no compensation for my shares

The answer to Carolyn Leckie's point is perfectly simple. The SNP is calling for an inquiry by Audit Scotland into all these issues. Today's debate has illustrated why that inquiry—one aspect of which would be drugs procurement—is needed. Everyone recognises that drugs procurement is an important issue. This debate has been characterised by arid exchanges of statistics. The weaponry has been percentages and the only casualties have been politicians. When the heat and smoke disperse from this poorly attended battlefield, we need to get down to serious, positive business. We need to examine the work of Matthew Dunnigan, who has provided us with a serious statistical analysis, and of the people who have attended meetings of the incipient cross-party group on the loss of consultant-led services, which I hope Jean Turner will convene when we meet again on 9 June. We must consider seriously the problems that have been identified today. As Shona Robison said, the budget for the health service has risen massively. We acknowledge that fact and, I think, all members welcome it. There has been an increase of £800 million—the cost of two Holyrood buildings—in the period from 1998 to 2002-03. Where is the money going? Are we getting best value? Should we examine whether we can get better value and more patients treated for the money? If by amending the system to tackle some of the problems that we have heard about today we can treat more patients and help to care for more people who are ill, we will be doing our job. That is why the inquiry for which we are calling is essential.

rose  —

Would Comrade Leckie take an intervention from me?

Fraternal greetings. Carolyn Leckie states that the pharmaceutical companies should be brought into public ownership. Does that include GlaxoSmithKline and AstraZeneca? If so, what money would be left after the value of those companies had been paid? That purchase would use up all the health budgets for the next two decades. What money would be left to fund any NHS whatsoever?

Will the minister give way?

As Annabel Goldie has pointed out, with a population of 34,500 pairs, the sparrow-hawk is not a rare bird that is under pressure. Eleanor Scott is quite wrong to suggest that amendment 31 calls for a cull. It does nothing of the kind, and it is important that that should be clearly understood by those who, like Alasdair Morgan, are interested in listening to the arguments.

I would not like to see one pigeon with its neck bitten off, as we have seen. I would not like to see one pigeon suffer unnecessary cruelty because there is no legal possibility of obtaining a Larsen trap—not to kill the raptor, but to trap it and then liberate it. That is what the trap is for—it is not about killing raptors.

That is an exceptionally intelligent intervention.

I think that everyone has woken up, Presiding Officer. The Scottish Homing Union says that deterrents simply do not work. That is a serious point because the allegation has been made that they do work. They do not work, but if they did, they could be used in conjunction with the appropriate type of trap, and there would be no problem; the sparrow-hawk would fly away, no doubt to some other pigeon. The trap could then be used. Pleasant though this is, all good things must come to a close. It is odd that, to paraphrase George Orwell, all birds are equal, but some are more equal than others. I will play no part in the propagation by the RSPB and others of a form of avian apartheid.

Will the minister give way?

I welcome the work that the committee carried out, particularly its rejection of those who have argued for an outright ban on the use of snares. I also welcome the balanced approach that we have heard from those committee members who acknowledge that snares are needed. Last summer, I was happy to attend the Moy game fair, at which the SGA launched its code of conduct on snaring practice. Anyone who has read that code will see that the gamekeepers are determined to ensure that best practice is followed within and outwith their organisation. I hope that the minister will consult the SGA fully on amendment 14, because I have a slight concern about it. It states that there will be a code on snaring and that breach of that code will be a criminal offence. Ministers who are familiar with this area of the law will recognise the caution that we need to apply when we create new criminal offences, particularly on highly sensitive issues. I hope that members recognise that the best way to ensure the end of the inappropriate and cruel use of snares is by education. Instead of attacking gamekeepers, as the Scottish Socialist Party and the Greens have done by proposing a ban, we should value the contribution that they make as the real custodians  of the countryside, because, unlike us, they are not talking about looking after wildlife; they do it day in, day out and year in, year out. Gamekeepers manage wildlife, and they know what they are doing. We must be very careful about assuming that we know better than they do. Instead of taking that approach, we should value the work that they do. I welcome the approach that the Environment and Rural Development Committee has taken, but I ask the minister to take the greatest care in the preparation of the forthcoming code. We should tread very warily indeed in this territory. Gamekeepers already feel victimised by many measures that the Parliament has taken and we should not add to their misery.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will direct the Deer Commission for Scotland to suspend any further mass cull of deer and from whom it has sought advice on the issues involved, other than its own advisers and the Deer Commission for Scotland. (S2O-2148)

I think that the minister is aware that nearly 900 deer have been culled in Glen Feshie, partly under the use of emergency powers. I think that he is also aware of possible further culls that are planned in other areas of the  Scotland. The issue has raised serious concerns about whether the culling was carried out in a proper and humane way. Can I put to the minister a suggestion that I intimated to the Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development last week for a way to break the impasse between the Deer Commission and the Scottish Gamekeepers Association? I suggest that the minister appoints a committee, comprised of three people, one of whom would be nominated by the Scottish Gamekeepers Association, another of whom would be nominated by the Deer Commission and the third of whom would be an independent person nominated by the minister after consultation and who would act as a chair. The committee would have the remit of examining what happened at Glen Feshie, the lessons to be learned, and the issue of deer management. Will the minister give serious consideration to that suggestion as a means of breaking the logjam on this issue, which is of great concern to many people in Scotland?

To ask the Scottish Executive how much it estimates it will spend in total on public relations in this and the next two financial years and whether it will take any steps to reduce those figures. (S2O-02150)

Not for the first time, we do not get an answer to the question. According to press reports, a colossal amount of money is being spent on public relations—on the Executive promoting itself rather than investing in Scottish public services. Is not far too much being spent on that and what will the minister do to reduce the figure?

I warmly congratulate Mary Scanlon on securing the debate, which I believe is the first debate on the topic in any Parliament in the United Kingdom. Mary Scanlon has rightly taken up the case of an individual in Nairn, although I am sure that, like me, she acknowledges the high quality of the chiropody service that patients receive from the NHS in the Highlands. Mary Scanlon, Shona Robison and others highlighted the extent to which senior citizens require chiropody services. The estimates in the briefings that members have received are that seven or nine out of 10 senior citizens require assistance. Anyone who has suffered pain in their feet will know how debilitating it is—it affects  mobility and the capacity to carry out basic daily functions. The pain can be excruciating, as I found when canvassing in Cradlehall during the 1997 election campaign and was virtually incapacitated. I suppose that that may have been good news for my opponents, but it was bad news for me. To give another piece of information that I am sure members are anxious not to hear, ever since then I have had orthotic insoles with metatarsal lifts. The insoles, which were prescribed by a registered chiropodist, cost only about £20, but they completely removed the pain. Mike Rumbles is correct that the fact that the issue of regulation has not been tackled is an obvious flaw. We would not expect a person to be able to call himself or herself a doctor without proper qualifications. Westminster must get to grips with that. In the United States, chiropody and podiatry are recognised as being equivalent to medicine, rather than as being an allied health speciality. Of course, one could make a case that other allied health specialities should be regarded similarly, but it is interesting that chiropody has achieved that status in America. It has been recognised that the issue of painful feet is fundamental and affects all life. Rationing is an extremely difficult issue. Unlike our departed colleagues in the Scottish Socialist Party, I do not believe that the answer to every problem is to climb the mountain, go into the great cave where all the money is hidden and get some out for the blank cheques that will solve all the problems known to man. The minister has a difficult problem. We have heard much about whether the access criteria should be based on age. Mike Rumbles is right that they should not be, but the fact remains that many elderly people are unable to reach their toes at all, never mind touch them while standing up. Therefore, age is a criterion that the minister will obviously take into account. I wish the minister many happy returns on his 50 th birthday. I am sure that he will not regard that age as the cut-off point in his review of the access criteria. I wait with interest to hear whether he will offer us hope of a fairer system, an end to the rationing that Shona Robison talked about and more access to services, particularly for those who suffer acute pain but who may not receive the treatment that they need at present.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will take, or propose that Her Majesty's Government should take, any measures to assist the motorist in Scotland, in light of the necessity of a motor car for many people in rural and urban Scotland. (S2O-2038)

As the minister knows, the level of tax on fuel in Scotland is, thanks to the London Labour chancellor, the highest, or among the highest, in the world—although it is not high enough for the Liberal party. Can he explain what, in his view, is the justification for that dubious honour? Is there any reason connected with the environment? If so, can he explain the strange absence of massive clouds of smog scudding along our skyline? Is it the truth that the problem is not damage to the environment, but damage caused by the chancellor, and that the colour of the problem is not green but Brown?

I have received information that, from October of this year, Reliance will assume responsibility for the transfer of prisoners who have a psychiatric disorder. Can the minister confirm that? If that is the case, how can its staff conceivably be given the appropriate training to do that task in that timescale? With regard to the minister's comments that the negotiations between SPS and Reliance were nothing to do with her, is she suggesting that she did not approve the terms of the contract with Reliance? Assuming that she approved the contract, does it contain a clause that entitles Reliance to protect its commercial interests—that is the phrase that was used in the statement—and to refuse publication of that contract? If so, how can that be consistent with the need to ensure that there is proper public scrutiny where public money and public safety are concerned?

Does the minister acknowledge that the matter is of long-term significance to the people and the economy of Inverness and the Highlands, that John Farquhar Munro's point is well made and that the Scottish Executive has a responsibility to intervene and to be proactive? I draw the minister's attention to the proposed planning advice note that contains new guidelines on the crossing of waterways. It says: "Severing or adversely affecting inland waterways should be avoided." Will those guidelines be respected and adhered to in connection with any new development, whether trunk or non-trunk?

To ask the Scottish Executive, following the closure of the Airborne Initiative, what programmes it supports that provide residential care for young people and are designed to divert them from crime and addiction problems. (S2O-1924)

As the Deputy First Minister reminded us, this is an area of sensitivity between the two component factions of the Scottish Executive. In playing my habitual role as mediator and peacemaker, I commend to the warring factions in the Executive the Highland youth advantage scheme, which has operated for around four years with great success in a joint venture between the Northern Constabulary and the Army. The results, following reappraisal, show that young people who took the course, having conducted a short life of minor crime, were rehabilitated. Therefore, will the minister take steps to promote the replication of the scheme in every constabulary area in Scotland, so that something that works for young people can operate throughout Scotland?

Will the member take an intervention?

As Bill Aitken knows, we believe that the inquiry must have full powers, so what he says is really not the point. Bill Aitken is on record as saying that there are legal problems with using section 23 of the Scotland Act 1998. Does he therefore accept that, if the Tories' motion were to succeed, we could be tied up in the Court of Session in a judicial review action with the taxpayer paying hundreds of thousands of pounds for both sides' expenses?

The debate is, above all, about ensuring that the Fraser inquiry receives the evidence that it needs to succeed. We know that, at present, it will not receive the tapes unless the BBC changes its position. We also know that the First Minister has not been asked to give evidence  and is not insisting on doing so, which I believe is a serious error. The Conservatives have pointed out in their motion that it is the role of this Parliament to consider the work of the Fraser inquiry and to enhance the debate that ensues after the publication of the inquiry report. I submit that it is not only legitimate but our duty to make criticism in respect of the inquiry where it is felt due. I say that as someone who has attended every evidence session of the Fraser inquiry, with one exception, and who has pored over virtually every document on the inquiry website. When Barbara Doig advised the late First Minister in a memo of 23 March 1999 that, given the increase in the estimated cost of the building, the budget must increase from £50 million to £60 million, the public are entitled to know why that information was not shared with them. We have the memo of 14 April 1999 in which Donald Dewar explains that that information should not be made public because a review was being carried out by independent consultants and the results of the review of costs would be available later in May. In other words, the reason that the information was hidden from the public was that the First Minister adjudged that cost consultants were doing reports. We have been told by just about every civil servant witness, from Sir Muir Russell down, that the Davis, Langdon & Everest reports—the cost consultant reports—were not shown to the late First Minister, which I accept. However, there is the question—and only Mr McConnell is alive today to answer it—whether he was told what the reports contained. That question must be answered. I know from studying the inquiry documents that he was told of certain components. He was told in a memo of 19 May 1999 that there were commercial contingencies valued at £5 million or £6 million. He was told on 2 June at a meeting with the late First Minister, Messrs Gordon, Gibbons and Grice and Mrs Doig that there were risks. Did he ask what those risks were? He was told at that meeting that one of the risks was client change, which was one of the components in the DLE report. He was told in a memo of 26 May that the cost consultants' estimate, comparable with the feasibility design stage cost estimates of £50 million, was £62.2 million, excluding VAT, fees, contingencies and risk allowances. Did he ask what the risk allowances were? The phrase "risk allowances" means that they were a cost component, and the risk allowances were the DLE allowances. Unless the First Minister answers those questions, the public will have been denied the whole truth. What did he and the late Mr Dewar discuss on 1 June 1999? We know only that they discussed presentational issues.

No, it is too late. Did Jack McConnell and Mr Dewar discuss the information that we would be told and the information that we would not be told? We know one thing: Jack McConnell was told that the landscaping costs might go up to a certain amount. How much do members think that they would pay for landscaping—trees, a few chips, some lawn and pot plants? Perhaps they would pay £10,000 or £20,000. Jack McConnell was given the figure of £10 million. I can tell members why the Parliament was not told about that and why Jack McConnell held that information back from the Parliament: he knew that if the public had been told the whole truth and nothing but the truth, members would have voted against Holyrood on 17 June 1999. That is why we have not been told the whole truth. I am delighted to take the opportunity today to say that the First Minister will not be able to hide. He may not bother to attend the debate, but he will be unable to hide when those questions are put to him again.

We all agree that no single issue in the short life of this new institution has done more damage to it than that of the Holyrood project. If that is true, I hope that the various political parties also agree that the inquiry is crucial to moving on. I say that whether or not we want to rehabilitate devolution or, as the SNP  does, move forward to proper self-government and independence. If that is true, it is essential that the inquiry is seen to produce a report that is sound. Anything that undermines its credibility or that justifiably erodes confidence in its process must be attacked and opposed by Parliament. No one has been more vigorous or persistent in asking that the BBC co-operate by handing over its tapes than me and my party. We have pursued the matter doggedly. I have presented 50 pages of evidence to the Fraser inquiry and more documents than anyone here would probably care to read. On 29 October 2003 I raised a point of order to ask whether the procedure that the Tories propose could be effective. The Presiding Officer wrote to me—it was not a formal ruling—and stated that sections 23 and 24 of the Scotland Act 1998 were not intended to allow the provision of documents to a third party; they were intended for us to properly conduct our proceedings in relation to matters for which the Executive has general responsibility. It is clear that the Tories' attempt is a contrivance, a ruse and a mechanism to make up for a basic and straightforward failure. That failure was identified repeatedly by Bill Aitken when the First Minister announced the formation of the inquiry—the inquiry lacks the powers to compel the appearance of witnesses or the production of documents under the Tribunals of Inquiry (Evidence) Act 1921. I commend the 1921 act to anyone who enjoys reading clear prose. It is because the inquiry does not have the power to force a recalcitrant witness to co-operate that we are where we are. There is a more fundamental reason why we do not support the Tories' proposal. No one argues more vociferously than I that the BBC is wrong. Indeed, I believe that it is fundamentally wrong—and I will return to that subject in a second. However, it is a fundamental principle of democracy that Parliaments do not act as pinstriped bovver boys who push around independent media and broadcasting corporations, even—and perhaps particularly—when we all think that they are wrong.

No, the member has had quite a lot of time. If the Tories seek to present themselves as bastions of freedom of information, I should refer them to the Zircon affair, when they sent the police into the BBC to raid the files and tapes that related to that matter. Ironically, the Solicitor General at that time was one Peter Fraser. The BBC's position is extremely inconsistent.  Indeed, I made that serious charge on "Newsnight Scotland" on 29 October 2003. The corporation began by arguing that guarantees had been provided, with the implication that they applied to every interviewee. However, on that same day, when I asked the Presiding Officer whether that was true, he said: "I have to say ... I was given no guarantees, nor was I asked about the subsequent use of the footage."— [ Official Report , 29 October 2003; c 2635.]  The impression given was misleading. After I pointed that out on "Newsnight Scotland", I received a vitriolic letter from a Mr Ian Small of the BBC, which is on the Holyrood inquiry website if anyone wants to read it. The BBC is on shaky ground; its position is untenable and unjustified. However, in conclusion, I suggest two alternatives. First, we should not simply ask the BBC to hand over the tapes, but all party leaders should combine in a delegation and go to the BBC chiefs. [ Interruption. ] That is democracy. The Conservatives might want to send in the police and the bovver boys, but we do things rather differently in a democracy. Secondly, because the key omission is the lack of properly constituted powers, we should explore the ability to provide the inquiry with those powers. Ironically, under the Scotland Act 1998, the Parliament does not even have the legal powers to do that. We would have to ask Westminster to use its powers in that respect. However, under the current system, we are where we are. I have suggested the way ahead; that is what we should do and indeed is what I will be doing. We should not abandon every principle concerning the freedom of the press that we in a democracy stand for—or should stand for. Instead, we should pursue things correctly. That is what we in the SNP are calling for and what we shall be doing. I move amendment S2M-1117.2, to leave out from "agrees" to end and insert: "believes that, whilst it is wholly inappropriate for any parliament to issue orders to the press and media requiring them to hand over material, the BBC should cooperate with the Holyrood Inquiry by providing to it the tape recordings of the interviews with the late Donald Dewar and Enric Miralles, which have been filmed for the proposed programme, "The Gathering Place", because they may include material of relevance to the remit of the Holyrood Inquiry; further believes that the Holyrood Inquiry should have had conferred upon it at the outset the powers to compel the appearance of witnesses and production of documents set out in the Tribunals of Inquiry (Evidence) Act 1921; considers that the First Minister and the Presiding Officer should now explore whether such powers can yet be conferred upon the Holyrood Inquiry; believes that the leaders of all political parties in Scotland should immediately agree to write jointly to the BBC calling upon it to cooperate with the Inquiry, and considers that the First Minister should seek to appear before the Inquiry as a witness in order to answer questions about his role as Minister for Finance."

Agreed.

That was a stunning insight.

I thank Robin Harper—or is it Professor Harper?—for giving way. Does he agree that part of the problem for many of our rural communities is the high cost of living and, in particular, the high cost of fuel, which is the highest in the western world? Do the Greens support the reduction in the excessive cost of fuel and the high tax on road fuel—

I warmly congratulate Rhona Brankin on raising what is a most important topic. I also congratulate her on the way in which she explained and expanded on the text in her motion on the World Health Organisation's bone and joint decade, which runs from 2000 to 2010. As Rhona said, there are a large number of musculoskeletal disorders, many of which she covered in her speech. Her motion points out that severe pain is a key feature of all those conditions, and that, behind the statistics, every case involves a human being who is suffering from severe pain. That severe pain has all sorts of implications for the people concerned, for their families, for the health service and for the economy in terms of sick leave. As Rhona Brankin anticipated, I will talk about osteoporosis. I became involved with the issue of osteoporosis after a constituent, Lorna Young, roped me into helping locally; she also roped me into raising the profile of the condition in Parliament. Particular tribute is due to Lorna Young and to Anne Simpson, from the National Osteoporosis Society, who is in the public gallery. Most members present have met and spoken to Anne, who is going round Scotland preaching the message about osteoporosis. The minister is familiar with the issue, which I raised in a previous debate, and I know that he has taken a close interest in it. What I have to say in the short time that is available to me is therefore not new. I hope that the minister will comment on what progress has been made in the implementation of the guidelines from SIGN—the Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network—which were published in June last year. That was a great step forward, but we want to know what is being done now to implement the guidelines and how  those in the front line—general practitioners—are being assisted to ensure that the guidelines are fully taken into account. Access to osteoporosis services remains extremely variable—it is a sort of postcode situation. Great work is being done in many parts of Scotland, for example in Glasgow, Aberdeen—where Professor David Reid is involved—and in Dingwall. However, the availability of scanning is patchy. That is surely inadequate. The matter has been raised time and again, and I would very much appreciate a word from the minister about the progress that has been made. There is a very long waiting period for access to scanners. For patients, that is a time of concern—as it would be for anyone on a lengthy waiting list. There is also a lack of lead clinicians, and variable knowledge of, and interest in, the condition on the part of lead clinicians and consultants in Scotland. Everyone stresses the importance of preventive measures. The intake of calcium is particularly important—and it is not restricted to osteoporosis. Much more needs to be done to encourage kids to drink milk, which is perhaps the key way in which calcium, along with vitamins A and D, can be consumed. I had the pleasure of accompanying Anne Simpson to Brussels, where we saw an exhibition of photographs of people with osteoporosis; the photographs showed them unclothed. The Benetton photographer took the photographs, which included some of ladies with very advanced osteoporosis. It was an arresting, striking exhibition. I hope that, when we eventually get into that new building down the road—in which people take an occasional interest—we might bring that exhibition there. Although it has a dramatic impact and perhaps some of the photographs are gratuitously sensational, it brings the issue of musculoskeletal disorders home to people.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps are being taken to promote shinty. (S2O-1608)

I know that the Camanachd Association welcomes the support—albeit modest—that it receives from sportscotland. Is the minister aware of the high cost of shinty sticks—the caman—which come in at £27 to £29 a time? Is the minister also aware that the sticks frequently break, either when they come into contact with other sticks or, occasionally, with human flesh? Given the glaring and mystifying omission from the Chancellor of the Exchequer's budget statement yesterday of a reduction of value added tax on shinty sticks, does the minister agree that sportscotland can do a lot more to ensure that young people do not give up the sport because their parents cannot afford the gear?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has examined the advantages of the Irish model of staff relocation policy when considering its own policy. (S2O-1607)

I would have thanked the minister if that had been an answer. Is the minister aware that the Minister for Finance in Ireland, Mr Charles McCreevy, announced in December a fully detailed programme for the proposed relocation within three years of 10,000 jobs to the parts of Ireland that need investment? Does the minister agree that, although we should not replicate completely the policy of another country, a national strategy with the principle of having volunteers not conscripts and a national spatial policy through which relocated jobs go to the parts where economic development is needed are the model policies to which Scotland should aspire?

To ask the Scottish Executive what its policy is in respect of whether swing bridges should be used on main trunk routes where they cross canals or waterways and whether it will provide any incentive to avoid retention of swing bridges when trunk road improvements are carried out. (S2O-1609)

I am considerably indebted to the minister for that answer. I refer, of course, to the proposed swing bridge in Inverness. Is he aware of the telephone poll that was conducted by that august journalistic body the Inverness Courier , which showed that the overwhelming majority of Invernesians are opposed to the swing bridge proposal? Indeed, there is near unanimity on the issue among the good citizens of Inverness. Will he consider, with the provost and the councillors who have to grapple with the issue, any mechanism that would allow a bridge or underpass to be used rather than a swing bridge?

Does Mr Muldoon not accept that the SNP quite clearly recognises that those who are better off—for example, those who earn more than £50,000, £60,000 or £70,000—are likely to pay a bit more under its proposed tax system than they currently pay, because that is only right and fair?

Will the member give way?

If a local income tax would be so difficult to collect, how does the Inland Revenue manage to collect income tax so well?

The Scottish National Party is pleased to choose local government taxation as the topic of our second debate this morning. Council tax affects a great many people in Scotland, particularly those on low incomes, fixed incomes and senior citizens. The SNP has brought forward detailed proposals to abolish the unfair council tax, which tends to hit the poorest hardest, and replace it with a local income tax that is based on the ability to pay. As we know, the Conservatives introduced the council tax in 1993. In every year since its introduction, the council tax has increased beyond the rate of inflation. Since its introduction by the Conservatives, the level of council tax has doubled and, since Labour came to power in 1997, the level of council tax has risen by 50 per cent.

No, not just yet. The basis for the SNP's proposal for a local income tax is simply this: we propose a tax that is based on fairness and the ability to pay. The higher the council tax has become, the more manifestly its unfairness has been shown. That is because a tax that is based on the notional value of a building has no connection with people's capacity to pay. For some senior citizens, the council tax represents a quarter of their available income. As for people such as MSPs, on the other hand, who command a handsome salary and a high income, we do rather better. We believe that that is unfair and that that situation must come to an end. We have set out our proposals in considerable detail. We are usually attacked by the unionist parties for not doing so. It is recognised by the newspapers and by serious commentators that our proposals are workable, serious, well thought out and, more than that, in line with the strand of Scottish opinion about what is correct. I draw attention to the fact that the Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy has recognised that a local income tax would have considerable benefits. CIPFA has said, for example, that there may be savings of up to £500 million were a local income tax introduced on a United Kingdom basis,  and that the tax would be cheaper to collect. Under our detailed proposals, we have set out our belief that savings would be gained, for example, through the lack of any need for a complicated valuation system, which would go. That and other savings would amount to £78 million a year. We believe not only that our proposals would be workable, but that they would be cheaper to administer.

Well, isn't that interesting? When we make a serious contribution to the debate and set out our proposals in great detail, we hear the charge that we are rushing into something. I ask Mr McNulty to tell us where the word "rushing" appears on our paper, among any of our utterances or in our motion. Is that really the best that the Labour Party can do on our proposals? Last week, we heard a quite outrageous assertion by Mary Mulligan. Incidentally, I see that it has been dropped in the letter that Mr Kerr sent to Mr Swinney, which I have in front of me, and which seems to be a pretty poor piece of work. Last week, Mary Mulligan said that there was a black hole in our figures. She said that the approximate £300 million that is used in respect of council tax rebate would be withdrawn. The Labour Party here, which is supposed to be a party speaking up for Scotland, is making unilateral threats that money designed to fund the council tax rebate be withdrawn. What sort of definition of home rule do Labour members use if they think that, if we went down our own road and had a local income tax based on fairness, the contribution to which Scotland was entitled should suddenly be withdrawn? Did Mrs Mulligan consult Gordon Brown on that? Will Tavish Scott say whether it is an official Executive policy that the price for Scotland going down a different route would be a Westminster fine of £300 million?

I see that Labour members do not want to answer that charge, so I will just have to let the Tories in.

I am glad that Mr Monteith has recognised that the council tax is unfair. Is he saying that there should be a Westminster fine? Certainly, Scotland should receive her entitlement, and the idea that that should be confiscated is ludicrous. Let me turn to the Liberals. The Liberals' policy is curious. On the one hand, they have committed themselves to a local income tax for several decades, yet they do not seem to want it to come in.

Indeed, they are not in a rush.

I am in my last minute.

The Liberals say that the local income tax would be introduced by the end of the next session. The end of the next session occurs in 2011, so the Liberals' policy is seven more years of the council tax. There is one tiny problem with that. Their website says "Axe the Tax"—their weapon appears to be the axe. The reality, however, is that we are to have the council tax for another seven years—so their weapon is in fact the review, which the Liberals are using as a fig leaf to conceal the fact that they have no intention whatever of standing up for their principles. Yesterday was St Patrick's day. Dr Elaine Murray and I had the great pleasure of visiting Ireland as part of our committee business on Monday and Tuesday of this week. We heard the ambitious, bold, imaginative and well-thought-out plans of the Irish for their country. What a tragedy that we do not have an independent Parliament, where we can do likewise and where we can deliver our detailed proposals for a local income tax, on which no one has yet laid a single glove. I move, That the Parliament believes that the council tax should be abolished and replaced with a fair system of local income taxation based on ability to pay; notes that the Partnership Agreement published on 15 May 2003 included a commitment to establish an independent review of local government finance; further notes, however, that no such review has been established, and calls on the Scottish Executive to honour its commitment by establishing the  review forthwith under an independent chair and reporting back to the Parliament by the end of 2004.

rose—

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. An aspect of debates that worries me is that a rule appears to be developing that no interventions are accepted in the final minute of a member's speech. It is not my understanding that such a rule is written into the standing orders. The final minute of a speech is being used by many members, including the minister just now, to make personalised and political attacks.

During the election, I well remember seeing some SSP posters displayed on the odd lamppost around the place. Those posters did not say, "Vote SSP for our service tax." They said, "Scrap the council tax." I may be wrong, but I  do not think that even the Conservatives at the last election had a manifesto of cutting taxes so, in effect, they were outflanked on the right by Mr Sheridan and his comrades, who made—

Not just yet. [ Interruption. ] I accept that I am not as far to the right as Tony Blair. Mr Sheridan and his comrades made their plea not on the basis of their proposals, but to arouse the instincts of people who want to pay less tax. That was a revealing campaigning technique by the SSP during the election. The SNP has produced a set of proposals that serious commentators in the press have acknowledged as well thought out and detailed. They are based on a fundamental principle that local government taxation should be based on the ability to pay.

Too early, Iain. I have just started. Our proposals, which are set out in a paper, are based on replacing the council tax with a local income tax. They would bring an end to the situation where pensioners are paying up to 25 per cent of their net available income on the council tax. In some cases, that means bills of £2,500 a year. Surely we must all recognise that the current system, which is based on property valuations, is unfair. We must recognise that the valuation of one's house is not the same thing as one's ability to pay. We must also recognise that the valuations for the council tax were carried out in 1991, which is 13 years ago, and that there should be a revaluation. If the Labour Party and its friends in the Conservative party, who are thirled to the council tax, believe that the current system should continue, they must acknowledge that there will be a revaluation.

Not in the slightest. If there is to be a revaluation, a house in Leith, for example, that is currently in band B would, because of the increase in property prices, go up to band D or E. That would mean a further increase of around 40 per cent for people who might be on low incomes. Let us face it: the days of the council tax are  over. We saw the days of the Conservative Government come to an end because of its unfair poll tax. I believe—and it is the view of my party—that the days of the Labour Party in government will come to an end because of its unfair council tax. We have produced proposals on which no one has laid a glove. Our proposals recognise, for example, that the Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy has concluded that a local income tax would be fairer and easier to administer. I look forward to the campaign ahead. I am confident that our proposals will gain massive support among the people of Scotland, who consider that the council tax is inherently unfair.

Although I add my support to both my colleagues who mentioned the importance of the Glenshee resort, will the minister also recognise the vital role that is played by Glencoe in skiing in Scotland and the importance of Cairngorm, which is also in my constituency? The funicular railway there is an excellent facility that is able to operate all year round. If the building at the bottom of the Canongate is not ready by July, would the top station of the funicular be an appropriate place where we could meet for our deliberations?

Alasdair Morgan set out in a moderate and fair way the problems that rural  GPs, in particular, face. There are no simple solutions. I represent Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber and it seems to me that if those doctors who work single-handedly on islands such as Eigg are required not to opt out of out-of-hours care, they might find that, if they want to retire in a few years' time, it will be extremely difficult to attract anyone to take over the practice. They know that they are working round the clock instead of being off duty from 6 pm to 8 am and at weekends, as other doctors are. As Alasdair Morgan said, it is difficult enough to recruit doctors to remote rural areas. I am pleased to say that in Laggan we recently managed to find a new GP, but I think that there were only two applicants for the post, when we would have expected many more. There is great concern in other parts of my constituency, in particular in Lochaber, where a meeting of three community councils—Arisaig, Mallaig and Morar—took place earlier this month to discuss the implications of the loss of round-the-clock GP services in relation to the threat that consultant-led facilities at the Belford hospital might be downgraded. There is also the prospect that the new system, which I think has been designed without adequate thought, might cause resentment and a form of medical apartheid, dividing doctors who decide not to opt out from those who do. For example, I understand that the practices in Nairn and Ardersier have indicated that they will not opt out. Their general manager has recently opined that the number of GPs in the Highlands who work out of hours will drop from the current figure of 70 to only 10. Highland NHS Board has proposed that it should provide alternative care in about 10 areas, which is difficult enough to do. I heard from one GP about a new breed of GPs who will work solely out of hours. Although what I was told was anecdotal—the minister might be able to put his own figure on it—I understand that the new breed of GP might be able to earn in excess of £150,000 a year. Although the change is necessary, the impact has not been thought through. Much more work is needed if people in rural Scotland are to continue to receive the first-rate service to which they are entitled.

Can the minister confirm that visitscotland.com is meeting its financial targets and that it is still intended that the loan repayments will begin on 1 May 2005?

Tourism is perhaps more important for my constituency than it is for any other constituency in Scotland. I echo the sentiments that most speakers have expressed and congratulate Nora Radcliffe on securing the  debate and on her remarks on the television last night, which I thought were very good. I have been inundated with complaints from small tourism operators from throughout my constituency, but I do not think that there would be any point in my adding to the examples that have been given. I want to move forward and make some rather different points. I obtained—with some difficulty—the accounts of eTourism Ltd. I did so after meeting the chief executive of VisitScotland, who said that the information that the accounts contained was confidential. At the time, I did not know that the accounts, far from being commercially confidential, had been published in Companies House—I did not know that the company was called eTourism Ltd, or I would have found that out for myself. When I made the acquaintance of the accounts, I discovered that in the first period of operation of nearly 12 months to 31 December, the company made a whopping loss of £1.248 million. The accounts stated that the company's turnover was £879,000. VistScotland's response was that those figures were very much in accordance with the business plan. However, the business plan requires, of course, the repayment of debts of £7.4 million. SchlumbergerSema has 60 per cent of that—or £4.5 million—but the taxpayer invested a whopping £1.875 million through VisitScotland and £1.125 million through Partnerships UK. I seriously question whether the enterprise will become profitable. I do not say that because I want it to fail—we all want it to succeed. However, it is difficult to believe that the enterprise can achieve the success that we all want it to achieve, such is the discontent about its performance so far, in particular among small providers, and such is the needless provocation of remarks such as the one in the briefing that VisitScotland provided for this debate that in the website's first year of operation, it waived subscription fees—as if that were an act of extreme generosity on its part. The difficulty for the minister, of course, is that this is essentially a private company. Some 60 per cent is owned by SchlumbergerSema. Frankly, we might as well be debating Marks and Spencers with a large minority shareholding interest. It is up to the minister to ensure that VisitScotland responds to the criticisms of it that have been made in the debate. Those criticisms have been varied and, largely, measured—I have not read from letters that I have received, which I can assure the minister use language that is slightly less measured. I hope that he will respond by indicating exactly what he will do to ensure a better deal, in particular for the small tourism provider in Scotland.

The minister referred to the Economic Secretary to the Treasury. In a debate at Westminster on 20 January this year, Mr Healey said: "against the background of a worsening problem, success in tackling fraud in other excise regimes and the apparent lack of alternatives, the implementation of a tax stamp system on spirit bottles is a necessary and proportionate step."—[ Official Report , House of Commons ,  20 January 2004; Vol 416, c 428WH.] I trust that our minister disagrees with that.

Brian Monteith described well the flawed rationale for the introduction of strip stamps. However, Campbell Evans of the Scotch Whisky Association recently proposed other measures that the Government should seriously consider. In particular, he raised the issue of suspect bonded warehouses where untaxed spirits are stored. Under existing rules, even people who have criminal convictions can obtain licences to run bonded warehouses. Surely the conditions that attach to licences that are needed to run a public house should apply to licences that are required to run a bonded warehouse. HM Customs and Excise's response to that sensible suggestion was dismissive. All that it said was that registrations and approvals of bonded warehouses  were assessed regularly. I query whether that was an adequate response. Smuggling, however widespread, can be tackled by a better supervisory regime. If the scheme goes ahead—and the worrying signs are that Gordon Brown seems intent on it—the real victims will be small distilleries. I had a chance contact with Springbank Distillers in George Lyon's constituency, which has opened a second distillery. It sends some of its whisky to the home market and some abroad, but only the whisky for the home market will have to have strip stamps. At present, the distillery can make easy arrangements from month to month and vary quantities of export stock and stock for the UK market, whereas in future it will have to determine at the bottling stage how many bottles will have strip stamps and how many will not. That will make the management of the business extremely difficult for no good reason. The cost of strip stamps is also a worry, as is the time of payment. For quality whiskies in which the amount of alcohol differs, there may have to be different levels of duty. Frankly, the scheme is absurd. It is the sort of proposal that one would associate with primitive socialist economies; one does not expect to find it espoused by a chancellor who has what seems to me a somewhat unmerited reputation for prudence. This is an issue on which the Scottish Parliament is entitled to, and must receive, a clear lead from the minister, who must say that the scheme is not acceptable and that he will stand up for Scotland. As we are following Burns season, perhaps it is appropriate to recall a verse from Robert Burns's address to Scotch parliamentarians on that ill-advised occasion when it was first decided that there should be tax on whisky. His advice was: "In gath'rin votes ye were na slack, Now stand as tightly by your tack: Ne'er claw your lug, an' fidge your back, An' hum an' haw, But raise your arm, an' tell your crack Before them a'." I hope that the minister will follow Burns's advice.

First, I thank all the members  from the various parties who accepted my e-mail invitation to speak for the SNP in today's debate. I think that, as always, I struck a consensual tone. I thank Mary Scanlon and Cathy Peattie for their kind offers but, as they can see, I decided to stick with the A team. I was interested to hear Brian Monteith say that he was not prepared to defend previous Conservative Governments. That is a new and slightly surprising admission. I am not quite sure whether Margaret Thatcher was too much to the left or too much to the right for Brian Monteith, but we can discuss that another day. As for his hairstyle, I can only say, "Hair today, gone tomorrow"—a bit like Conservative Governments. There is no doubt that the public are sick and fed up with the council tax rises that we have seen over a long period. The council tax was introduced by the Conservatives as a panic-measure political fix to get them off the poll tax hook. In the event, the council tax did not help the Conservatives and, since inheriting it from them, new Labour has increased the level of the tax substantially. Since 1996-97, the average band D council tax has risen from £708 to £1,009. Had the council tax increased simply in accordance with the rate of inflation that applied in that intervening period, the average council tax bill would be £842, which is a substantially lower amount. It is fair to point out that a higher council tax burden now falls on senior citizens and others who are on fixed incomes, given that council tax now takes up a higher proportion of their available income. That is what has caused the protest, the unrest and the anger.

I am glad that the member has spotted that the public in Scotland are waiting for a Government that understands the anger about the council tax. The SNP has always argued that any system of local government finance must be related to ability to pay. That is the fundamental flaw with the council tax. A further flaw that exists in Scotland's council tax that is not mentioned by the Conservative or Labour parties is that we have a different banding regime. I note that the Minister for Finance and Public Services is looking at me with close interest, as well he might. In Scotland, a house that is worth £50,000 is in band D, whereas in England a house worth £50,000 is in band B. Pound for pound, England's council tax bills are lower. Similarly—I am glad to see that the finance ministerial team is taking notes—a house that is  worth £60,000 is in band E in Scotland but in band C in England. When I raised that point in previous years—in those distant days when the Tories were at the helm and Brian Monteith had a different hairstyle—the explanation that I was given was that houses in Scotland had different values from those that applied in England. Arguably, that is no longer the case. There is a real problem. I do not know whether I have time to take an intervention from the minister.

As I have already explained, the SNP has always argued that local taxation must be directly related to ability to pay. That remains the position. The hunt for a perfect tax will be pursued many times and over many years. A local income tax is a method of taxation that is operated successfully in many countries. Although there are many difficulties with it, the same applies to every form of taxation. However, as a method of taxation it is more directly related to the ability to pay than the council tax is. Neither of the unionist parties is willing to face up to that. That may pose them serious difficulties in the days ahead.

I start on a consensual note by saying that it is a pleasure to see Bill Aitken back in harness. It is perhaps unfortunate for his party that he did not contribute to the debate, and that we had the ambitious proposition put forward in the motion by the Conservatives that high rates are disastrous. I say "ambitious" because although the Tories are now in a state of permanent opposition—assisted by the proportional representation system that they oppose—they behaved slightly differently when they had the opportunity in power. For 16 out of the 18 years in which the Conservatives were in power, business rates in Scotland were higher than those in England. Not only that, but Craig Campbell computed over-taxation in the period 1990-95 as being £1.2 billion. That money came out of the Scottish economy from Scotland's businesses. The Conservatives are attacking that which they applied in Government—they say one thing in opposition and they do the opposite when they are in power.

No I will not, because it is a matter of fact that, for 16 out of 18 years, business rates in Scotland were higher than they were in  England. I am glad that Murdo Fraser asked the question—I had thought that he would, so I have an answer ready. In 1995, when Ian Lang was setting the rate for that year and for the first time bringing Scotland's rates down to the English levels, he said that he could have set the rate lower than that in England. Do members know why he did not do so? He said that if his Government did so, another Government in 2000 might come along and continue decoupling business rates. Of course, that is exactly what Jack McConnell did with Jack's tax, by giving Scotland's businesses more. What Ian Lang predicted came true, but instead of getting the lower business rates that we should have had in 1995, we achieved balance and equivalence in the level of business rates only in year 17 of 18 years of the Conservatives being in power. The little word that "starts with 'h' and finishes with 'y'", —[ Official Report , 15 Feb 2001; Vol 10, c 1300.] and is not Henry is one that the Conservatives should take care about. We are also concerned about the burden of regulation. I am glad to see that Mr Wallace is back, so I will highlight an issue about regulation that was raised by the Sunday Herald and, in particular, I will mention the comments of Peter Hughes, the chief executive of Scottish Engineering. He spoke about the Scottish Environment Protection Agency, which in Scotland charges £7,500 for a licence under the control of pollution regulations, as compared to a charge of £2,000 for such a licence in England. The article states that Mr Hughes compared SEPA to "a mosquito sucking the life blood out of the Scottish economy and picking over its bones." That may be going over the top—I am never one for hyperbole myself. However, it seems to me to be an illustration of a very serious problem in Scotland.

No. That quotation illustrates that the quangos are out of control. I will close by asking whether, in replying to the debate, the Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning can explain the point of the enterprise team's existence when it cannot remove such an obvious unfairness as businesses in Scotland paying a levy that is about 400 per cent higher than the same levy in England. If he cannot deal with the unfairness that Mr Hughes has identified and that the Sunday Herald rightly publicised for two weeks running, what is  the point of the so-called minister for enterprise in Scotland? More and more businesses want to see all parties standing up for enterprise—that is not happening under the Executive.

Since we want to face reality, how would the Scottish Socialist Party fund any public services at all in Scotland after it had spent the whole Scottish block several times over on renationalising Scotland's banks?

Does Mr Fraser argue that Scotland cannot be independent because it has sometimes had a deficit? If so, can he explain how  the United States of America, which has a deficit of trillions, manages to remain independent and apparently successful?

Does Mr Purvis regret the fact that his Liberal colleagues in the previous session voted on every possible occasion to go ahead with the Holyrood fiasco, whereas we rejected that decision? If he wants to talk about spending, does he accept that it has been found that defence spending with BAE Systems has overshot by £3 billion, which is three times as much as the amount that Tony Blair says will be raised by his top-up fees? If we had slightly more efficiency at the UK level, those fees would be completely unnecessary by a factor of 300 per cent.

The bill deals with some fairly dry material that falls into three categories, namely resource budgeting, prudential borrowing and the requirements of FRS 17. The Scottish National Party has supported resource budgeting on the basis that it allows us to show the underlying cash position and strength of the accounts. On prudential borrowing, we look forward to studying the fine print in the Finance Committee, which has not yet considered the bill. On FRS 17, like a true anorak, I glanced at a document on the subject the other night and was concerned to note that, for many years, the UK has not followed the practice that has been adopted throughout the rest of the world, which is to value scheme assets at a fair market value as opposed to an actuarial value. That seems to me to be something that should have been corrected long ago.  While we are on the topic of pensions, I must say that it is unfortunate that Parliament does not have the power to tackle a serious problem in pensions law, which is that more than a decade after the events that led to the Maxwell pensioners—some of whom were very near to retirement—losing their pensions, the loophole in the law that allowed that situation to arise has still not been closed up. That companies can still borrow the actuarially calculated notional—I stress "notional"—surplus is wrong in principle and, if the Scottish Parliament had the requisite powers, we would not have allowed that to stand as Westminster has done. The minister has canvassed on terrain that is far wider in its scope than the bill, so I will follow his example. With regard to the budget, the people of Scotland want to hear how we are going to ensure that proper value for money is obtained from the funds that are spent. Is the money that is being spent at the moment being spent wisely and to the greatest effect? Conversely, are some of the spending programmes and decisions not achieving real benefit for the public? In that regard, I want to raise six points. First, it is wrong in budgetary and control terms that quangos are allowed to operate as independent organisations that are, in effect, free of Government direction and control. To some extent, the powers exist to exert control by means of direction. However, there have been widespread and well-publicised criticisms of, for example, Scottish Enterprise's decisions over the years to spend a great deal of money on consultants' reports. The Auditor General has opined on that, but I do not think that any effective action has been taken. Secondly, the Executive has been proved by the economic wizards, Jim and Margaret Cuthbert, to have seriously miscalculated the borrowing limits that have been applied to Scottish Water and that, in consequence, it is possible that more than £100 million a year could have been borrowed. They have also identified that the investment by Scottish Water in the year 2002-03 was about £52 million. That means that, although we have had high charges, we have not had the high investment that people would expect and which they were assured was happening. As Jim and Margaret Cuthbert told the Finance Committee this week, that means that today's water rate payers have been paying for yesterday's accumulated debt and are not even getting the investment that we would expect. The result is that in places such as Kingussie in my constituency, people are told that sewerage capacity will not be upgraded for 10 years, the result of which is that Scottish Water objects to every application for sewerage services for a new house or business. A total blight has been placed  on development, partly because Scottish Water was given the wrong instructions. Those instructions were based on a flaw—that the Cuthberts identified—in the letter that commissioned the review of water charges. I know that Allan Wilson anticipates gleefully his visit to the Finance Committee next week to face questioning on the matter. Thirdly, it is correct to say that financial memorandums, which the Finance Committee considers, are increasingly poorly worked out and ill thought through. Just yesterday, we heard a virtual admission by Mr Peacock that his figures were wrong, yet he said, "Don't worry—if we need more money, it will be there." He said that on the record yesterday. I ask him how much will be available over what period and whether other services will suffer if an unidentified surplus exists. That seems to be fiscally irresponsible. Fourthly, we have seen the Administration's failure on individual learning accounts. Where was the monitoring then? Where is the monitoring of social inclusion partnerships? My fifth point arises particularly from the Holyrood inquiry. I seriously question whether the model that the Auditor General for Scotland uses in his modus operandi is correct, because he must agree the facts with the audited body. Most people who are interested and who expect the Auditor General to be an independent watchdog expect him to be entirely independent and to reach his own view of the facts without a requirement to agree the facts with the audited body. That topic will emerge. As for the macroeconomic climate, western countries fairly uniformly enjoy low inflation, low interest rates and economic success, but as the Institute for Fiscal Studies paper of December 2003 by Carl Emmerson and others showed, I expect that we will see the UK Chancellor of the Exchequer face a time of considerable pressure that he will be unable to withstand, given his commitment to, for example, defence expenditure at Tory levels. That is the conclusion of the Institute for Fiscal Studies. The SNP would pursue different spending plans and would therefore be able to devote resources where they are needed—to our prime public services and to allowing our businesses a fairer deal.

At present, those people who cannot afford a private dentist and who require emergency treatment have to phone up an emergency helpline first thing in the morning. Sometimes they are taken, sometimes they are told to ring back the next day. If they are taken, they are advised by the dentists that only temporary repairs can be done, which means that they have to go back time and again. Surely emergency treatment should be the full treatment.  The present situation is not only unfair to the patients, but a false economy.

Dr Douglas Watt worked in the health service all his life. He is now a constituent of mine, being retired in Lochaline. He spent 28 years as a consultant physician in Lancashire and was then the medical director of an NHS trust. He suffered a heart attack not long ago and was treated at the Belford hospital, which he described as excellent. Because of complications in his condition, he was then taken to the Edinburgh  royal infirmary. I should say that he received excellent medical attention there but, other than that, that is where his problems truly began, as has been described in the newspapers. Dr Watt described the food as "too horrible to imagine". The food, which is provided by Consort Healthcare under the PFI scheme, it is made not in Edinburgh or Lothian but in Wales and then transported and reheated—according to Dr Watt, it is inedible. He was in the hospital for a long time and lost a substantial amount of weight. The message seems to be that, because of this presumably unintended consequence of PFI, someone goes into hospital and is treated by excellent professionals but then faces the real risk to their health in the food. The point that I make is not facetious or frivolous, but serious. Although it is one that I have addressed at length with the minister and David Bolton, it has not been answered. I would like to know whether the minister can do anything differently. Does he have any powers to do so, or have they all been handed over—given away by the democratically elected Government to a PFI company? My second point is one to which I alluded earlier. I have been eating farmed salmon all my life, and so have most people whom I know. Despite what we read in the papers—that farmed salmon is more dangerous that any poisonous substance yet known to man—people are, surprisingly, living longer and longer. That is despite their consuming that ultra-dangerous commodity that we hear about from the friends of the Greens. Some recent publicity followed research that was commissioned by the Pew institute. The Pew institute believes in direct action and has already destroyed a number of industries and jobs in America through its calculated and deliberate so-called environmental campaigns. Yet the truth is that the institute's work was deliberately misleading: it was flawed and it misused the guidelines of the United States Environmental Protection Agency.

The views that I hold are shared by more than 5,000 scientists, including Phil Guzelian, professor of medicine. He states that, in relation to the chemicals involved, the incidence is "about 100 times lower than the safe amounts recommended". That speaks for itself. I was delighted when Unison confirmed to me  today that, unlike the sponsor of the motion, it thinks that farmed salmon is good for us. It is apparently rich in omega 3 fatty acids—that does not particularly bother me, but it is apparently good for us. It is excellent for bone health in developing infants and for a range of diseases and ailments. Scottish farmed salmon also tastes good and supports more than 6,000 jobs—in my constituency and elsewhere—which the Greens want to destroy, suggesting no alternative whatever. I am delighted to set the record straight.

Does Mark Ballard agree that farmed salmon is good for you, as Unison confirmed to me by e-mail this afternoon?

I echo the sentiments of most members: we support the aims of the bill. However, the question is whether those aims will be achieved. The first problem is that the financial memorandum states that the most recent estimate shows that there are 17,315 records of needs, but the Executive estimates that there will be only between 11,200 and 13,700 co-ordinated support plans. The Executive calculates that between 3,600 and 5,000 fewer children will have CSPs than have records of needs. That has huge ramifications, and the difference in the figures has not been explained. My second point relates to paragraph 162 of the Education Committee report, which states that some parents will be denied "legal recourse". All of us know that no one fights more tenaciously or with more determination than a parent for his or her child. There will almost certainly be judicial review and additional legal costs to those that have been estimated. My third point relates to the importance of definitions. Fuzzy definitions lead to poor cost estimates. The word "enduring" appears in paragraph 82 of the policy memorandum, but it does not appear in the definitions of additional support needs or co-ordinated support plans that are to be found in section 1(1) and section 2(1) of the bill. If CSPs are to be only for children who have "enduring" additional support needs, how is that category to be assessed? A legal minefield could be created.  I have little time, but I want to say that there are some oddities in the procedure today. In effect, the original financial memorandum has been entirely superseded. We heard a veritable avalanche of references to other budgets today, including a reference to £60 million in the changing children's services fund. References were also made to £12 million, £14 million, £8.4 million and £17 million. How do all those budgets relate to each other and have they been fully thought through? I think not; I suspect not; we all fear not. The minister said that more money will be needed for CSPs than he estimated but that he will find the money. Might that money have to be found at the cost of other vital expenditure in local authority education departments? If a department overspends in one area, it must find its money from spending in other areas. The motion is an unusual creature. Not only does it invite us to agree to the financial memorandum in respect of the bill, but it refers to increased funding in any other bill, without saying what that might be. The Parliament has been criticised for signing blank cheques. I call on the Executive to return to the chamber with a fresh financial memorandum. The Executive should think the memorandum through and work it out. If it does not, we might be heading towards scuppering the aims that all of us support.

I will return to reality. I  commend the speeches that we heard from Richard Lochhead and Ted Brocklebank for spelling out the appalling consequences of the deal and the bleak future that our fishermen face. I will talk about the problems that the west-coast fishermen face. For the third year running, west-coast fishermen have seen the total failure of the Executive to win back the 10 per cent cut in the nephrops quota. That is despite the fact that over the past five years during which I have represented Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber, Ross Finnie has acknowledged repeatedly—

I have hardly started. Ross Finnie has acknowledged repeatedly that prawns are in plentiful supply and that the cod bycatch is minimal—some would say negligible. Therefore, the justification for cutting the prawn quota does not exist. He has stated repeatedly his desire to see a fair deal for the west coast, but for the third successive year, he has come back with nothing. This year, when he did not answer a question from Mr Morrison about why he failed to win a proper deal for the prawn fishermen, he came up with a new reason, which is that it was difficult to argue to increase the west-coast nephrops quota by 10 per cent, because the quota was not used up this year. When an intelligent man—which Ross Finnie patently is—uses an argument that is patently absurd, one has to ask what he has to hide. Mr Finnie knows fine well the argument that Robert Stevenson has made that non-active quota held by people who are not fishing will, by definition, not be taken up. There is a huge amount of non-active quota, so it is obvious that there is no chance whatever that the quota on the west coast could be used up. So, for the third year running, Robert Stevenson, Hugh Allan and every other fishing leader is asking the same questions. Did Mr Finnie, as Mr Bradshaw's junior, ask for an increase? If so, did he press for an increase, or was that just a bargaining chip that was thrown away at some point in the negotiations, about which, incidentally, we hear little or nothing. I refer to comments that fishing representatives have made. Alex Smith said that the deal is "totally unmanageable." Hamish Morrison said, "It is fundamentally flawed." Mike Park said: "This is a black day for the industry." Robert Stevenson said: "'A good deal', 'A successful outcome'?—nothing could be further from the truth." John Hermse said: "This is the final straw."  I have spent much of my life representing people who have been made bankrupt. It destroys people's lives, it destroys their spirit and often they lose their home. Is the Executive going to be responsible for putting some of the most successful, proud and law-abiding people into a situation in which they are forced into the plight of bankruptcy by the law and by the Executive's incompetence and duplicity?

I certainly supported Sarah Boyack's plea for support for Scottish renewable energy companies. I should state for the record that I have a shareholding in a Scottish utility company. Sadly, it is rather a small share. I will address the real topic of the debate—the economic potential of renewable energy—and the barriers that Nora Radcliffe mentioned. I will touch on two barriers, because that is all that time permits. The first barrier is the lack of any national strategy for the development of wind power. Its development has been ad hoc, deil tak the hindmost, ill thought out and disorganised. The Scottish National Party is and always has been supportive of renewable energy. I have supported it in my constituency. I have supported the development that adjoins John Farquhar Munro's constituency, namely, the hydro scheme at Glen Doe. I have supported the biomass plans for the Arjo Wiggins Carbonless Papers Ltd paper mill at Corpach, which are still waiting for an answer from the DTI. I have also supported communities that, by and large, although one or two people are opposed, want proper community benefit. That is a lacuna, which I discussed with the minister at a meeting and which he said could not be implemented because, if we did, Scottish companies would find that all the wind farm developments would suddenly plonk themselves in Wales and England because the companies would be scared off, which is absolute nonsense. The second barrier concerns biomass. It should be encouraged, but in practice many biomass industries go down, as did Torren Energy in my constituency. Where was the support for that venture? There were words on a page, but practical support was non-existent. There is something that the UK Government has been failing to do and must do quickly if biomass, which in turn depends on a healthy timber industry, is to develop. It concerns the problem of certification. I do not have time to go into it in great detail, but at the moment the Forest Stewardship Council, which is an unelected and unaccountable body based in Mexico, controls what UK-produced wood is used. Many people believe that an alternative from the Pan-European Forest Certification Council, which has received a great deal of support from many quarters, should be extended, but the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs has been dilatory in pursuing that. If we are to have successful biomass, we must prevent an unfair disadvantage being placed on our panelled-products industry, which in turn  means that we must be able to avail ourselves of the wall of wood, because we will see a rise from 6,000,000m 3 to 10,000,000m 3 of wood available for production by 2017. If we are to avail ourselves of that massive opportunity of the best renewable source of energy, the Government must tackle the red tape and do what it says that it will do, not just debate words on a page from a member whose sole purpose was to make a cheap and ineffective political attack.

Does the minister recognise that, although Highland NHS Board has the responsibility to produce options, unless there is action at a national level on training, importing elective surgery and increasing the role and recognition of the general surgeon, it might be extremely difficult to find a solution that involves continuing consultant-led services in Fort William and Oban?

I am delighted to agree with the sentiment of George Lyon's motion. What must not happen in the months ahead is a process of divide and rule in the communities of Lochaber and Argyll. I know that that sentiment is shared by everyone who attended both of the major meetings. I was privileged to be the local MSP in  attendance on Tuesday 11 November 2003, when more than 2,500 people turned out on a dreich night to show that they would not put up with the loss of a consultant-led acute hospital at the Belford and to demonstrate their personal appreciation of all the staff at the Belford. I am sure that the same arguments will have been put and the same sentiments will have been expressed at the meeting in Argyll. There is a serious problem, in that, because of the process so far, there is a strong feeling in Lochaber that a decision has perhaps already been made. That was manifest in many of the contributions at the meeting. I commend Mr Richard Carey of Highland Acute Hospitals NHS Trust for the way in which he spoke at that meeting, which Mary Scanlon also attended and spoke at; he conducted himself in a dignified way. He is doing his job and we are doing ours. The problem is that the option that was put forward at that stage was for a GP-staffed community hospital model, which would be simply unacceptable. I hope that George Lyon would agree with that. I have spoken to various people in the Belford action group—TBAG—and the reason why that would not be acceptable is because the key point is that we should continue to have a consultant-led service. It would not be acceptable to a member from Edinburgh—I can see that at least one such member is here—if their constituents had to travel to Newcastle to have emergency treatment at an acute hospital but, if Fort William loses that service, in effect that is what my constituents will face. There are national issues that must be addressed. I have suggested to Mr Chisholm that, unless certain national issues are addressed, Highland NHS Board might find it difficult to come up with a proposal that it can implement, because it is not responsible for key elements of the Lochaber option. Those elements include recognising the work of surgeons who operate as generalists in remote areas as a specialism in itself. I think that that case is resisted by the medical establishment, but it is not resisted by the people of Lochaber or Oban. Some of the existing consultants have specialist interests in neurology, colorectal surgery and breast surgery, so I think that that is the way ahead. I understand that work has been done on that in Canada and the United States of America. The second element is that there must be a mechanism or pathway to provide training for people in remote areas, because the current system is not sufficient. Thirdly, I doubt that the idea of GPs in hospitals would work; I understand that that is also the feeling among the medical community in Lochaber. It is untried and untested, has no support and would mean that junior doctors  might not receive adequate training, because GPs would be brought in to do the work that junior doctors would normally do as part of their training. I hope that we can all unite behind the fundamental requirement, which is that services in the west Highlands—in Oban and Fort William—will continue to be consultant led. That is the commitment that I will seek from the minister when he makes his closing remarks.

I am sure that all of us, and indeed all right-thinking people, will agree with all the sentiments that the Minister for Finance and Public Services has expressed. There is something particularly repugnant and repulsive about assaults on a person who is seeking to help the assailant. Usually, such incidents happen when the thugs concerned are under the influence of drink or drugs. I suspect that those people will not be detaining themselves too long on a detailed study of the consultation paper, worthy though it is. The Scottish National Party argues for an extension of the statutory recognition that is currently given to the position of the police, nurses and doctors. I make a particular plea about the position of psychiatric nurses. The patients that they receive for treatment are often brought to them by several police officers, who are armed with powers of control and restraint. Unlike the police, psychiatric nurses do not have handcuffs or other apparatus that are designed to ensure control and restraint: however, they must still manage violence and aggression so I hope that their position will be recognised. Shop workers were also mentioned. There is recognition in the consultation paper that the common law is based on principle and that it is flexible. We should bear that in mind, as well as the problems of definition that have been raised. On behalf of the SNP, I welcome the guidelines on and the examples of stiff appropriate sentences for general thuggery and such behaviour. I cite the example of a nurse who was subject to a particularly unpleasant incident in a hospital in central Scotland. Two individuals were attending a friend of theirs, who was receiving treatment. Apparently, they blew up surgical gloves like balloons and wheeled each other round a nursing station in a wheelchair. The nurse told them three times to leave the area and to return to reception because they were endangering safety. Her requests were met with abuse. The men returned three times to the nursing station, which was 100ft from the reception area, and told the nurse, "Watch who you're talking to." When she warned them a third time, they threatened to "get" her outside and crowded her in the nursing station. The nurse, who had worked for 16 years, including stints in inner-city hospitals in London, said that she had never been more scared in her life. I am pleased to say that the two individuals were arrested by the police and put into a cell in order to reflect on their behaviour over the weekend. They were charged and appeared in court on the Monday. Then, however, representations were  made on their behalf to the local elected representative. The First Minister decided that he would take action on their behalf. According to reports in the Sunday Mail and the Daily Mail last September, the First Minister did intervene, by writing to the local police. His letter was reported by respectable and responsible journalists, without contradiction, and the First Minister is said to have referred to the incident that I have just described as a "minor matter". The nurse has said that she was never more scared in her life and that she was afraid to leave the hospital for fear that the men's threat would be implemented. According to the reports, which have not been contradicted, the view was also expressed that the First Minister stated, implied or suggested that the police might have better things to do with their time than to arrest and lock up these two men. If, rightly, the Scottish Executive argues—as the Minister for Finance and Public Services has argued—that such threats are despicable, how could the First Minister have argued for a moment that the conduct of those men was of minor importance and undeserving of police time? The letter that he wrote was not simply a request for information. That would have been in order—we are entitled to ask for information from the Lord Advocate or, indeed, the police—but surely none of us would contemplate expressing views that suggest that what the police are doing is wrong. I suggest that a number of things should happen. First, because a criminal trial is a matter of public law in which justice must not only be done, but be seen to be done, as soon as someone is charged the case becomes a matter of public right and the public have a right to know. I suggest, therefore, that the First Minister's letter be put into the public domain in a redacted form. Secondly, there must be an investigation into the matter. Thirdly, the First Minister must do what he has failed to do thus far and make a detailed statement on it. As long as the First Minister fails to take any of the action that I have described, a cloud will hang over him and the Executive. Last Sunday, the First Minister stated in a newspaper that since he was 14 years old he has had a commitment to transparency and openness. Does that fine principle apply to his conduct and apparent intervention in a police matter? I will conclude by showing the chamber a headline that appeared in the Sunday Mail , a fine newspaper that is committed to standing up for the ordinary person, even against the most powerful man in the land. The headline asks: "Why did First Minister stick up for neds"? We are waiting for the answer.

There will obviously be a lot of agreement with what the minister has said. Does  he agree that all of us, as elected members, have a responsibility to play our part and, in particular, that we must not criticise or condemn any activity that is undertaken by the police in investigating any allegation of an attack on any of the workers that he has described?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will now consider allowing local authorities (a) the discretion to remove, or restrict, the 50 per cent reduction which second homes receive from council tax, (b) to set out categories to which such provision would apply and (c) to retain the whole benefit of the additional sum raised. (S2O-1095)

That was a rather inscrutable reply. The newspapers are being more candid, by suggesting that the Executive is about to do a U-turn and to adopt the position that I exhorted the minister's predecessor, Mr Peacock, to take early in the first session—that if people are wealthy enough to afford a holiday home, they should pay the same council tax as everyone else does.

Does the minister agree that the additional yield would supply vital investment for the provision of affordable housing in many rural parts of Scotland that have more holiday homes than homes for young people?

Does the First Minister agree that salmon farming is absolutely essential to the economy of the Highlands, and the west Highlands in particular, sustaining as it does more than 6,000 jobs where there are no alternatives? Does he agree that the recent so-called scientific research that has attracted so much publicity is wholly flawed, and was funded by the massively wealthy Pew Charitable Trusts, which is a body  that is prepared to pursue direct intervention to achieve its so-called objectives? Does he also agree that the sample used did not include any wild Atlantic salmon, that the salmon used was bought before the compulsory labelling laws were introduced and that there is, therefore, no basis or foundation to this unreliable so-called research, which has done immense damage as an act of sabotage to this vital Scottish industry?

Does the minister share my concern that in Inverness it appears there is a much higher incidence of people with autism than in the rest of Scotland? How will he cater in funding terms—given that funding is dispersed on a pro rata, per capita basis—for the necessary support in areas such as Inverness, if children with autism are to receive the care that they require, in particular under the co-ordinated support plans that are to be introduced?

As an interloper in the debate —from the Highlands and Islands—I agree with the comments that have been made. Does Nora Radcliffe agree that the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Bill, which has just started going through Parliament, is defective because, although education authorities have a duty to deliver co-ordinated support through a co-ordinated support plan, there is no corresponding duty on health authorities? That is a fundamental defect of the bill as it stands.

I apologise to Des McNulty and Jim Mather for not being present during their opening speeches; I was outside doing the "Holyrood Live" programme. However, I heard about their speeches and will try to restrain my sense of anticipation about the prospect of reading Des McNulty's speech tomorrow. I have enjoyed the debate, which has been livelier than in previous years. Although it has  been long on liveliness, it has at times been short on relevance because—as has been pointed out—the debate is about the process rather than the substance of the budget; it is not about GERS but about Kerr's budget and the budgetary process. I arrived in the chamber in time to hear Brian Monteith's speech, in which he predicted that there would be tough days ahead. I must share with members the view that it is easy to believe that prediction. I also enjoyed listening to Alex Neil and was reminded of the reasons why he was nominated for one of the politician of the year awards. I am sure that he could have enjoyed a career on the stage—although I hasten to say that it would have been in vaudeville rather than in pantomime. I found Christine May's speech to be rather idiosyncratic. I say to the gentle lady that the points that she made might have been relevant on a different occasion but, with respect, they were unremittingly irrelevant today. In a self-effacing way and with some generosity, Ted Brocklebank pointed out that he is innumerate and that he repeatedly failed his O-level mathematics. That not only explains why Conservative policies have not added up for several decades, but provides the further—if not particularly surprising—revelation that the Conservatives are not capable of adding up. I genuinely enjoyed John Swinburne's speech, just as I have enjoyed what he has said in committee. He is to be commended for his generosity of spirit towards committee members and for his speeches in the Parliament on behalf of, and his work for, senior citizens. I am sure that all members would wish to endorse that. I enjoyed the speeches of Elaine Smith, Mark Ballard and others. Given that I am speaking on behalf of the committee, rather than in my normal persona, I want to say that it is the committee's duty to study what those members have said in the debate in order to inform the work that we do next year. I was intrigued by Dr Elaine Murray's somewhat surprising introduction of a canine metaphor. I have always admired and enjoyed working with Dr Murray on the committee, but I am not quite sure what species of dog I would be. I am speaking on behalf of the committee, not in my own capacity, so I ask members not to suggest that I would be a Rottweiler. In the sense that I am speaking in a spirit of consensus and co-operation with all members, I am a cuddly puppy Labrador. I see that a flash of recognition has come across the Deputy Presiding Officer's face. [ Laughter. ] Enough of this hilarity. The report has many points to commend it and it is difficult not to agree that there should be more  clarity or that there should be a clear analysis of the balance between capital and revenue expenditure. The most fundamental dearth of statistical data is in comparative data. I am pleased that the work that Elaine Murray and I are doing on the relocation of Scottish Natural Heritage is considering the example of how the Irish carry out such relocations. I am sure that that work will in due course inform relocation policy. However, one point that I would make to the minister—if I could secure his attention; we are coming up to that time of year when thoughts tend to dwell on other things, no matter how cogent and forceful the arguments of the person speaking may be—is that the key or nexus or nub of our report lies in the following three questions. How effective generally is the spending of the £23 billion? How effective is that spending in achieving the targets? How effective is the spending in achieving the top priority, which we know is to grow the economy?

Underlying the report is the sense that those questions are the function of the Finance Committee. I welcome and commend the work that has been done. I also, of course, thank the clerks and the advisers and the witnesses who have contributed to our proceedings. However, there are questions for the minister. Although I welcome his undertaking to respond to our report within eight weeks, I hope that he will focus specifically on the issues of effectiveness and measurement, which seemed to the committee to be lacking. People have questions for the minister, such as: "If more good money is going after bad, how do you know? What kind of relationship do you have with the large spending departments if, year after year, they receive more money and the public see no equivalent improvements in services? Do you simply hand over the cheque if it is requested? Do you ask the departments why they want it?"—[ Official Report, Finance Committee , 10 November 2003; c 510.] Those questions that I have just read, which come from Mr Purvis, seem to be apposite. I hope that Mr Purvis's Executive colleague will provide a reply. I see that I still have time, so I will mention two matters that are close to my heart. The first is that businesses in Scotland, especially small businesses, are not receiving the deal that they should receive. That point was picked up by Wendy Alexander when, during the committee's deliberations, she questioned the £500 million windfall, which is the revenue that has come from business into the coffers of the Scottish Executive over and above what was estimated just 12 months ago. By definition, therefore, all the  arguments that took place in previous years should be totally changed by that huge windfall, which was larger than anybody perhaps anticipated. I know that the minister will reply in detail to my earlier question about table 10.03 and whether the windfall will be even greater than £500 million, but I predict that it probably will be. In the committee, Wendy Alexander quite rightly raised the issue with the Scottish Executive—perhaps she is putting in an early bid for the award of free spirit of the year next year; one never knows—but the answers that we received in the statement today did not persuade everyone. I never like to disappoint Des McNulty, as he knows, so my final point relates to Holyrood, which was the subject of two recommendations in our report. Those who are interested should look at paragraph 81. Today is an appropriate opportunity—they do not arise frequently—to mark the fact that we all acknowledge Presiding Officer George Reid's work; first, in bringing some discipline to the control of fees and in securing a reduction in the level of fees that are payable to the contractor. Secondly, we should acknowledge the Presiding Officer's role, which is less well known—although Deputy Presiding Officer Murray Tosh will be aware of this because, as I recall, the original response was to his written question some years ago—in reconsideration of the matter of commercial confidentiality. The new Presiding Officer has completely changed the previous decision on the release of information about the Holyrood project: now, the presumption is in favour of releasing the information. Previously, under the first Presiding Officer, the decision was that we could not be trusted with the information. The current Presiding Officer has stated that that decision was incorrect, and incorrect in law. After I and others made detailed representations to the current Presiding Officer, I was heartened that George Reid took the decision with which I hope we all concur, which was that there should be disclosure of information about the Holyrood project. Finally, as I am speaking as a man of consensus, goodwill and generosity, I take this opportunity to offer my best wishes to all over the coming fortnight.

If the SNP said that it would not spend £500,000 on hedgehogs and £401 million on Holyrood, would the member agree with us?

I thank the minister for giving us advance notice of the statement this afternoon. The minister has patted himself on the back for providing £11 million to deal with the business rates issue. However, does he accept that there has been a £500 million business rates windfall this year, in that there has been £500 million more  than the estimated yield? Why has he not returned that money, which has come from businesses, back to businesses? What possible advantage does he feel that there is for businesses in Scotland in having a business rate that is 10 per cent higher than that south of the border? Will he say whether the figures in table 10.03 on page 173 of the draft budget document for 2004-05 have been revised upwards? If so, what is the additional windfall? Finally, does the minister accept that there is widespread public concern about whether the money is being spent effectively—whether it is £500,000 on hedgehogs or £401 million on Holyrood? There is an increasing lack of confidence in the Executive's stewardship.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is satisfied that the arrangements currently made by BEAR Scotland Ltd for winter gritting of trunk roads in the north of Scotland are sufficient and safe. (S2O-872)

The minister is aware, as we discussed the matter over lunch—

No food was involved. Recently, I met workers in Kingussie who told me that the new work rosters that BEAR has introduced mean that in some cases they might have to work one man per lorry for 20 out of 24 hours. How on earth can that constitute a proper health and safety policy? Does the minister agree that that matter should be investigated urgently?

To ask the First Minister how the Holyrood inquiry will now obtain potential evidence from BBC Scotland, in the light of the recent decision by BBC governors to endorse the decision by BBC Scotland to withhold the tapes of "The Gathering Place" from the inquiry. (S2F-433)

Lord Fraser, John Swinney and the First Minister have all urged the BBC to co-operate and yet it continues to refuse to do so. Indeed, its response, to plagiarise the vocabulary that Margaret Thatcher used when talking about Scotland, has been no, no and no. Will the First Minister therefore now grant Lord Fraser the legal powers that are necessary to force the BBC to hand over the tapes? Does he agree with me that the BBC's refusal to co-operate and hand over the tapes is based on a false assertion; namely, that all contributors received an undertaking? That assertion is patently untrue.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

I know that we have five volumes of a report before us, but I am struggling to work out what possible relevance there is in Mr McNulty's references to the SNP's internal procedures and the Scottish Parliament election  outcomes. Those matters are completely irrelevant to the debate.

This debate has been remarkably free of party politics. To carry on in that vein, I will start by disagreeing with the views eloquently expressed by my colleague Alasdair Morgan. I have come to the view that Mike Rumbles expressed: the reasons for holding some committee discussions in private, although valid, are largely outweighed by the need to be seen to have openness in those discussions. I have come to that view primarily because I cannot really see what we would want to keep secret. Alex Salmond once told me, "If you express a view in politics, don't be surprised if it finds its way into the newspapers. If reading that view in the newspapers would be, for you, an unwelcome experience, don't utter that view in the first place." If the publication of a discussion on a report, rather than on legislation, shows that people like me will—as members will appreciate—compromise on various issues at various times, I cannot see what is wrong with that. There is always the option of having a minority report or of expressing one's dissent. If members compromise—in the interests, as Alasdair Morgan said, of achieving a committee report that is strong and therefore more likely, in theory at least, to influence the Executive—I do not see what is wrong with those members being seen to have compromised or being seen to have said, "On account of the views that Mike Watson has just expressed, I have modified my views slightly." In expressing that view, I genuinely disagree with my colleague Alasdair Morgan. However, that is the kind of principle that the CSG would expect us to support. The report's recommendation on ultra-long ministerial answers has been dismissed rather casually by the Executive, which says that there is no need to alter standing orders. Time and again, we have heard the Presiding Officer say that he has no power over the answers that are given. Time and again, members—including me, the chamber might be surprised to hear—are cut off by the Presiding Officer because they go on for too long. That is to keep order, but why is it that ministers can ramble on and on, taking up inordinate amounts of time and not actually revealing a great deal?

I noticed only today that Des McNulty seems to be trying to submit the highest number of written questions—at least according to recent business bulletins. Of course I support the recommendation of a review. Responses to parliamentary questions are, to be frank, appalling. Recently, a snooty sort of addition at the end of answers refers the questioner to a website. I do not subscribe to the view that parliamentary answers cost any money, because they are dealt with by civil servants who would be there anyway and, in many cases, the information should already have been provided. Regardless of whether parliamentary answers cost money, what about the caveat at the end of them, about reading the website? That is just patronising.

No. I have obviously stirred things up a bit, but I want to move on.

Indeed. The contrast between the approach to freedom of information in this Parliament and the approach that has been illustrated in the Fraser inquiry could not be starker. We are getting to find out the truth about what happened with Holyrood for the first time, because civil service advice is being published. If the Executive carries on keeping things secret on spurious grounds—contrary to the provision to which I referred in my intervention on Ken Macintosh—it can expect to be roundly condemned by me. I fully expect that the Executive will continue to keep all such matters absolutely secret. That is totally in breach of the CSG principles. The fact that everything to do with Holyrood was kept secret is perhaps the key to why people are scunnered with the Parliament. That information is now coming out. The Executive's approach on Holyrood and on sharing information with elected MSPs and the public has been lamentable; it is rather akin to the desire of squirrels to share their nuts prior to hibernation.

On the assertion that Ken Macintosh has just made that, for as long as civil servants are bound by a code of confidentiality, we cannot adopt the welcome practice of Hutton and now Fraser of disclosing civil service advice, is it not the case that the current code of practice leaves it open to the Executive to publish civil service advice when the public interest in the issue in question outweighs the potential risk of harm to the candour of those internal discussions?

Will Murray Tosh clarify the Conservative's position on what would happen if a Sewel motion were a matter of political controversy at Westminster? Should English Labour MPs abstain from voting on such matters?

What about the heir?

rose—

As Tommy Sheridan knows, we, too, want the successful central heating scheme to be extended. Indeed, we all want that to happen. Would it not be better to spend money on extending the scheme than on renationalising the power companies?

Not for the first time, I agree with every word that John Farquhar Munro has said so far. Does he agree that the difficulty with Eaga is that it does not have enough staff and surveyors to carry out the work that it has to do and that that is causing much of the delay?

What does Nanette Milne think of the decision that means that we will lose the subsidy for the Highlands and Islands, which will send costs soaring by 10 per cent? Does she agree with her colleague Murdo Fraser that that is a very unfortunate attitude to take?

Once the Green party has abolished oil, gas and nuclear power, what will the average increase be in the price of fuel for the ordinary Scot?

Does the First Minister agree that we cannot have a sustainable Scotland and sustainable communities in the west Highlands of Scotland unless people continue to enjoy access to consultant-led acute hospitals, such as those in Fort William and Oban? Will he urge both local health boards to bring forward proposals that allow those aspirations to be met? Does he agree that the phrase "Lochaber no more" is fine for part of a song by the Proclaimers but should not be a proclamation of the upshot of the Scottish Executive's health policy?

Will the minister give way?

I agree that local opinion must be taken into account in the planning process, but the wording of the motion seems to be slightly woolly. Is the member talking about a certain level, number or proportion of residents in an area being opposed to a wind farm, or does he mean that there should be a plebiscite in that area? What exactly is he suggesting?

On a point of order.

It is two points of order, of which notice was given to your office earlier this  afternoon. In The Daily Telegraph today there is a story that the contractors that are responsible for building the new Scottish Parliament have demanded payment in return for appearing before Lord Fraser during his inquiry. Can you indicate—

Can you indicate whether there is any truth in that story, indicate which contractors have sought payment, and confirm that it would be outrageous for anyone to seek payment for participating in the inquiry? Is it not a matter of civic duty that all witnesses should participate? Can you confirm that there is no provision in the budget—for which we have responsibility—for any such payment to be made, and nor is there any provision under the contract that the contractors have with the Scottish Parliament that they can invoke to seek any payment or compensation?

I did. I invite the member to retract that.

I am most grateful for the member's kind retraction. The First Minister appeared to acknowledge that one of the best things that we could do for Inverness would be to rid it of the millstone of the PPP at Inverness airport terminal. The trouble with the cities review is that, instead of achieving such things, which could really make a difference to economic growth, we will achieve worthy but minor things.

We are all concerned about people on incapacity benefit. Can the member demonstrate to me exactly how people are on incapacity benefit because of economic growth?

That is just IDS.

At the risk of disconcerting the Minister for Finance and Public Services, I begin by saying that there is some common ground between us. There is no doubt that some of the initiatives that the minister mentioned in his speech are welcomed by all. The minister mentioned the Maggie's Centre in Dundee; I hope that a Maggie's Centre will soon be established in Inverness, although most of the money for that is coming not from the Executive, but from charitable effort. We welcome many of those initiatives, unlike the Conservatives who seem to oppose them all. It is right to start by saying that. The purpose of debating the principles involved is to point to what I regard as valid criticisms of, and flaws in, the analysis and approach that have been adopted. I suggest that those flaws should be considered so that we can achieve common aims. There is no doubt that Scotland's cities are drivers of economic growth. Equally, there is no doubt that economic growth is a top priority for us as it is for the Executive, even if we have different ideological views about the context in which that can best be achieved. We want to be ruthlessly constructive. I am sure that the minister and other members will be aware that there has been valid academic  criticism. Ivan Turok from the department of urban studies at the University of Glasgow said that the review was "a modest response" to the range and intensity of the challenges facing the cities. Some of those challenges have been mentioned. Depopulation is a serious problem for most if not all of the cities. Shona Robison mentioned Dundee to me in that context, and I believe that Nicola Sturgeon and members from all parties have that concern. That is not something that a cities policy can necessarily solve, but solving it is a key to our future—a sine qua non of economic success. Professor Michael Pacione from the department of geography at the University of Strathclyde said: "The Cities Review provides a succinct analysis of the current health of Scotland's cities but neglects the opportunity to address important issues such as those relating to city boundaries and local retention of business rates." Members mentioned that in the debate on the same topic that took place in January 2003. Professor Glen Bramley pointed to finance being a key issue and said that although the £90 million was welcome, it was not sufficient to address some of the more serious problems. Let me mention a second flaw in the approach—as my audience departs from the public gallery. There is a strong argument that the best way in which to approach the intellectual and policy issues of improving our economy is to do so not solely on a geographical basis, but also on a sectoral basis. To do so on a geographical basis rather suggests that Government knows better than business what the remedies and solutions are. If we look at each sector of the Scottish economy—whether it is financial services, manufacturing, various types of modern technology, such as biotechnology, which the minister mentioned, or traditional industries, such as whisky—ask what the problems are and then try to address them, we can more readily achieve the aims that we all share. It is ironic that it was the second First Minister who, when he wore the hat of Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning, took the initiative of the pathfinders document, which set out on exactly that course of looking at each industry to find out how it could achieve more—although of course there are terrific successes. Sadly, Mr McLeish has departed. We were pleased to hear from him yesterday in another place, and were reminded of the past. It is unfortunate that the approach that he advocated, and which we supported, seems to have been abandoned somewhere along the line.

I find it impossible to agree with any of the assertions contained in that intervention. Since the point has not been grasped, perhaps I can restate it in a simpler way so that it is easy for anyone to understand. Let us take the whisky industry as an object lesson. It faces the problem of the highest taxation in the world for Scotland's most famous Scottish product. Why is that so? I do not hear answers coming from the finance team opposite or from anyone else, for that matter, on the unionist benches.

Obviously I do not agree, but that was a particularly inapposite intervention, because I was talking about tax on whisky, which is excise duty. The Executive's report did not include any study of excise duty. It ignored it. Neither did the report include—and the minister raised this, so it is an open door—any reference to the tax on our oil, which is the highest or second highest in the world. I return to Mr Purvis's point, which I was trying to address before I was interrupted by the minister. On the whisky industry, we would be looking at the water framework directive, at labelling, and at all the regulations that are being foisted on the industry, and we would try to lift them, so that the industry could achieve more success. However, that has not happened.

I see that they are enjoying my speech. Obviously it is stimulating some mental activity on the opposing benches, which is always welcome, if surprising. As an émigré from Glasgow, it seems to me that much of what we can do is not linked to Government or policy. Glasgow has some of the friendliest people that could be imagined—myself included, or not—and if that friendliness could be bottled, it would be more expensive than even the most expensive bottle of whisky. It is not all about money. Inverness sought to become Europe's capital of culture. If Scotland were an independent country, Inverness would have been the European capital of culture. Directly because we are not, that honour goes to  Liverpool. Next year, it goes to Cork and the year after that it goes to Luxembourg. Because of our subservient status, we lose the huge benefits that I am sure everyone recognises would have come from that honour. I move amendment S2M-526.2, to leave out from "endorses" to end and insert: "notes the concerns of many that the publication of the Review of Scotland's Cities was a modest response to the challenges facing Scottish cities and that the review neglects the opportunity to address properly important issues of transport infrastructure and finance."

I fear that Concorde is temporarily departing. Thank you, Presiding Officer for the opportunity to make this point of order. Of necessity, I gave you brief but immediate notice of it. In response to questions from Mr Swinney, the First Minister stated that the Fraser inquiry has exactly the same powers as the inquiry into the Profumo affair and the Hutton inquiry had. Is it not a matter of fact that that can be true only  in the sense that neither of those inquiries had any power whatever?

The First Minister went on to state that Lord Fraser's inquiry has all "the powers that it needs." The Tribunals of Inquiry (Evidence) Act 1921 gives inquiries the power to require the production of tapes, but Lord Fraser has no such powers. Therefore, it appears that the First Minister has, perhaps inadvertently, misled Parliament. Finally, Presiding Officer—

Is it not the case that Lord Fraser has about as much power to require production of the tapes as King Canute had to hold back the tide?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The Scottish National Party certainly believes that the BBC should make available the 400 hours of evidence to the Fraser inquiry, not least because two of the principal witnesses to the inquiry do not, for obvious reasons, have the opportunity to tell their story now. When the First Minister announced the inquiry, I recall that—in response to questions from me and other members on why the inquiry would not have full legal powers to require the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents, including tapes—he said that anyone who refused would be named and shamed. It appears that the BBC has a shame deficit. Presiding Officer, I have given you written notice of three points of order. First, the justification given by the BBC for withholding agreement to pass over the tapes now appears not to be based on any duty of protection of the anonymity of sources. That is inapplicable, because Donald Dewar and Enric Miralles could hardly have been less anonymous. They willingly gave their interviews in the full expectation that those interviews would be shown long before now. The justification now appears to be that there are in existence legal undertakings and confidentiality agreements that are, I presume, signed by the contributors. I ask you to indicate whether you are aware of such documents having been signed by any Presiding Officer of the Parliament, any member of the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body, any  member of the Holyrood progress group or any member of the parliamentary staff. Secondly, on section 23(1) of the Scotland Act 1998, although I fully support what my colleague Dennis Canavan said, is it not the case that under section 23(1)(b) the entitlement to require the production of documents affects only matters over which the Scottish Executive has general responsibility? That does not include the Scottish Parliament Holyrood project, because the responsibility for that lies with the Parliament. Does there, therefore, appear to be a lack or defect in the Scotland Act 1998 that, sadly, deprives us of the necessary legal powers to intervene should a request to do so be received from Lord Fraser? I appreciate your indulgence on the matter, Presiding Officer, because of the importance of the issues that are involved. Finally, do you consider that, in the absence of any legally binding undertaking between a contributor and the BBC, all the tapes of the contributions of the late Donald Dewar and Enric Miralles should be released?

rose—

Is Mr Sheridan really saying that we would have the benefits of oil without the entrepreneurialism that was shown by the people who built up the oil companies throughout the world from the late 19 th century and throughout the 20 th century? Is he really saying that without the so-called seven sisters oil companies and other oil companies—warts and all, as I said—we would have the benefits and the oil that we do? Does he really expect us to swallow that proposition?

I might not be as young as my sprightly 35-year-old colleague Alex Neil but, like him, I spent 20 years in business. I spent 15 of those years running my own business, which gave me the opportunity to participate in a small way in the precursor to the scheme that we are discussing this morning. The earlier scheme was run by the CBI; John Ward and especially Charles Skene took a particular interest in it. I am well aware of the huge efforts that people such as Charles Skene and Tom Hunter have made—through genuine belief and not to drive personal benefit as was suggested by the Green speaker—to instil in our children the importance of enterprise. Like my colleague Alex Neil, I would like to be relentlessly positive about the issue. The 20 recommendations in "Determined to Succeed" should be implemented; they are the result of a lot of hard work by the panel members and they have been commended by almost every party in the chamber. I will suggest five additional ways in which they might be taken forward. Perhaps my suggestions are implicit in the 20 recommendations. First, there should be many more work placements to allow children, especially at secondary school, to spend time seeing what different walks of life and business are like. Secondly, for children of a slightly older age, shadowing is important. We already have shadowing in the Parliament, including people shadowing our work as MSPs. That practice should be widely extended into the private sector. Thirdly, and perhaps most important, if we are to inculcate the importance of enterprise in order to ensure that the business of Scotland is business— in the same way as the business of America is business—our leading entrepreneurs must go into schools. I am thinking particularly of those entrepreneurs who are so public spirited that they give hugely of their time and effort to convey the importance of enterprise. It is not enough for the programme to be delivered solely by teachers, although I welcome their input, provided that training is in place, as is implicit in one of the recommendations. Kids respond to leadership, inspiration and the example of people such as Tom Hunter, Brian Souter or Sean Connery—indeed, once Scotland is independent, I am sure that Sean Connery will tour many of our schools to that end. We want business people to go into schools to explain how they succeeded and to transmit their success, inspiration, force and determination to succeed. They would do so not for financial gain—that is where the Greens go so wrong—but because they want to grow business for the benefits that it creates, such as employment and opportunities for young people, and because they want to help Scotland to grow, flourish and achieve her true potential.

I am genuinely not sure what the question is, but if Jamie Stone is asking whether I am suggesting that business people should be paid for doing such work, my answer is, "Most certainly not."

I thought that that was what the member meant. Business people will do the work because they feel that it is right and because they want to do it. Like volunteers in the mountain rescue service or the fire service, they would blanch at and probably get angry about the idea that they should receive financial benefit. That is not what it is about. I have two other brief suggestions. Every child now seems to be computer literate, but how many of them can type? Typing is an important skill to many businesses; it is a key and a gateway to success. Should we not consider including it as part of the programme? I realise that that may not be appropriate at primary school level because, apart from anything else, the hands of children of that age are too small to be able to use a qwerty keyboard. However, typing opens up a huge new vista. It is not a robotic skill; it is a gateway to  opportunity in the arts, sport, business and everything. I want the enterprise programme to be brought back to the Parliament. Members might remember that, early in the first session of Parliament, we experimented with the business in the chamber event. The result was a bit shaky, but I thought that such an event should take place at least yearly. Why should we not have children in the chamber, particularly secondary school children who have participated in enterprise programmes? We could have them in the chamber—or down the road, if we ever get there—on the first anniversary of the start of the programme to say what they did in the programme, what they got from it and what they understand about business. Let us have business people here as well and let us congratulate them all. Shiona Baird suggested that businesses might get involved in the enterprise in schools programme for what they could get out of it. With respect, I fundamentally disagree with that attitude. She referred to companies from the FTSE index, such as oil companies, as if they are somehow bad per se. Such attitudes are obstacles to the success of the enterprise in schools project. Oil companies have their warts, but throughout the 20 th century they released the potential for people to live a life of comfort and ease that would have been unimaginable in the social conditions of the 19 th century. Without the oil companies we would not be here with the lights on.

I am sorry, but I cannot take an intervention. I will have to speak to the member later. Without the oil companies, we would not be here with the lights on. Without the power that the industry produces, we would not have central heating or any modern conveniences. Cannot we just highlight the positive role that successful businesses have played in our lives? If we cannot, excellent ventures such as enterprise in schools will never succeed. I hope that the minister will take up some of my five suggestions, which I proposed in a spirit of co-operation.

I think that Councillor McFarlane Slack and his colleagues would like to retain all 32 units if that is possible, but the concern was that the Health and Safety Executive might serve an improvement notice that required breathing apparatus to be provided within two years. I sincerely hope that that will not happen. Will the minister give the Executive's views on the issues in relation to breathing apparatus that I and my colleagues raised? That topic was the meat of the debate.

Last October, Her Majesty's fire service inspectorate for Scotland reported on Highlands and Islands fire brigade. That report recognised the excellent work that has been done by firefighters throughout the area, which is about the size of Belgium, covers 40 per cent of the land mass of Scotland and one sixth of the area of the whole of Britain. There are three types of firefighters: full-time professionals, retained firefighters and auxiliary firefighters. I understand that there are about 150 full-time firefighters and no fewer than 1,400 retained or auxiliary firefighters in the Highlands and Islands. There are presently about 128 fire units in the Highlands and Islands, which covers the four council areas of Highland, Western Isles, Orkney and Shetland. Auxiliaries work mostly from small communities such as Ardgour, Carrbridge, Eriskay, Glenborrodale, Knoydart, Nethy Bridge, Hamnavoe and Kyleakin. They are all volunteers who have other jobs and responsibilities—they are not in it for the money. Their pay is restricted to the work that they do and the time that they spend in training. The volunteer ethos of the people of rural Scotland is something that we should cherish. The Highland brigade said to the Scottish  Executive more than a year ago that auxiliaries should be upgraded to retained status. While that would obviously impact on other areas in Scotland, I would like the minister to tell us what his answer is to that request. That measure would go a long way towards mitigating the difficulties and financial constraints that are faced. The inspectorate report considered the role of auxiliaries. It divided the units into two groups: the 95 strategic emergency cover locations that are to be kept; and the 32 stations that are said to be under further scrutiny, which has been widely interpreted as meaning that they are possibly for the chop. What role do auxiliaries play? They ensure that in rural and remote parts of Scotland, there is a professional group of men and women who are trained to a high standard and who can attend and tackle certain types of fires. They are not permitted to tackle fires that occur indoors, but they tackle forest fires, muirburn and road-traffic incidents. They are an integral part of their communities but attend other communities when requested to do so. The number of incidents that they have attended has increased in recent years; this summer has seen some of the most ferocious forest and moor fires ever, such as those in Glenborrodale, Knoydart, Lochindorb, and Strathspey. Some fires raged for days and were tackled not only by auxiliaries but by estate workers and visitors. I have written to a number of individuals and groups to canvass their views, including the Badenoch and Strathspey fire protection group, various estates, Scottish Environment LINK, forestry interests and the interim convener of the Cairngorms national park. I add that my Westminster counterpart, David Stewart, has also canvassed opinion. The responses that he and I have received have, but for one, been wholly supportive of the role that auxiliaries play. I will read a few of the comments. Jamie Williamson, of the Badenoch and Strathspey fire protection group, said that more than £1 million-worth of damage was caused to a moor in the Lochindorb area and that "the knowledge that auxiliaries have of a local area can be vital—and unique. There is no way that such a wealth of knowledge can be had by wholetime officers covering such a huge area." An auxiliary firefighter wrote: "in responding to a fire, every minute can be vital to save life or limit the damage to property and we are often first on the scene" Another auxiliary wrote: "I attended a fatal road accident and helped shield a child from the sight of her parents who were fatally injured trapped in their car."  What auxiliaries do is not always appreciated, even by the inspectorate and the Health and Safety Executive. Their role is much wider than we might expect when we think about the matter in conventional terms. A trade association that represents the forestry industry has argued that Government policy to encourage reductions in grazing on hill farms through having fewer sheep, cattle and deer might be contributing to the ferocity of fires because fire spreads more quickly and burns with more intense heat on ground that has not been grazed. It was disappointing that the response from Scottish Natural Heritage said that it could not lend its explicit and whole-hearted support to the issue. Its response, however, contrasted with the excellent response from Councillor Stuart Black, a member of the Cairngorms national park board, who said: "There is not much point in encouraging regeneration of moorland and the Caledonian Pine forest if it's all going to go up in flames." Why are the men and women who help to provide a fire service in the north of Scotland now under threat? That the inspectorate report fails to give specific reasons is unacceptable. In each case, the reasons why each particular unit should not continue must be spelled out. The crux of the issue relates to the provision of breathing apparatus. That is what is driving the report and is what has been focused on by the Health and Safety Executive. Some people argue that the capital costs of £400,000 for building a new model station are necessary, but I do not share that view. A solution can be found; not a Rolls-Royce solution, but a practical and commonsense solution that takes account of local needs and provides access to breathing apparatus, perhaps in the nearest retained unit. We do not need a Rolls-Royce—a family saloon would do just fine. Breathing apparatus is essential for fighting fires indoors, but not always—usually not—outdoors. One auxiliary, Rod Coltart, has said that, 99 times out of 100, his unit does not need breathing apparatus. It attends 18 incidents a year. Therefore, only once in five years might the unit be in a situation where BA is required. Surely we are not going to threaten 32 auxiliary fire services in the most remote areas of Scotland because of a one-in-100 risk, especially bearing it in mind that auxiliaries are legally prohibited from fighting fires indoors. The argument against their doing do is that those who fight fires do so from an heroic impulse—the desire to save lives—and would put their own lives at risk by entering a building, even though they were breaking the rules. That has happened on at least one occasion, but if that is the Executive's view—it is a legalistic view—surely  such people would do exactly the same thing even if they were no longer working as auxiliaries. They do it because they are human beings, not because they happen to be officially called auxiliary firefighters. I see that I am getting the eye from the Presiding Officer.

I will therefore move swiftly on and cut out vast thickets of prose that I had composed earlier.

My speeches are never inflammatory, as Mr Monteith knows. The purpose of the debate is to win cross-party support for the auxiliaries, many of whom have come to Parliament this evening, as have the local fire-master and Councillor Drew Slack of the Highlands and Islands fire board. I welcome that and I hope that all the parties can give support. I welcome the support of 32 members from the Conservatives, the Scottish National Party, the Scottish Socialist Party and the Greens. I am sorry that the Labour and Liberal-Democrat members have not signed my motion, but I look forward with interest to hearing why that is the case. I hope that they will lend support to the motion this evening.

Does Patrick Harvie accept that a lot of firefighters could not get to work unless they drove by car?

There is a broad consensus in the chamber on where we want to go, on the need to save lives—both of victims and of firefighters—and on the need for a better, safer service than the one that we have at present. That is what we all want to achieve. I agreed with everything that Maureen Macmillan said and I endorse her remarks. I will make my speech about the auxiliaries after 5 o'clock, not now, but Maureen Macmillan made the points well. I urge the minister, in his concluding remarks, to confirm to the fire-master and convener of the Highland and Islands fire brigade, who are here today and are listening attentively, that the 95 auxiliary units that are not under threat according to the inspectorate report will be fully funded. That is the assurance that those two gentlemen seek from the minister. I hope that he will address that point because it will ease other problems that they might face.

I understand the theory behind  the minister's point. However, in practice, those whom I mentioned are responsible for ensuring the provision of the existing system and they need the funding to do that. To ignore responsibility and finance and to divorce one from the other would be an abrogation of the role of a democratically elected Government. The people who are charged with running and financing the existing system are rightly looking for assurances that the existing system—which I believe we all support—will continue to be funded. I made a fair point but, as the minister says, we will debate the matter further later this afternoon. In response to an appearance by Peter Mandelson on "Question Time", one of my constituents wrote him a letter, which he kindly copied to me. It tackled the false premise—which I think I heard the Conservatives present again today—that firefighters are somehow opposed to, and have set their faces against, any change to working practices. As the letter from my constituent demonstrates, the work force in the Highland area could hardly be more flexible. One size does not fit all and I would have thought that the working practices that have developed, with full-time, retained and auxiliary firefighters working shift patterns, and the use of resources that that demonstrates, are models of flexibility. It ill behoves members to berate firefighters for a failure to be willing to change, because they have already demonstrated a capacity to change. As Nicola Sturgeon mentioned, that was against the horrendous background of the dispute, which seemed to me to be appallingly mishandled. Another constituent has pointed out to me the lot of a firefighter compared with that of someone who works as a police constable, over a 30-year career. Over a lifetime, the police constable would earn £171,819 more. When Mr Mandelson berated firefighters for having another job, perhaps he should have started at home, with the second jobs that some of his colleagues have, instead of lecturing firefighters for having second careers. The work force should be the first people we look to for advice. It seems to me that, in any line of work, those who do the job know best how things could be changed, because they are not talking about the job, or producing papers or consultant's reports about it; they are doing it. I hope that the proposals, which are worthy but extremely vague, will be informed with the benefit of that advice. I am disappointed that in point 7 of annex A to "The Scottish Fire and Rescue Service: Proposals for Legislation", the conclusion on the use of sprinklers—which we know can save lives—is that the situation will merely be reviewed. Surely we should be making further progress on that, particularly in rural areas.  I will address briefly the role of mountain rescue. The legislative proposals refer to firefighters being involved in cliff rescue. That could perhaps lead to a demarcation dispute with mountain rescue teams; I think that they feel that that is their area. I know that Michael Matheson will deal with that point in his speech. I hope that the Deputy Minister for Justice will spell out with some clarity in his winding-up speech whether the vague statements about structural and framework alterations and devolution to local authorities indicate that he proposes to bring back the proposal contained in amendment 59 to the Local Government in Scotland Bill, which we voted down in this Parliament on 8 January this year. That amendment would have prohibited the Parliament, following an appeal to ministers, from having the right to consider the case of any specific fire station that is proposed for closure. I hope that, as a democratic principle, we will oppose that proposal in future, as we rightly did when we voted it down on 8 January.

I agree with what David Davidson has said so far. However, when he talks about choice, does he accept that we have to consider something more basic—namely access? Especially in remote and rural areas of Scotland, there is a real danger under the new GP contracts—especially because of the lack of any replacement for the inducement scheme—that on the island of Eigg, for example, there will be no general practitioner, no access and so no choice whatsoever.

Does that mean that the minister is considering only the issue of through traffic and not traffic as a whole? The issue is not solely about the volume of through traffic; it is also about congestion and safety issues in Elgin.

rose—

My intervention is on similar lines. I have to say that there is quite a nice picture of Nicol Stephen in "Scotland's Transport - Proposals for a new approach to transport in Scotland". The document states that £1 billion a year will be spent by the end of the current spending period in 2005-06. Within that expenditure, is there a plan to advance the case for an Elgin bypass? The minister has said that stage 1 has been completed through the STAG mechanism. Will a further survey take place as part of that expenditure plan?

I wish to support the case made by my wife—not for the first time and, I am told, not for the last time either—and I do so first of all by arguing that the principle that major towns and cities on the A96 should be bypassed has already been accepted. There have already been three bypasses, as the minister will know. Huntly, Inverurie and Forres have all been bypassed, and I understand that Fochabers is further down the road—to stick to the same metaphor—in achieving its bypass. The principle that the A96 should be a continuous normal road has been accepted, and it would be good if that principle could include extension to two lanes. That has not been accepted, although I believe that that must be our long-term aim, and the sooner we accept it the better. The traffic problems are acute. John Farquhar Munro was absolutely right to mention the real risk of driving on the A96, which has been exemplified by fatal accidents in Nairn. Following John Farquhar Munro's precedent, which I note was considered competent by the Presiding Officer, I would like to divert slightly from the Elgin issue and put on record the fact that there is a strong feeling in Nairn that Nairn, too, should be bypassed. There is absolutely no doubt that the A96 bisects Nairn, and the tragic incidents earlier  in the year made that matter the talk on the doorstep throughout the election campaign. Although that is not the topic of tonight's debate, I hope that the minister will take that on board. As Maureen Macmillan rightly said, traffic levels are increasing, and it is not all traffic from Aberdeen. MacKellar Engineering in Grantown-on-Spey is operating as a subcontractor for the oil industry and sending huge vehicles up the A96. There are also waste vehicles going to Peterhead, although I was told just yesterday evening by somebody whose views are usually reliable that the waste now goes down to Perth. Perhaps the minister is better informed about matters of waste than SNP members are. Of course, resources are an issue. I understand from recent intelligence that there is to be resurfacing of the A9 on the stretch heading down towards the Strathnairn turnoff. I am not convinced that that work is required, and I think that the money spent on it might well be wasted. According to the partnership agreement, whose contents I presume to be true—it contains a photograph of the minister—we will be spending £1 billion a year. How much of that money is being spent on much-needed road improvements and upgrading and how much is being spent on other things, such as resurfacing, which seem to be of dubious relevance? To what extent is the minister in control of the expenditure in his own department? To what extent has that control been farmed out to private contractors? Will he say whether he was and is aware of the possible waste of the money that will be expended on the A9? I want to say something about what the Greens have said. I am profoundly depressed that, once again, the Greens appear to reject the case that is supported by my wife's constituents—my wife has represented the area for an extended period. The Greens have a serious problem in the Parliament. They have been totally against road transport for dogmatic ideological reasons and seem to refuse to accept that road transport is the only real alternative in the north of Scotland for people who want to carry on with their daily lives and maintain their livelihoods.

In a minute. The Greens must decide where they stand on the project. They must be for it or against it, or they will sit on the fence. I ask Eleanor Scott where they stand.

I understand that the case for a loop at Orton has been rejected, although the Executive appeared to support it. There was interest back in 2000, at least to the extent that reports were being considered. I say to the minister that I have proof of that interest in a written answer that I have in my hand—perhaps the civil servants could pass it down to him. Even if rail links exist, they would not be suitable, practical or usable for many people in the north of Scotland simply because they do not live near stations and cannot get to them if they live at a fair distance from them. Rightly or wrongly, roads for use by private car or public transport are a necessity in the north of Scotland. One benefit of having more Greens in the Parliament is that it is easier for us to get the message across that the Greens are not representing or serving the people of the Highlands well in that respect. I am sorry that Eleanor Scott has not supported the case—

I will be happy to give way in the future. I am delighted that the other parties have supported the case for the bypass and hope that the minister will accede to the request that it should be scheduled as a project that it has been agreed to do, even if it cannot be carried out as soon as we might like.

Will the minister give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. As Mr Morgan mentioned, one of the problems with the debate was that we received the draft budget document at the beginning of the debate, which gave us no opportunity to raise important issues. The minister chose not to give way and, as a result of our procedures, I had no opportunity to point out that the draft budget has been cut from £22,854 million to £22,763 million. No explanation of that has been provided.

rose—

Does Mr Aitken accept that we put out our spending pledges in our manifesto, which committed us to cutting business rates? Obviously, we can all talk about proposals, but the SNP commitment was put into its manifesto and that is what we are talking about in the debate. Can we get back to reality and away from the works of fiction in which Mr Aitken now seems to be interested?

Will the member take an intervention?

I do not know the Latin for "business rates". My point is a simple one. The level of underspend every single year is at least double or treble the amount required to reduce business rates in those years to English levels. Surely we could have made that reduction.

As I mentioned earlier, the probation of the ministerial statement has been delayed considerably. It is late by a substantial margin. The Minister for Finance and Public Services will be aware of the Latin motto of the clan Kerr. Classicists in the chamber will know that the Latin motto, "Dexter sero sed serio", means "Late but earnest". I am pleased that the minister is living up to his clan motto by being both late with the statement and in earnest. The underspend is £394 million. That is less bad than the underspend in previous years. Last year it was £450 million. In 2001, it was £643 million. The year before that it was £718 million. We congratulate Andy Kerr on the fact that his record is less poor than that of his immediate predecessor, the present First Minister. The first serious question is whether underspending is a matter to which blame attaches. The Executive has a successful record of underspending—it seems to be an endemic and habitual practice. The same explanations that we receive every year are wearing thin and are rather unpersuasive—all the more so since the Holyrood budget is largely fixed, unlike the Westminster budget, where they have full control over their finances. With a largely fixed budget, subject to a couple of variations such as business rates, surely it is possible to expect that departments are able to spend the whole of their budget, or at least far more of it than they have spent until now.

It would appear that Keith Raffan is posing a multiple-choice question, but I am absolutely delighted that he has asked it, as it is a gift of a question.

I shall tell Mr Raffan one thing that we would have done. We would have ended the penalising of Scottish businesses, which have paid higher business rates since the Parliament was created than businesses in England have paid. We would have ended the tax introduced by the former Minister for Finance, Jack McConnell, whereby those paying Scottish business rates pay a higher business poundage than those south of the border. That tax, which I helpfully call Jack's tax, has been roundly condemned by virtually all business organisations, as it imposes a higher level of taxation on Scottish businesses than exists for businesses south of the border.

Not for the first time, and I suspect not for the last, I completely disagree Richard Baker, as do the overwhelming number of businesses, which see nothing but rising business rates and water rates, more regulation, higher insurance costs and more indirect taxation. That brings me to my first serious point. Mr Kerr seems to think that the burden of the level of taxation on business is perhaps a matter for amusement. I know from going around my constituency and other parts of Scotland that the anger about the level of water rates is palpable. The increases faced by some businesses are extraordinary, and the lack of any intervention by the Executive to tackle the problem is lamentable. One constructive suggestion has been made by Bill Anderson of the Forum of Private Business and circulated to all MSPs. It is a modest and costed proposal—that £4.1 million could alleviate some of the unfairness in the charges—and it is well worth exploring. I would like to answer Mr Raffan's point, but I see that he has gone away.

That is very wise. The SNP would have made that reduction in business rates. We have always said that we would, and it would  have been perfectly possible to implement such a reduction.

The member should hang on a second. Of course, it is more difficult to implement a new spending programme. Ministers are fond of making announcements early, but then they find out from their civil servants that implementing the programme is far more difficult than they thought, and that is one of the reasons why we have the massive underspend. In the partnership agreement, in part 1, line 1, sentence 1, the Executive says: "Growing the economy is our top priority." I quote that just in case there is any doubt. However, I notice that in chapter 7—on objectives and targets—of the glossy budget document that arrived just a couple of minutes ago, there is not even a target for the level of growth. It is the top priority, but there is no target at all. The Executive's prime objective, which we share, is to grow the economy, but it is an objective that the Executive has not even turned into any form of target. The SNP supports the general strategy of "A Smart, Successful Scotland", but I have three substantial objections to the Executive's failure to deliver action and to implement that programme. First, this Parliament lacks the powers of any self-respecting state in the United States of America or of any German Land, never mind any of the independent nations. Those narrow nationalists in Finland, in Ireland and in Denmark all have one thing in common—a more smart, successful economy than ours, and higher living standards. That is the first problem. The second problem is perhaps new and had not been commented on until Professor Midwinter—not always the most fervent supporter of the Scottish National Party—pointed out that the history of spending on higher education under the devolution regime shows that it is the lowest priority in the Executive's education budget. We want smart, successful people. Presumably that means that education must be some kind of priority. However, in his evidence to the Enterprise and Culture Committee last week, Professor Midwinter said that the higher education budget is to grow at a much slower rate than the budget as a whole. He states: "That implies that there have been political decisions to reduce the education share of the overall cake."—[ Official Report , Enterprise and Culture Committee , 2 September 2003; c 27.] Is that not interesting? How are we to achieve a smart, successful Scotland when, according to  Professor Midwinter, education is the lowest priority and is receiving the lowest increase. I am moving towards some kind of conclusion, Presiding Officer, unless you are going to add on time for the helpful interventions that I had.

Thank you; you are charitable as always. Thirdly, public money must be spent effectively. I ask the Minister for Finance and Public Services, or his deputy, if they will tell members how they ensure that money is spent effectively. What checks and balances do they have? It appears to me that much public sector spending is demonstrably wasted in a series of areas, especially, if I may say so, among some quangos and non-departmental public bodies. I am sure that the minister will want to reply to that, although he might want the help of his spin doctors. I understand that they are now at record levels, even after the Hutton inquiry. Hutton might come and go but the Labour and Liberal Democrats' 43 spin doctors are well funded and apparently here to stay.

First, I acknowledge with thanks  the advance notice of the statement. The Scottish National Party welcomes the fact that the Executive has wisely decided to adopt SNP commitments to have more police on the beat and to have smaller class sizes. My party leader spent a great deal of time during the election trying to bring round the Executive to that point of view, but it is better that a sinner repent, so we are delighted that that has happened today. The minister has not explained why this announcement was not made when it was due in June, nor have we yet received a breakdown of the underspend of nearly £400 million among departments. The one concrete piece of information that we have is that the level of the contingency fund—the reserve—has risen massively. In the draft budget it was £29 million for this year. We now learn that it has increased to £120 million. Next year it was to have been £42 million but it has risen to £58 million. For the following year, it has risen from £142 million to—as they say in darts—£180 million. Will the minister assure me that what occurred in 2001, when the Minister for Health and Community Care complained about the former First Minister filching money from the health budget, is not happening now? Has the minister raided the health, education and justice budgets to fund a new slush fund for future Executive announcements?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The guidance that applies to Executive announcements states: "Where an announcement is of sufficient significance for a Ministerial statement to have been programmed into the business of the Parliament, the details of that statement should not be released to the media before the statement is made." This morning, we learned from the radio and The Scotsman that £6.5 million has been pledged to the national theatre. I understand that in the statement we are about to hear there will be an announcement of funding for the national theatre, although The Scotsman has more information about the details than we do even now. I ask for your ruling on whether that is a clear breach of the guidelines. If that is the case, can we ask the Minister for Finance and Public Services to express regret and give us an assurance that such a breach will not recur in this session?

To ask the First Minister when the inquiry by Lord Fraser into the Holyrood building project will be completed. (S2F-170)

Does the First Minister agree that the Scottish public will be concerned about the apparent delay in the expected conclusion of the Fraser inquiry? Does he agree that the part of the report on the findings of the first section of the inquiry, which deals exclusively with decisions that were taken before devolution—the choice of site, architect, contract and construction manager—should be published as soon as it is completed? Publication of that section of the report should not wait until completion of the second section of the report, which will deal with what happened after devolution. Does the First Minister agree that the report on the findings of the first part of the inquiry could be published by the end of the year?

The framework document starts well when it states: "For too long the industry has been bedevilled by often ill-informed criticism of its operation". Almost every week, we all read story after story attacking the salmon farming industry. Those stories are written by a small group of about five or 10 individuals whose names I will not mention but whom we know. They have been supported by a number of journalists who seem to have a desire to destroy the salmon farming industry.  We should all agree that salmon farming is essential to Scotland and that the jobs that it provides are, as many members have said, in the most peripheral parts of Scotland—such as in Lochaline, in my constituency—where there are no alternative jobs. Anyone who attacks the industry and knocks the quality of our Scottish salmon product does it no service. This is the first time that I have had the chance to listen to the Green views on this matter, and I am astonished that Jamie Oliver should suddenly be the arbiter of policy in the Scottish Parliament. That is a novel proposition. It may be that the Green Party is moving towards a new phase of muzziness and fuzziness, as it was not clear to me what its policy is—whether it is for or against the industry, or whether it is for the industry, provided that it is different in some unspecified way. One of the unfortunate aspects of the debate is the fact that there has been no real recognition of the excellent research work that has been undertaken.

No doubt, Robin Harper will agree with me.

Of course. No one is suggesting other than that the industry has achieved a great improvement in standards of environmental stewardship over recent years. [ Interruption. ] Perhaps that is Brian Simpson of SQS phoning me to agree with the point that I am making—no, it is John Farqhuar Munro making arrangements about his fish farm. No other member has dealt with the role that salmon can play in nutrition. On 1 September I spoke to an audience of international neuroscientists at Coylumbridge at a conference that was convened to consider the role of fatty acids in finding possible cures for schizophrenia, Alzheimer's and autism, as well as the nutritional role that fatty acids—which are found in salmon—play generally. A mass of research has already been done. I want to tackle what seemed to be the fallacy of Sarah Boyack's speech—most of which I agreed with—which was that we are only just starting to undertake research.

I will make this point first. When I visited Dunstaffnage marine laboratory a couple of years ago, I learned that a lot of work had already been undertaken into the location of fish farms. That work has now been taken up by Mediterranean models and projects such as DEPOMOD and MERAMED, which use digital technology to show the best places for fish farm locations in particular marine situations. We have already done a huge amount of research, and we should not tackle this debate as if it had not been done.

I am not offering to hold anyone's jersey. I would like to bring members up to date with the situation at Ardtoe, which is in my constituency. I have visited Ardtoe on numerous occasions and supported the efforts to save it when Seafish decided that it was going to divest itself of its financial responsibility. I am pleased to say that, although a deal has not yet been done, from discussions that I have had with John Rutherford, Jim Treasurer and the chief executive at Ardtoe, it seems likely that Ardtoe will be saved. Unfortunately, ministers have declined an invitation from me to visit Ardtoe and no financial help has been provided, although it has been requested. At the end of August, I was contacted—I had better not say by whom—with the message that the reason that there was no deal at Ardtoe was that the Scottish Association for Marine Science was waiting for a letter of reassurance from the Executive that Ardtoe would receive research commissions from the Scottish aquaculture research forum, which did not meet until 2 September. That letter was not provided until the very last minute and only following my intervention at question time. Therefore, while the Executive's theory might be fine, the implementation side is sadly lacking. The SNP is wholly committed to a competitive, well-regulated industry. It is a shame that the Tories could give us no idea about the regulations that they wanted to get rid of. I could help them out by telling them where the real problems lie: delays in consents and in dealing with applications to use medicines such as Slice. Unless we address the competitive disadvantage through the rental charges that are imposed by the Crown Estate Commission—contrary to what the minister says, other countries do not have that charge—there will be a clear anti-competitive disadvantage. I would  be interested to hear whether the minister agrees with the Liberal Democrats that power over the Crown Estate Commission should be transferred to the Scottish Parliament.

Scottish Quality Salmon won the Label Rouge award in France. Does the member accept that we already have high-quality products? What point is the member trying to make?

Will the member give way?

Is Mr Harper aware of recent research that has been published in the bulletin of the European Association of Fish Pathologists? Findings show that the number of sea lice on wild salmon stocks remains relatively constant whether there is fish farming activity or not. Does he accept that research? Will he explain in more detail exactly what the policy of the Green party is? What proposals does the party have? What would the party like to do that is different, and what impact will that have on the industry?

The member said that the industry is under-resourced and he condemned the £1 million aid as paltry. According to Tory policy, what level of aid should be provided to the industry? What aid did the previous Tory Government provide?

I am grateful to the minister for giving way. We share his view that the Scottish industry should be competitive. Does he agree that the imposition by the Crown Estate of about £2 million per annum for rental of the seabed is an anti-competitive charge, such as virtually no other competitor country faces?

rose—

Paragraph 3.4 of "A Framework for Scottish Aquaculture" states: "the Crown Estate and the Scottish Executive will ... consider whether an independent study should be commissioned to look at the costs which regulation imposes on aquaculture businesses in Scotland". Has the consideration period terminated? Has a decision been made? If so, what is it?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. In the Environment and Rural Development Committee this morning, there was a debate on a motion to annul a statutory instrument—SSI 2003/371—which relates to the scallop industry. A regulatory impact assessment was supposed to have been lodged on the day when the instrument was laid at the end of July. It is a matter of agreement that the RIA was not laid until today, thereby depriving the industry of the opportunity to give its views about an instrument that it says might jeopardise the livelihoods of at least 17 boat owners as well as hundreds of employees. I appreciate that, under standing orders, it is the Executive's responsibility to decide whether to pursue an instrument in such circumstances and that it decided to do so, but would you echo the convener of the Environment and Rural Development Committee, whose opinion was that such practice is utterly unacceptable and must never be repeated?

The SNP response to the DTI consultation paper was submitted by Sir Neil MacCormick and the SNP's European policy review group. In that submission, Sir Neil pointed out that "Successive UK Governments have shown a marked reluctance ... to ensure funds are truly additional" and, in particular, "that since 1975, the Treasury have retained between £1.6 and £3.3 billion of EU funds that should have been spent in Scotland." That is the true record of Westminster. Phil Gallie's faith in a British ministry belies that record, which is a sad one. His faith is touching if slightly misplaced. If not "vitriotic", it is certainly irrational. We have no doubt about the way in which this debate should be going. The debate lies in the last sentence of Mr Purvis's motion: no matter whether  Brussels or London is in charge, the important thing is to ensure that money flows in the future as it has in the past. If we are to have consensus in this Parliament—as Richard Lochhead of the SNP has argued that we should—it must be around a clear position. At the moment, the position is as clear as mud. I am indebted to the briefing from the Scottish Parliament information centre, which points out that the current Executive position is that it "cannot adopt a stance". Well, no change there. I am also indebted to Stephen Herbert and Aileen McLeod of SPICe for stating that the majority of people who responded to the European Committee were in no doubt—they had far more confidence in Europe to deliver a better deal on regional funds than they had in the Westminster regime.

I am coming to that right now. My wife and I, under our own steam, attended a meeting in Brussels that brought together around 100 regional and national representatives and bodies from areas that are mountainous, sparsely populated and include island communities. I do not know how much Irene Oldfather knows about such things, but I know a lot because I have taken the time and trouble to campaign here, and around the Highlands and Islands, where aid is absolutely essential. The work of people such as Drew McFarlane Slack in Highland Council has been remarkable in trying to establish a directive, and a new budget line under European regional policy, that recognises as a specific category areas with those features—mountains, sparse populations and islands. This Parliament should be uniting around such proposals. Why have we heard nothing about that from the Executive? Why has there been a complete wall of silence over the past months and years when every other small and medium-sized country in Europe has not only been debating what its position should be but, having formulated that position, has been going around Europe and winning friends for the position. Those countries are negotiating as independent states in their own right to ensure that they get the best possible deal. Can anyone imagine Ireland in the shambles that we are in now, without an agreed position?

No—I will give Mr Purvis the same time as he gave me. I notice that Mr Purvis did not give his position, either in his speech or in his press release. He has no idea what it is. The  south of Scotland alliance has grave reservations about the DTI's proposals, so I was surprised that we did not hear about that. I would be interested to hear why, based on the information in the SPICe paper of 14 August, the forum that was set up to consider this vital matter has not had members such as Ben Wallace replaced since the election. If this matter is so important, why has the forum not even got round to replacing members such as Christine May and Ben Wallace, who are obviously no longer appropriate to serve on it?

rose—

Will the member give way?

Alex Johnstone suggests that the SNP has developed an interest in the water industry only today. Can he explain why his colleague, Ted Brocklebank, did not support my motion that there should be a full parliamentary inquiry by the Finance Committee into the finances of the water industry, which I lodged just after the election?

My question to the minister is really quite simple. Does the bill give the power to introduce a total ban on the sale of fireworks—yes or no?

As the Minister for Finance and Public Services, Mr Kerr will be concerned about the ultimate cost—which could be quite substantial—of any regulations that are brought forward. However, what proportion would that ultimate figure be in relation to the figure of £338 million, the previous estimated cost of the Holyrood project, which the minister described as a "drop in the ocean"?

I agree with Phil Gallie about the misery that is caused to animals of various types by the explosion of fireworks. As far as the animals are concerned, surely it makes no difference whether the firework display is legal or illegal—authorised or unauthorised. The lack of the power to impose an outright ban on the use of  fireworks is a gap in the Fireworks Bill. In future, evidence may emerge that an outright ban is the only measure consistent with animal welfare.

In the previous debate on this topic, Donald Gorrie argued: "We should also explore the possibility of a reverse Sewel motion".— [ Official Report , 12 June 2002; c 12611.]  Has that rhetorical bang become a whimper?

If Cathie Craigie supports a general ban on fireworks, would she agree that Bill Tynan's bill is inadequate because it does not  permit a general ban?

I do not advocate that there should be an outright ban. However, I believe that the Scottish Parliament should have the power, if it becomes necessary to use it, to establish such a ban. My point is that Westminster is not providing us with that power.

I begin by saying something that may not be immediately obvious to members—I am here this morning as the stand-in  for Shona Robison, who is unable to be here because she is entering the early stages of labour. I am sure that all members would wish to join me in wishing her and Stewart well. Members on these benches expect the happy news of another SNP gain by Shona Robison from labour. Looking around the chamber, it is pretty evident that last night we had the Scottish Parliamentary Journalists Association annual dinner. I am pleased to see new arrivals skulking into the chamber even as we have this debate. Many members from all parties have taken a close interest in and campaigned on the risks of fireworks. Sadly, some of those members are no longer here. John McAllion and John Young, to name two, played a prominent part in the previous debate on fireworks. However, it is fair to say that Shona Robison led on the issue in the first session of Parliament. I pay tribute to her tenacious pursuit of this matter, which, as the minister said, is important. Not only did she secure a members' business debate on 12 June last year, but she produced a proposal for a member's bill, which received support from all parties but one, although John Young, as he was wont to do, broke ranks in an entertaining and engaging fashion. I have some serious points to make. In Scotland last year, there were 114 fireworks injuries. That was an increase of 25 injuries, or 28 per cent, on the year before, when there were 89 injuries. Previously, there had been 82. The trend in Scotland is for more fireworks injuries year on year. Most of those involve children and most of those children—this is perhaps no surprise—are boys. It is obvious that the problem is extremely serious. Sadly, the facts show that in England the case is the reverse. I understand—and I may be corrected here—that the number of injuries from fireworks is reducing down south; it is not rising, as is the case in Scotland. Many incidents occur at impromptu private fireworks displays, rather than at organised events. I am sure that the majority of us here would not wish to be killjoys and would not wish there to be a total ban, for various reasons. For example, the Chinese community celebrates its new year traditionally by the use of fireworks. For reasons that I find rather difficult to understand, we celebrate the activities of the gentleman called Guy Fawkes every 5 November. I am slightly puzzled by that, because I do not see why we should celebrate the record of a failure.

Now I face the alarming prospect of seeing the world from Brian Monteith's  perspective and through his spectacles. I guess that Brian Monteith would form that view—would not he? Let us get back to the tale. Increasingly, fireworks are being used as offensive weapons. That happens all over Scotland, including in the Black Isle where I understand that a firework was put into a metal postbox, which exploded, spraying the surrounding area with potentially lethal debris. It was fortunate that no one was killed. I think that it was John Young who referred to Corkerhill community council in Glasgow, which had cited problems of "fireworks in letter boxes, stuffed in milk bottles, thrown under police cars".— [ Official Report , 12 June 2002; c 12602.]  We hear about many other incidents in which youths attack fire officers with fireworks, throwing rockets at fire brigade members. Those practices are utterly unacceptable and I ask the minister whether we have not gone beyond the last-chance saloon. Existing law, including the Explosives Act 1875, allows the use of fireworks in such instances to be regarded as the use of an offensive weapon. Indeed, the Offensive Weapons Act 1996 allows any implement that is not intended in its manufacture to cause damage to be treated as an offensive weapon if it is converted and used for that purpose. The minister said that the Fireworks Bill does not allow an outright ban and I wonder whether that is adequate. I outlined the SNP's reasons for not arguing at present for an outright ban, but, if matters were to get significantly worse—which is a significant possibility—the Scottish Parliament should have the powers to enable ministers to introduce an outright ban similar to the ban on the indiscriminate sale of guns. We might reach that situation, but I hope that we do not. However, if we were to do so, the lack of such a power in the bill indicates that we will take the wrong decision today if we agree to this Sewel motion. I say that based on the practical grounds that I set out earlier and not on constitutional grounds per se. The lack of such a power is the failure in an otherwise commendable piece of legislation, which the SNP supports.

Mr Gallie makes a fair point. I hope that, with the help of the civil servants who are sitting at the back of the chamber, the minister will address that point in his concluding speech. I have not made an expert study of the issue, but I  note that the bill includes the powers for UK ministers to ban the importation of fireworks. How does that power square with the operation of the free market? Would not European Union approval be required to ban importation? I will be interested to hear what the minister will say in response to that question. I was intrigued by a suggestion that Donald Gorrie made in the previous debate on the subject. As Donald Gorrie is in the chamber, no doubt we will hear from him again today. He suggested that the Parliament should explore the possibility of a reverse Sewel motion. Why is the traffic in Sewel motions always one way? Why not pass powers to the Scottish Parliament to allow us to deal with reserved matters? I do not know what such a motion would be called. If Mr Gorrie continues to support that suggestion, perhaps it could be named after him, but if he does not, I would be happy for such a motion to be moved in my name.

Some members have advocated an outright ban on fireworks, arguing that the misuse of fireworks as offensive weapons requires such a ban. Will the minister clarify whether, under Mr Tynan's bill, such an outright ban would be possible?

Why did they not make it?

I rise to oppose the motion. The order in question does two things, the first of which is to make a change in accounting practice. That particular measure is dull and worthy, and we support it. Yesterday, the Deputy Minister for Finance and Public Services assured me that the measure could be introduced at a later date if the order is rejected today. However, the order's second purpose is to provide almost an additional £100 million for the Holyrood project, which could not be more controversial. The SNP opposes the motion because it was not persuaded at yesterday's meeting of the Finance Committee that a case has been proven for the expenditure of the additional £37.7 million that was dealt with yesterday. Indeed, some elements have not been proven at all. I want to outline some of the unanswered questions that members of all parties raised yesterday. What exactly are the total fees for each consultant? How much money has been saved by the recent cap, which the Presiding Officer referred to? We do not know; those are secrets. When we asked why the contingency had been calculated at £5.692 million, the project team told us that the figure displayed a "spurious accuracy". We asked about the justification for the failure to finalise the design of a boundary wall and the exterior staircase, but answer came there nane. There are many more points I could mention; however, I have outlined three of the most serious. Today we are being asked to make provision from the public purse of nearly £100 million for the most controversial project in Scotland. The SNP is determined to cap the cost at not a penny more than the legal minimum.  The SNP supports PPP schemes where the expenditure is on pupils, patients and the police. By contrast, during the general election campaign, the Minister for Finance and Public Services, Mr Kerr, who has just arrived, said that the £338 million cost of the Holyrood project was a "drop in the ocean". Mr Kerr, who does not seem to be concentrating on this important debate, might call £37.7 million a droplet, if he believes that £338 million is a drop in the ocean. I fear that henceforth the Minister for Finance and Public Services might be known as Andy drop-in-the-ocean Kerr.

I have only 10 seconds to go. The SNP voted against the Holyrood project in 1999 and in 2000, whereas Labour and Liberal members voted for it. We are where we are. The building must be completed. Rejecting the motion will in no way prevent the completion of the building. Another motion can be lodged. Let us oppose the motion and act in accordance with the wishes of the majority of the Scottish public.

At yesterday's Finance Committee meeting, we were told that we were not allowed to know the amount of public taxpayers' money that each of the project's consultants are to receive. That information has been kept secret, but the whole project has been bedevilled by secrecy. Today we have heard how, for the second time in a fortnight, an unelected peer is to be given huge powers by a democratically elected Parliament. That appears to place Lord Fraser in a position of some difficulty. His dilemma will be to publish or be damned. In passing such huge powers to an unelected peer, should it not be arranged as a matter of urgency for Lord Fraser to appear before one of the Parliament's committees before the recess to explain the criteria on which he will base decisions to keep information secret or make it public? In that way, the First Minister's pledge that no questions will remain unanswered could be delivered rather than breached.

Answer the question.

Carrbridge is an attractive village in my constituency that relies substantially on tourism for its survival. There is also a garage there. I am sure that if members visit the village during the holidays they can buy some petrol from Dougie MacDonald at the garage. However, during the Easter weekend all the residents and businesses in Carrbridge had no water for five days because of a faulty valve in a pipe. I mention that serious problem because the real cause of it goes back two years to attempts that were made to get permission to lay the new water pipeline that is needed to replace the faulty existing pipeline from Loch Einich, which is in the  northern part of the Cairngorms. It has taken two years for us to have the various quangos involved agree that the new pipeline may be laid below ground. It has taken so long because the pipeline would cross sites of special scientific interest. It has cost Scottish Water £1 million to prepare the environmental impact assessments that are required under the Natura regulations to prove that every other possible source of water that would not involve the pipeline crossing an SSSI could not be used. Scottish Water even had to prepare an EIA for Loch Ericht, which would involve the laying of a pipeline for 30 miles at a cost of £30 million. I want to make constructive points, rather than to contribute to the unedifying spectacle of a competition between the Labour and Tory parties about whose record is worse.

I will give way to the member later. All of us want to preserve and protect our environment, but the current policy is not what is required. It is a greedy, gas-guzzling Cadillac of an environmental policy, when we require a normal, respectable family saloon. From Joe Moore, the head of operations at Scottish Water, I understand that a cost of £1 million just to lay a pipeline under the ground is the norm. I know that my constituents—especially patients in the north of Scotland who are waiting 53 weeks for a liver scan—would regard that as a massive waste of money. What are we doing spending money on it? It is no wonder that our water charges are so high. Des McNulty is right to draw attention to the fact that when we ask questions about Scottish Water Ross Finnie and his able deputy Allan Wilson say merely that these are operational matters for Scottish Water. That is very convenient. The real reason that the Tories set up the quangos and Labour and the Liberal Democrats retain them is to deflect blame and responsibility on to the quangos. Alan Sutherland and Alan Alexander get the flak, rather than the Executive.

I am happy to clarify the point. The £1 million was just for the consultation. We have not begun to pay for the pipeline. We have not even reached the stage of applying for  planning permission. The £1 million was spent just on securing Scottish Natural Heritage's agreement to the pipeline. What is that about? It is no wonder that Scottish businesses are complaining about their water rates. It is no wonder that the Golf View Hotel in Nairn told me that its standing charge has increased by 9,000 per cent—by 90 times.

It is an example of a lack of common sense. I want to talk about fixed charges, which are anti-environment because they do not discourage excessive consumption. In South Africa, post apartheid, a system was introduced under which every household receives a supply of water per week that has been calculated to be more than ample to meet the weekly needs of a family. Excessive consumption is discouraged by the use of metering. The system that we have is the obverse of that: it encourages profligate use of water and, as the Federation of Small Businesses has pointed out, may be incompatible with the duties on companies under the Environment Act 1995, which requires companies to promote efficient use of water by their customers. Where do we go from here? For the past two weeks, as a member of the Finance Committee, I have suggested that the Parliament should conduct a thoroughgoing inquiry into and review of Scottish Water. The inquiry should examine the claims of Alan Sutherland that £300 million could be saved. I do not accept those claims. I think that Mr Sutherland has done a hopeless job and would like to scrap the office of the water industry commissioner for Scotland, which would save £2 million straight away. However, if Mr Sutherland has said that £300 million could be saved, why is the Executive doing nothing about that? Why is there no inquiry or review? Will Labour and Liberal members block a parliamentary inquiry by one of the committees that would sort out the issue and find the solutions that every business and customer in Scotland wants?

If water quangos are so bad, why did the Tories set them up?

I want to raise two matters with respect to the First Minister's letter. First, the First Minister states that he has invited the Auditor General to examine issues of financial probity. Is the First Minister concerned that there has been a lack of probity? Secondly, the First Minister states that people in Scotland rightly expect answers to all their questions. We agree with that, but, as the First Minister is aware, before we can get at the truth, we need to have access to all the information. Up until now, that has been denied on the grounds of commercial confidentiality. Will those documents be made public? If not, the public will never know what happened.

To ask the Scottish Executive how many deaths have been caused since 1999 by (a) lung cancer, (b) road traffic incidents and (c) amnesic shellfish poisoning. (S2O-138)

We are all aware of the essential need to protect public health. Those statistics show that there is no real risk of death from amnesic shellfish poisoning. There is certainly no case for the even tighter testing regime that is being proposed. Does the minister agree that the view of the scallop fishing industry is that it would have no future if we were to adopt a new, tighter testing regime, and that we would lose a proud, sustainable and successful Scottish industry for no good reason?

I congratulate Jamie Stone on securing the debate. A couple of years ago, we enjoyed a congenial hour or so on the Great North Eastern Railway rail service from Edinburgh to Inverness. The service is very good, but it could be improved. I would like a much faster link between Inverness and central Scotland. Many people in my constituency of Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber do not have a car; for them, as Jamie Stone suggests in the motion, the rail service provides a vital link. Not everyone can afford a car and not everyone wants to have a car. In the Highlands, it is difficult to travel without a car. Unlike the Greens, I am not anti-road. I think that, over the next four years, there will be a forensic destruction of the Greens' traffic policy, which will show their proposals to be utterly hopeless for the Highlands, where the car, if not a necessity for everyone, is certainly a necessity for many people to go about their business, pick up their kids, get to work and generally have a life of any quality.

No, I am sorry. I will in another debate when there is more time.  This week, I received a letter from the Friends of the West Highland Line. I was appalled to note that a meeting that John Chamney had arranged with the Executive's team leader to discuss the future of the west Highland line was cancelled and that no alternative date had been set. The tender is to be agreed shortly and the specification is vital. As Maureen Macmillan said, if we do not have in that specification protection of the west Highland line—never mind an expansion to more than two sleeper cars, without which the service is barely viable economically—what future is there for the line, which is so important to the west Highlands and a magnificent tourism attraction? I hope that that will be put right. Perhaps in his closing remarks, the minister will confirm that Mr Chamney, Fraser McDonald and others at Friends of the West Highland Line will have an opportunity to make an input. They know a great deal about how the service can be improved and how savings can perhaps be made. It is essential that that happens before Porterbrook, the owner of the remaining 12 cars, has sold or scrapped those cars, which would remove the possibility of extending from the two existing cars. I had the pleasure of meeting the minister's family in Aberdeen. I suggest that it might be enjoyable for him and his family to experience the delights of the Strathspey steam train in my constituency. If he would like to do that, I would be delighted to accompany him and persuade him, perhaps in one of the local hotels after the journey, of the need to extend that line to Grantown-on-Spey.

As the MSP for Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber, I am often asked to present prizes at secondary school prize-giving ceremonies. When I did so at schools in Kingussie and Kinlochleven, I was struck by the amazing breadth of achievement in academic subjects, sport and art. I was genuinely awestruck by the huge diversity of achievement to which our young people have aspired in their schools. The vast majority of children in Scotland are achieving. They are confident and they are set to do well. However, we should examine the situation of those who are in difficulty and work out practical measures that can let them achieve the same excellence. I was recently reading through new members' maiden speeches. Marlyn Glen was quite right to say that we should praise children for doing well and praise school staff for helping them to achieve excellence. Some of the finest establishments for helping children to achieve excellence in sport are in my constituency. There is the Glenmore Lodge outdoor activity centre and Clive Freshwater's establishment, Loch Insh Watersports, where  generations of children have learned about canoeing. There is the Scottish Outward Bound Association's Loch Eil centre, which I am visiting this weekend. There is the Badaguish Centre, which specialises in helping children with disabilities. I heard about one young blind girl who heard the sound of running water in a burn for the first time. That outdoor centre provides an excellent service, but it lacks the necessary funding. Such facilities are regarded as add-ons, as Donald Gorrie suggested, whereas they ought to be regarded as essential. Thirty years ago, I heard the principal of Glenmore Lodge saying that every child in Scotland had the opportunity to enjoy the outdoors. That is no longer the case, although it should be the case. It should be an essential and not something that is liable to be cut when the fiscal going gets rough. In the previous session, Lloyd Quinan was right to say that it is a disgrace that there is no proper, worked-out national strategy for autistic children. That must be put right in this session. I heard on "Newsnight Scotland" last night about the approach used to promote literacy that has been adopted in schools in Clackmannan. I am no expert in the field, and I might get contradicted, but if such an approach is so successful in Clackmannan, why is it not being taken up elsewhere? The problem of youth crime must be viewed in context. It concerns only a small minority—Robert Brown spoke of 0.1 per cent as really serious offenders. However, I am afraid that the 1,000 or so young criminals who get into serious trouble make the lives of many throughout this land an utter misery. My constituents have related experiences to me that I could not begin to relate to the chamber. I refer to the foul language, the offensive behaviour, the yobbery, the vandalism, the damage to property and the complete lack of respect for human decency of a very small minority of children. What do we do about those young people? In the remainder of my speech, I want to discuss one scheme that has been shown to work and has been adopted by a partnership of Grampian police, Northern constabulary and the Army. The Highland youth advantage scheme has been carried out in barracks at Gordon and Fort George. The scheme is intended for kids who are identified either as having committed crimes or as being liable to do so. They are identified by social workers, by education departments, by schools and by police community beat officers. The scheme offers children who are in difficulty, have committed minor crime and are perhaps on the cusp of committing major-league crime the opportunity to attend a five-day residential course  that is run by the Army and the police. For many of those young people, the course is probably their first taste of discipline. It consists of a mixture of sporting activities, Army drill and advice about drugs, fire raising and good citizenship. It is probably the first time that many young kids have had the chance to do many things, but in a disciplined, orderly way. The scheme has been so successful that, according to the evaluation report, hardly any of the children who took part in it have reoffended. That must show that it is a terrific success. I mention the course today because it seems to me self-evident that it should be replicated all over our country. I am amazed that that has not yet happened. I hope that the Executive will agree to examine seriously the evaluation report and to provide funding to ensure that the course can be replicated throughout Scotland. I will cite some of the comments of children involved in the scheme. One said: "I liked everything apart from having to get up early, but I'd get used to it". Others said that "There is a lot of discipline", that they learned "How to get on with people and work as a team", and that the Army and police were "Very friendly and easy to talk to". Can members imagine some of the young people of whom we may be thinking saying that before they went on the course? One young person commented: "Just to say that it was great fun and as I was having fun I was learning at the same time. I would easily go again". Operation youth advantage is designed to divert young people away from offending behaviour and to improve their life chances by giving them an insight into Army life. The first pilot project evaluation was compiled by Jim Urquhart and Graham Sedgwick of Grampian police. I commend them, the Army and Northern constabulary for their work. I hope seriously that this positive suggestion will be taken up and analysed by the Executive and replicated throughout Scotland.

I asked this question during the past four years and did not receive an answer, but I will persevere. Murdo Fraser says that a level playing field was achieved under the previous Conservative Government, but why was it achieved only in 1995, which was 16 years into Tory rule?

I, too, congratulate Mr Baker and all the new members of the Parliament who have contributed so eloquently to the debate. The retreads like me can cope for themselves. One Sunday, when the Rev Ian Paisley was delivering a sermon, he described graphically the  condition that awaited those members of his congregation who would not ascend to heaven but would go to the other option. He said: "There will be a wailing and a gnashing of teeth." At which point, one of the congregation said: "But, Reverend Paisley, I have no teeth." To which came the answer: "Teeth will be provided." That suggests the problem that we face: what sort of dental service will be provided over the next four years? Mr Baker rightly highlighted the problems that some of us have raised over the past four years. The solutions, however, have not yet been found. I want to make some positive suggestions to Mr McCabe, which I hope he will pursue—indeed, I made them to his predecessor. Why are the golden hello payments so restrictive? Why is the group of people who are entitled to receive them so narrowly defined? Surely if we want to attract dentists to provide NHS dentistry, we need to create the widest possible choice from which to draw the widest possible group of people. We heard earlier this afternoon about the intimations of discontent within the partnership relationship. However—if the partnership is still to be called a partnership—it appears from the partnership agreement that we are to have free dental checks before 2007. Will all dentists, including all those who do not provide NHS dentistry, provide free checks, or will those checks be provided only by those who operate in the NHS? If the latter is the case, the interesting question for the minister is how the policy will be delivered. Is not the main problem the vast discrepancy between NHS and private rates? A similar problem arises under the legal aid system, whereby legal aid is not available to many people. Why do we still have the 18-month rule and how on earth can that rule be applied to children under five? We register for life with our general practitioners, so why register for such a restricted period with a dentist? Surely that ludicrous rule has to be changed. I commend the excellent provision for young children in Highland that is led by the public health department. I hope that such provision will be taken up elsewhere. Like Elaine Murray, I am not sure of the details of dental provision in Grampian, but surely fizzy drinks should not be sold in schools anywhere in Scotland. Surely sponsorship arrangements between schools and purveyors of chocolate should be banned. I will be interested to hear whether Mr McCabe agrees with that point. My final point concerns dentistry in sparsely populated areas. My dentist, Mr Gill, provides dentistry to more than 1,000 patients in the  Ardnamurchan area. He retired to the area from Liverpool and is a fine fellow. However, he earns too little to access commitment payments, seniority payments or even assistance with continuing professional development. I put Mr Gill's case to the minister's predecessor. I hope that Mr Gill and others who are trying to provide a dental service in sparsely populated areas in Grampian, Highland or anywhere else will receive a better deal than they did under the previous shower—I mean, previous lot.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Am I right in saying that standing orders require a reasonable balance in the selection of questions between members of Executive and non-Executive parties? If so, could you explain which side of the fence the contributions of Mr Raffan and Mr Gorrie come from, and whether they display the good will and mutual trust that I believe are referred to in the partnership agreement and are the hallmark of the new relationship between the Liberals and their Labour counterparts?

I do not think that any member has argued any of the premises that the minister has outlined. Scientific advice must be accepted, but what is the scientific advice that underlies the current regime? If more research proves that the 20 micrograms per gram test is overprotective, will the Scottish Executive and the FSA argue that the level should be raised?

I hope that it is in order for me to begin by mentioning Rhoda Grant, who served in the first session of the Scottish Parliament and is not with us today. I know that she made a solid contribution to the Rural Development Committee, particularly in respect of the matter that we are debating. We look forward to seeing who replaces her on the committee, especially as I understand that in Labour MSP circles it is known as the sin bin. Perhaps if Rhoda Grant had come third rather than second in the election she might have aspired to ministerial office. Sadly, that was not to be. Today's debate concerns an issue that has been debated often in committee. I welcome the opportunity to raise it in the chamber, because at stake here is the future of the scallop industry in Scotland. The Rural Development Committee has had the benefit of advice from fishermen throughout Scotland, from so-called scientific experts, from European officials and from the FSA. It is abundantly clear that unless we reach a fair solution to this problem with all the bodies involved the future of scallop fishing in Scotland will be at risk. I quoted from a letter from Mr Paul Gallagher, a scallop fisherman who has lobbied the Parliament about this matter. He has demonstrated that between the time when a scallop is caught and removed from the sea and the time when it tests positive for amnesic shellfish poisoning and the box closes there is a gap of about 10 days. During that period, scallops continue to be fished and eaten. Mr Gallagher has worked out that, over the relevant period of approximately four years, if an average of 30 boxes were closed each year, 30 times 50 tonnes—or 1,500 tonnes—of scallops that were supposedly above the limit were consumed. On the basis of a portion size of three scallops per meal, he has computed that 1,500 tonnes represents 9.6 million individual meals of scallops from areas where some scallops have proved to be over the limit. If 9.6 million such meals have been consumed, why has there not been one reported case of amnesic shellfish poisoning? Like the minister, we all support public health measures and believe that we must take a responsible approach. However, on the basis of the existing evidence and the figure of 9.6 million meals to which I referred, it seems abundantly clear that the statistical likelihood is that someone should have become ill during the four years in  which this regime has been in force. That has not been the case. The only logical conclusion is that the existing regime is far more stringent than is necessary to protect public health. I hope that this Parliament acts on argument rather than assertion—unlike the situation that I observed over the last four years. If the Parliament believes that it should proceed by reasoned argument, the only conclusion will be that the current regime is unnecessary and—what is more—a serious threat to the continued livelihood of fishermen. Many of us doubt the requirement for the existing rule, but that rule is about to be tightened. The regime will be replaced by a regime that the FSA apparently recommended last October and November when it came before the Rural Development Committee. The new regime will impose limits that are four or five times more stringent than the one that has produced no cases of proven illness out of 10 million meals. What will be the effect of that? According to Hugh Allen of the Mallaig and North West Fishermen's Association, the effect will be to close down the scallop industry. The FSA has proposed an exemption from the directive, which would require either tiered testing or whole-product testing. However, the way in which that would operate would require fishing boats to sail every week to every box, sailing 500 miles just to get a sample, incurring massive extra cost and a massive reduction in the profitability of each boat. Under the new regime, boxes will not remain open until it is proven that the scallops there are perhaps lightly affected. They have to be closed unless there is evidence that the scallops are not infected. Fishermen will have to fish all the boxes to bring back scallops for testing. Only if that is done in between one and seven days will the scallop box be allowed to stay open. It is clear what is required. The minister must meet the Scottish Scallop Fishermen's Association, which met yesterday, I understand. I hope that the minister and his colleague Mr Finnie, or Mr Wilson, will meet the industry. I hope that the minister will undertake to do that to find a way forward. The research that the Scottish Executive Environment and Rural Affairs Department said was to be commissioned into the biochemistry of scallops must be commissioned. I understand that that research has been blocked by the FSA or, at least, that the FSA is dragging its feet—despite the fact that it was instructed many months ago and the fact that the need for research was demonstrated last October, at the very latest, in this Parliament. The methodology on which this ridiculous, more stringent testing regime is based is absurd. It assumes 12 scallops per portion—complete  nonsense. It assumes that evidence applies to scallops when the evidence came not from scallops from the west coast of Scotland, but from mussels from the coast of Labrador. What is that about? How on earth can any scientist draw conclusions on whether or not Scottish scallops are safe to eat when all the evidence comes from another species altogether? That species has different biology, different habits—it does not move—and different scientific reactions involving the differing chemicals such as domoic acid. There needs to be scientific research and there needs to be discussion and debate. Until those things happen, there must be no regime that is more stringent than the current one. I invite the minister to undertake that no more stringent regime will be put in place until all the things that the industry is calling for are put in place.

We all acknowledge the need to protect public health. However, is the minister aware of a letter from Paul Gallagher—a scallop fisherman—which appeared recently in the Fishing News ? That letter pointed out that, over the period during which the current regime has been in force—namely, the past four years—there was a gap of 10 days between the catching of scallops that tested positive for ASP and the closure of the box from whence they came. That means that a huge quantity of scallops that apparently were a risk to public health has been consumed. Is the minister aware that Mr Gallagher has estimated that 9.6 million meals of such scallops have been consumed? Is he also aware that there has not been a single case of ASP, despite 9.6 million meals of apparently bad scallops being eaten over the past four years?

Will the minister give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether the A82 between Tarbet and Inverarnan is an urgent priority for improvement and should be included in the next round of trunk road improvements in 2003-04. (S1O-6705)

That answer shows that fudge remains the Executive's favourite confection. Is the minister aware that temporary traffic lights have been in place on the A82 for more than a decade? Is that acceptable? Does he consider that a period in excess of a decade can properly be described as "temporary"? Does he agree that people and businesses in the west Highlands require a proper, normal trunk road if they are to realise their potential?

Will the minister give way?

Why is it that countries such as France implement PSOs without such an endless series of reviews?

Along with other members, I attended the presentation at Edinburgh City Chambers that HITRANS gave on its imaginative  and ingenious proposals. The presentation was truncated from an hour to 30 minutes, perhaps to take into account the average attention span of MSPs. The basic idea was that if we can increase the frequency of flights between islands in the Highlands and Islands and from there to Edinburgh, Glasgow and, indeed, London, there would be an increase in passenger numbers, which would be likely to bring down the price of tickets for flights. Moreover, flights would be available at times that were more convenient, as the motion points out. We could then have something that more closely approximated an integrated transport system and we could create the virtuous circle to which Tavish Scott referred. My understanding is that the next step for HITRANS is to discuss the proposal with the carriers. It will be interesting to see what emerges from that, because I suspect that it might be difficult to persuade the carriers that the ingenious HITRANS model would be workable. The implementation of the proposals would require the application of PSOs. I disagree with the notion that that would create an insuperable difficulty. If that were the case, how does France manage to have so many PSOs while Scotland has so few? It is relevant to argue that a prosperous and successful Highlands and Islands Airports Ltd would help to ensure cheaper and more frequent flights within the islands and from the islands to the mainland. If HIAL can increase its revenue and reduce its costs, that would enable the whole operation to work more efficiently and effectively. I have two further points. First, I referred in a speech during an earlier debate to the private finance initiative. I will not repeat what I said, except to refer to two matters. The Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee made comments and recommendations on PFI in paragraphs 210 to 214 of its tourism report, but we are still waiting for a response from the Executive. However, Lewis Macdonald told me just this afternoon that the Executive has ruled out buying out the HIAL PFI. Will he say whether the Executive is considering buying out the offending PFI clauses, so to speak? The first of those clauses punishes success, because PFI repayments increase as passenger numbers increase. The second clause prevents HIAL from developing the retail opportunities in Inverness airport. Is the Executive contemplating, in the Labour manifesto or otherwise, buying out those clauses and replacing the rising annual payment with a flat-line payment that would give certainty and the possibility of better investment for the future? My second point is that the Civil Aviation Authority has lumbered HIAL with a wholly  inappropriate regulatory regime. It is shocking that nothing has been done about that. I have two examples. Inverness airport was closed not so long ago because it had one airport traffic controller too few. One would think that bringing in an ATC from Aberdeen or Wick would solve that problem, but that is not the case. An ATC from those airports would have to do a three-month induction course even to be an assistant ATC at Inverness. Because it was short of one ATC, Inverness airport was closed for a day, which is ridiculous. One can understand the induction rule being applied at an airport like Heathrow, but not at one like Inverness. Why does Inverness airport have the same rules as one of the busiest airports in the world? I know that a review is taking place, but the current position is crazy. Why do we have to await the outcome of a Department for Transport review? My second example concerns Stornoway airport, which now must have two fire appliances to deal with the arrival of a new jet. The new jet has 50 seats, whereas the previous jet had 66 seats. Given that there are fewer passengers, why are two fire appliances needed instead of one? If Alasdair Morrison were here, I am sure that he would be keen to make that point. It seems that two fire appliances are needed because, although the new jet has fewer seats, it is slightly longer. The requirement for two fire appliances costs a huge amount of money—hundreds of thousands of pounds extra a year. The SNP would be determined to ensure that such inappropriate and unduly burdensome rules were removed. We could use the extra money to develop the additional routes for which members rightly argue.

Will the member give way.

I entirely agree with the virtuous-circle argument that Tavish Scott has advanced. Does he accept that the granting of a PSO to secure the Inverness to London Gatwick connection would support and facilitate the creation of such a virtuous circle?

The minister makes the valid point that, if the rules are changed, those who abided by the former rules may feel aggrieved. However, does she recognise that many clubs that developed their stadiums received substantial grants towards their costs from the Football Trust?  As that source of finance is simply no longer available, there is no level playing field.

Presiding Officer, his royal Wyness, grieving Celtic fans, ladies and gentlemen, I have no intention of gloating over certain recent events, although it is tempting. However, I am pleased to support the motion in Dennis Canavan's name and that the motion has attracted such a lot of support. The rule that would prevent Inverness Caley Thistle or Falkirk from achieving promotion to the SPL is based entirely on decisions that were taken in the 1990s, particularly 1994, when numbers were set in respect of membership of the various divisions. Those decisions, which require that SPL clubs have all-covered and all-seated stadia that hold 10,000 people, were made nearly a decade ago when attendances at matches were much higher than they are now. I will give some information about the first division, in which Inverness Caley Thistle currently plays. The club's current stadium has a seated stand that accommodates 2,290 people, 730 of whom can be accommodated under cover. The stadium has a total capacity of nearly 6,500. The balance of spectators are accommodated on terracing, most of which is not covered. The average attendances at first-division matches have been substantially lower than the 5,000 that was stipulated in the 1994 settlement agreement. It seems that clubs in the first division can get away with breaking the settlement agreement, but that that law must somehow be rigorously enforced in respect of the SPL. Surely that shows that the justification for the perpetuation of the system is unfounded. The rules are selectively enforced in the SPL but not enforced in the lower leagues. Karen Gillon mentioned safety. We all remember the Ibrox disaster of 1971 and the Hillsborough disaster of 1989. We all recognise that the rules were created to deal with safety and security at  grounds and that it was decided that all-seated grounds were the safest. We all agree with that, but there must be balance and there must be a limit. We must consider in that light the figures that were set at a different time. As Dennis Canavan said, there is an overwhelming case for considering the rules. In taking up the case with the minister and the SPL on behalf of a leading Inverness Caley Thistle supporter, I had a meeting with Lex Gold and Ian Blair, whom I thank for affording me the courtesy of a lengthy and full meeting. I believe that they would like clubs to be promoted on merit, but they are tied by the settlement agreement. The Parliament has a legislative role to play and it can take action. Elaine Murray is the last minister in the Scottish Executive whom I would accuse of committing a professional foul, but I believe that such a foul was committed in the reply that I received from her in which she indicated that the criteria for promotion to the SPL are not an Executive responsibility. That is true, but those criteria are not the impediment. The impediment is the statutory provision and the interpretation of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 and the national planning policy guideline 11. The Executive can change those; if it does so, the numbers can change. At a time when Inverness Caley Thistle is looking forward to the possibility of competing in Europe next year, it would be a bitter and unacceptable irony if the club could not even compete in the Scottish Premier League. I hope that the Executive will take appropriate action to ensure that that becomes a possibility.

Presiding Officer, I apologise that I will be unable to stay until the end of this debate because of important engagements that were undertaken before I was asked to speak on this debate. [MEMBERS: "Aw."] Yes, I know that that is a great disappointment to members.  Dr Simpson said that Scotland is at the pioneering edge in the breeding of fish. He may tell that to the people in the Ardtoe marine fin fish farming research institute, which is facing closure. It is the only institute dedicated to such research into aquaculture in Britain. Tavish Scott is shaking his head, but I am afraid that he is wrong. That institute carries out research on halibut and is the only institute of marine fin fish farming in Scotland.

I think that Tavish Scott is wrong, but let us move on. Marine fish farming is essential to the Scottish economy and we need research on that, but the facility at Ardtoe has been closed down by new Labour. How does that fit in with "A Smart, Successful Scotland"? Yesterday evening, I attended a meeting in Carrbridge. Many of the people there would not recognise the glowing picture of the rural economy that Iain Gray painted. They were concerned about losing services, and particularly about losing 42 auxiliary fire stations throughout the Highland fire brigade area. Thank goodness we beat the Executive on 8 January, when it wanted to deny the people of those communities the opportunity to take their case to their own Parliament by submitting a petition. What I heard about last night was the threat to pharmacists in rural Scotland from the Department of Trade and Industry and the Office of Fair Trading report, which is fundamentally flawed, as all members who participated in the Health and Community Care Committee debate understood. The people in Carrbridge were also concerned about the threat to rural sub-post offices from the withdrawal of benefits and the introduction of a card that seems to be designed for banks to take over business from post offices. We heard about that in a recent members' business debate that no Labour members other than the minister bothered to attend. I have asked people in rural Scotland about the state of the infrastructure. What investment has there been in the A75, the A82, the A96 or the A9 over the past four years? We have had the pre-election announcement of minor tinkering. We have had a route action plan for the A82, where there is a stretch along Loch Lomondside that has been single track with traffic lights for well over a decade. The Executive has suddenly realised that there is a problem, but I suppose that even Rip van Winkel had to wake up eventually. The Executive has let down the aspirations of rural Scotland in that respect.  The exchange rate is a serious problem, particularly for the mainstays of the rural economy. Not only does it impact on exporters, including some in Inverness in my constituency who have gone out of business because of the competitive disadvantage that they have suffered—an engineering firm with competitors in the euro zone finds itself at a distinct disadvantage—but it affects those engaged in farming and in tourism. As tourists, we are getting used to travelling to euro zone countries without having to change currency. We just spend our euros in Germany and then if we happen to go to Ireland, as my wife did at the weekend for the British-Irish Inter-Parliamentary Body, we can take the same currency with no exchange costs and no hassle. It is a great advantage. We do not have such an advantage because we are thirled to the pound that Mr Davidson's party is so fond of retaining. What is the effect on the forestry industry? Leading Scottish entrepreneurs that have been associated with the forestry industry for centuries are setting up new businesses not in Scotland but in the Baltics. How does that demonstrate the success of the stable macroeconomic regime? Incidentally, on that subject, what is the comparison between the interest and inflation rates of the developed economies in the west? We have not heard much in the way of comparative data in that regard. In fact, the UK has relatively high interest rates among the countries with which Scotland would compare herself. What about the burden of indirect taxation?

No, I will not. I will deal with Richard Simpson later when I come to talk about the private finance initiative and the firefighters. As far as indirect taxation is concerned, the burden on the whisky industry is crippling. Why do we in Scotland have excise duty rates that are double or triple the level in other European countries? Furthermore, why is the tax—which is not based on the amount of alcohol in the drink—so much higher than the tax on wine in France, Spain and Italy? Is it because those countries look after their industry and because the UK does not really give two figs for the Scotch whisky industry? The UK was embarrassed into freezing the rate because of constant pressure, not least from the SNP. What about the impact of the aggregates tax, which will see £50 million leaving the country for the towns? What about Highland Council's campaign for a decent sustainability fund? Money is leaving many quarries in the Highlands, and we will not see the benefit of it because the Executive has reneged on its promise to provide us with even a reasonable fund.  Richard Simpson mentioned the slogan "People not profits". Of course, that specifically refers to PFI. One particular failing of the Labour party is its espousal of a policy that it has plagiarised from the Conservatives. For example, although the terminal at Inverness airport cost £9.6 million, the cost of the PFI contract over its life might come to £30 million even if there is no increase in passenger numbers. Furthermore, we have the ridiculous situation in which the more passengers that Inverness airport gets, the higher the PFI payments will be. It is also absurd that retail development at the airport terminal is prevented because of the terms of the PFI contract. Under Mr Neil's tutelage of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, the Parliament has said that the matter must be dealt with. We all know that that is true, but the Executive has not dealt with it, because it knows that doing so would be an admission that PFI is a failure. It puts excess, unreasonable and unfair profits ahead of people. Those profits could be used for public services, which is why the slogan "People not profits" is correct.

On a point of order, is it in order for the minister to take interventions to disturb the free flow of his reading from his brief?

You have not done anything.

I congratulate David Mundell on lodging the motion, which has received support from the three parties that are represented in the chamber and from Dennis Canavan, who is also present. I apologise for not being here for the beginning of the debate, but I had to attend to a call of nature. Like other members, I was alerted to the problem by local postmasters, such as Cathy Walker of Kingsmills, who is here, and Mike Dow of Hilton. Like Mary Scanlon, we have attempted to highlight the problems that many members have mentioned. One problem, which I do not think has been mentioned, is that one of the options—the basic bank account—could result in pensioners going into overdraft. If they do, on a pension of about £90 a week, the overdraft charge would be about one third of their total weekly income. How can a Labour Government allow that to occur?  Of the three options—the POCA, the basic bank account and the current account—the POCA should, if I may use a pun, be the red-hot option. It has many advantages, which many members have canvassed for. However, rather than rehearse the social function or the £380 million that, I think, the Government wasted on the horizon project—perhaps it should be called the "lost horizon project"—I will dwell on the theme that has emerged from the debate. That is that a level playing field is all that is wanted, although the Government—not just the DWP—has actively discouraged people from the POCA. I sympathise with Allan Wilson. I am sure that he would rather be back in the debate that we had yesterday on the Agriculture Holdings (Scotland) Bill. He is a man alone today. "A Man Alone" was one of the songs from "The Ipcress File", which, as I am sure members will recall, had a fast-moving plot and a lot of casualties at the end. I hope that, when the minister makes his closing remarks, he will not be a casualty, because we get on fine with him. However, there is a serious point to be made. We have all spoken with the same voice and used similar arguments; we all want the same things. However, the Executive minister who is present must defend a position that is contrary to what we argue for. It is a position that has been adopted by a Labour Government at Westminster. When will the Scottish Executive stand up to the London Government? When will it make it explicit that it will stand up for the clearly expressed views of at least three parties on an issue that is of huge social concern? When will it voice the fears that we have expressed about the ill thought-out nature of the proposals and the fact that the Labour Government seems to be hellbent on pursuing the policy regardless of the objections that have been made? There are about 300 signatories to the early day motion at Westminster.

To conclude—I obediently follow the Presiding Officer's every direction—I hope that Allan Wilson will not obfuscate, evade and avoid, but instead will give Parliament an answer to my question: Will he stand up to the London Government on the matter, which is of great importance to many of our constituents?

As someone who served on a mountain rescue team for the best part of two decades, I am aware that not all mountain rescue team members have a radio handset. Will the First Minister undertake to ensure that, when the new frequency comes in, every member of every rescue team in Scotland will be properly equipped with a handset? From what he has said, the First Minister is aware that the key problem is core funding. Will he acknowledge that we are receiving a magnificent service on the cheap from a group of people who, according to health and safety rules, should be equipped more frequently with new ropes, harnesses and other equipment? That aspect in particular increases the need for a proper level of budgeting for our rescue teams. Will he provide that level of support to our rescue teams in Scotland?

I add my appreciation of the Rural Development Committee clerks, who were led on the bill by Mark Brough, whose work was of outstanding quality. I also say how much I enjoyed taking the evidence and meeting all those involved, particularly the farmers, and learning about the experiences and difficulties that they have had in the past. The late Donald Dewar remarked on the plight of tenant farmers. He was impressed that action was needed and I am proud that action has been taken. The bill has undergone more change in its passage through the Parliament than any other bill that I can think of—at least, more than any other Executive bill that I can think of. To a large extent, that has been because of the campaigning efforts of people who are watching the debate today and—dare I say it—some members, who have pursued some of the issues doggedly. Those  issues include securing a share of terminal value for tenants, which was not in the bill as introduced. They include improvements in the rent review to take account of the economic potential of a farm, which was not quite in the bill as introduced. They also include the ability to assign which, although it is too narrow for my liking, is a step forward in creating an opportunity for tenants who wish to retire to do so. They also include the setting aside of post-lease agreements and write-down agreements and the establishment of anti-avoidance measures. Those issues were all developed by hard work in the committee and I congratulate all who played a part in undertaking that work on the committee. There will need to be a period in which we find out whether the bill delivers the improvements that I would like and whether the bill will end the economic stagnation about which the Scottish Tenant Farmers Action Group talked in its excellent initial submission to the Parliament. One of the spokesmen of that group said about the bill in today's newspapers: "What started life as an insipid bill creating new-style farm tenancies ... has evolved into a meaningful bill laying the foundation block for real reform in the future." It seems no more than common sense that, as the Parliament has carried out a piece of work through which the lot of the secure tenant farmer will be significantly improved, there should now be a period of calm in which we can assess the effectiveness of the measures that we will pass today. It is up to all parties—but most notably the landowners—to use the new vehicles in the way in which we have intended, not to seek to circumvent them or pervert their purposes. If all parties use those vehicles as intended, many of those who wanted to go further and along the route that Alex Fergusson mentioned may not be as determined or keen to do so if they feel that the mischief that has caused the difficulty in their cases has been resolved. That is why we need a period—the next year or so—over which to see the bill's effect before it would be correct to go further. That is a commonsense statement. I hope that all those who have played a major part in the debate will welcome it.

I mean going further in the way that I have described today in relation to a variety of the issues on which I have spoken, such as the ability to have a general right to assign or ensuring that no tenants may face eviction because we refuse to take steps that allow that to be avoided. I hope that the use of subordinate legislation powers could be considered in order to protect any tenants who may face eviction, such as the 60  tenants referred to during our consideration of amendments earlier this afternoon. I take it that Mr Fergusson is referring to the absolute right to buy. I was pleased to take part in the debates on that subject at stage 2. We put the argument strongly and, when I spoke, it was, I think, the longest recorded speech of the Parliament—I am not saying that it was necessarily the most enthralling. One must recognise that when we cannot succeed in obtaining a majority to support us following a debate, it is pointless merely to have a rerun of the same debate at stage 3. We did not do that, because we wished to devote more time today to other arguments. I think that that was a wise decision. In the period ahead we will want to reflect on the work that has been done now, and I am delighted that the SNP has played a fairly major role in winning for tenants in Scotland a better deal than they have enjoyed in the past. Parliament can be proud of itself in passing the Agricultural Holdings (Scotland) Bill today.

Perhaps the major defect of the 1991 act was the fact that it was circumvented. Its purpose was frustrated and landowners and their agents used various devices, such as write-down agreements and post-lease agreements, to pervert the purpose for which the 1991 act was passed. It therefore seems logical and necessary that the bill—the purpose of which is, in part, to set up new vehicles that can be used in the tenanted sector—ensures that that does not happen to the new vehicles, otherwise we could rightly be criticised for failing to achieve our purpose. Amendment 42 would quite simply prohibit any attempts that might be made to disapply the rules and regulations that we are setting up for the new SLDT and LDT vehicles. The operative provision is subsection (2), which states that "any term of the lease or the agreement which purports to provide that any right conferred on the tenant, or obligation imposed on the landlord, by this Act does not apply to the tenancy is ... of no effect." I hope that all members will agree to the  amendment, as it is essential that, if the new vehicles are to be effective, they will act as we intend them to act and will not be overridden by smart lawyers' fancy agreements, which we have seen in the past. I move amendment 42.

I have listened with interest in the hope that there might be an argument against amendment 42, but I did not hear any such argument. Amendment 42 is a simple amendment that would provide for a non-contracting-out section. The amendment says that the "right conferred on the tenant, or obligation imposed on the landlord, by this Act" cannot be contracted out of. I appreciate that the minister was distracted momentarily. However, he did not provide a single example of a right that the bill confers on tenants that he thinks the landlord should be able to overturn and subvert. The serious point to be made is that that is exactly what happened under the 1991 act. In a way, it is because of that fact that we are in the chamber today.

I disagree with the minister. I am not sure that that was indeed an example, as the minister did not say to which section he referred or  to which right or period of notice. The bill contains no provision that the tenant would willingly wish to contract out of. Amendment 42 speaks for itself. If it is not agreed to and successful attempts are made by landowners to pervert the purposes of the act, that will be a result of the absence of the new section that amendment 42 would have inserted. I hope that the minister is confident in the arguments that he has made this afternoon.

Briefly, I confirm that the SNP will oppose amendment 130. We feel that it should have been introduced at an earlier stage, particularly to allow its implications to be considered by the Subordinate Legislation Committee.

No, I want to move it. Amendment 36 is my moment of triumph. [ Laughter. ]  Amendment 36 moved—[Fergus Ewing].

I am delighted that the Executive will accept amendment 36—I feel as if we are now making some progress. I want in speaking to the amendments to emphasise that the committee decided to support the measure by a vote of six to five. Rhoda Grant lodged the amendment that the Executive now feels would be dangerous and would have severely adverse consequences for the sector. However, the principle that Rhoda Grant supported at stage 2 and which the SNP continues to support at stage 3 is very simple: secure tenants in Scotland should have security of tenure. They have an asset that they cannot pass on or transact, but those who hold commercial leases for shops and offices are able to transact that asset by selling it on. The principle would create a market that would allow those tenants who Ross Finnie described as being "stuck" to become unstuck and able to sell off their assets. It would also mean that they would be able to create opportunities for new tenants to come into the market. I advance my argument in such terms because I understand that certain Conservative members generally support markets and the ability to transact with assets, but I suspect that will not apply to the agricultural sector today. My second serious point is that the Scottish Tenant Farmers Action Group supports the combined effects of my amendments. At a meeting yesterday John Kinnaird—the National Farmers Union of Scotland's new president—also supported them. I will explain the basis of his reasoning. He believes that a combination of amendments 31, 139, 36 and 138 would allow assignation with compensation to the outgoing tenant, and would give the landlord the benefit of conversion.  By mirroring section 2 provisions—which allow conversion from a secure tenancy to a LDT—we are saying that the incoming tenant would acquire a 25-year LDT. As John Kinnaird acknowledged, that would mean that there was something in this for everyone; the landlord would acquire the right to vacant possession. We lodged amendment 31 because of the argument that if that provision was not contained in the bill, we would be creating what might amount to a perpetual tenancy, so the landlord would never have any prospect of getting back vacant possession. I do not intend to move amendments 33, 34 and 35 because we have in effect debated those amendments, which were reflected in amendments 9, 10 and 12, if my memory serves me correctly. The provision that is contained in my amendments is vital for tenant farmers. If we really want to give secure tenants in Scotland a better deal, we must give them the opportunity to free up their assets so they can retire, and so that new people can come into the farming sector in Scotland.

Amendment 28 would amend the terms of section 47A that create a right to compensation for yielding vacant possession. That provision was introduced at stage 2 by a narrow  majority of six votes to five. The SNP was among that majority, and the Conservatives were in the minority. We are delighted that interest groups, notably the Scottish Tenant Farmers Action Group and the NFUS, supported the introduction of that measure in their many representations. It will have a substantial impact on tenant farmers who are presently unable to retire because there is no facility for them to yield the value that is inherent in the difference between vacant possession and land that is subject to secure tenancy. However, the purpose of the amendment is to tighten up the provisions in section 47A(2) to make it clear that when the landlord proposes to sell the land and wishes to do so with vacant possession, he or she must give written notice to the tenant. Also, when the tenant agrees to quit the land, the landlord and the tenant must enter into a written agreement. No compulsion is involved because it is up to the parties, if they ultimately reach an agreement, as to whether the sale goes ahead. However, the amendment makes it clear that if there is to be a sale with vacant possession, there must be an agreement in writing to that effect after the landlord has given notice. I move amendment 28.

I press amendment 28.

Compensation would be computed on the basis of the value of the improvement to the incoming tenant. The Scottish Tenant Farmers Action Group and the NFUS have argued that, in the past, improvements carried out where grant assistance has been available have resulted in the landlord receiving the benefit. The SNP therefore welcomes amendments 91 to 94 and 135. My colleague Richard Lochhead raised the issue at stage 2. I am delighted that the Executive appears to have adopted the methodology that I suggested at stage 2. Not surprisingly, I will support the product.

I hear what the minister says, but I am not sure that further backdating would cause unintended consequences. For example, matters may have progressed and notices may have been issued that were not triggered by the revelation of the Executive's legislative intentions. A limited partnership may have been brought to an end in the normal course of commerce—perhaps because the duration of the lease ended—and other arrangements may already have been made with a new let to a third party. In such circumstances, the provisions proposed in amendment 111, particularly new section 58A(5), protect that position and prevent the tenant from proceeding with a spurious grievance. Only those tenants with a genuine grievance would be entitled to apply to the Land Court. That court would be entitled to make an order only if it is satisfied that the landlord's behaviour was effectively triggered by the bill and designed to circumvent the Parliament's avowed intentions. I heard the minister's earlier argument, but I do not accept what he said. As I said, I have some fairly substantive legal comments to make, although I may be preying on the Presiding Officer's patience.

Very well. I am especially pleased that you have realised who I am, Presiding Officer.

I anticipated that the Executive or the Conservatives might object that my proposal contravenes the European convention on human rights. I do not know whether that argument will be advanced, but I understand that ministers have received from the Scottish Tenant Farmers Action Group a substantive opinion from Sir Crispin Agnew of Lochnaw QC, an acknowledged expert in this field. Citing the relevant authorities, he makes it abundantly clear that the ECHR would provide no comfort to any challenge to the provision. As ministers have received a copy of the opinion, I will spare members a word-for-word recitation of it.

I hear that the Executive is not advancing that argument, but perhaps the Conservatives are.

Perhaps the Conservatives have eschewed an argument that others may make. The Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors has made hugely exaggerated claims based on the ECHR, so the topic is serious. However, I am pleased that all parties that have an interest in the debate appear to recognise that the ECHR is not a problem. It would be wholly unacceptable for the Parliament to fail to take a measure that could prevent the possible eviction of secure tenants. I thought that the ministers had recognised that we should avoid such evictions at all costs, so I am surprised that they will not go the extra mile to do so. I hope that they will reconsider their position. If the Scottish Tenant Farmers Action Group is correct, the future of 60 families is at stake. It would be ridiculous for us to accept the principle of preventing evictions but to fail to put that into practice. Time will tell whether landlords go through with eviction, but some of those who do may not be caught by the Executive. The Executive's initial change of stance is welcome. I hope that, before we vote on amendment 111A, ministers will reflect on what I have said. This is a serious matter that may affect a number of families in our farming communities.

I speak to amendment 111A in the knowledge that, although this might not be the most important provision of the bill in the long term, in the short term it could have the most concrete impact on a number of secure tenants throughout Scotland. The matter was debated at stage 2. Shortly before the stage 2 debate on 4 February, a great deal of publicity was attracted by the unfortunate  event of a number of landowners issuing notices to quit or notices of dissolution to seek to bring limited partnerships to an end for, it is believed, the express purpose of circumventing the bill's aims.

No—it is too early. At stage 2, I lodged an amendment to backdate to the date of the bill's publication the provision to entitle those secure tenants to apply to the Land Court. I argued that 16 September was a reasonable date to pick because that was the date on which the bill was published. However, I pointed out that, on the day on which I spoke to the amendment—and only on that day—it had been drawn to my attention that, prior to 16 September, there were also a number of cases of secure tenants receiving notices to quit. Had I been aware that there was a serious problem before 16 September, I would have argued for an earlier date at that point. At stage 2, the minister was good enough to say that he would return to the matter at stage 3. He has now chosen to adopt the amendment that I lodged at stage 2. I hope to take the minister a further mile—or back a further six months in this case—towards what I think would be a fair, just and reasonable result. I do not start from the premise that all landlords are bad and intend to carry out some sort of clearance of secure tenants. That is manifestly not the case. When issuing notices, many landlords said—either themselves or through agents—that that was a legal procedure and that they intended to enter into new arrangements once the legislation was in place. In other words, they suggested to secure tenants that the notice was being issued for certain legal purposes but that there was no intention to seek to go through with an eviction. In many other cases, however, that was not done. In one case, notice was delivered on the eve of 4 February—in another case, it was even delivered in the early hours—and the tenants had been asked to stay in their house to receive the notice. In many cases, notices to terminate the limited partnership were served to tenants who faced not only the loss of their livelihood and their business, but eviction from their house. It was a double whammy. According to the Scottish Tenant Farmers Action Group, around 60 such notices were issued between April and September 2002. If the Executive has accepted in principle that tenants should have the right to go to court to argue that it is unreasonable for them to be evicted and for new tenancy arrangements to be  entered into, surely it must accept that the provision should date back to 16 April 2002, which was the date of the publication of the draft bill. It is perfectly clear that some landowners, acting between April and September last year, before the bill was introduced, took it to be the case that there would be a pre-emptive right to buy, as promised in the consultation paper.

I will certainly give way at this stage. I will also be happy to give way to Sylvia Jackson, now that we have moved on a wee bit, if she still wishes to intervene.

With respect, I think that I have fully explained that. The reason is simple. At stage 2, I expressly said—I have checked my remarks—that I had chosen 16 September because that was the date of the introduction of the bill. As I pointed out in the course of our stage 2 discussions, I was made aware—

I ask the minister to hang on a second, as I am responding to Alex Fergusson's point. Having lodged the relevant stage 2 amendment, I was made aware that there were a number of cases—I did not know at the time that it was about 60—that would not be caught and in which tenants might, in extremis, face eviction from their home. That is why I did not push back the date from September to April at stage 2. I hope that that position will be accepted. I am not sure whether any other members wish to intervene. Perhaps Dr Jackson wants to intervene.

Well, okay.

The figure of 60 was cited by the Scottish Tenant Farmers Action Group. I believe that there may have been some dissolutions prior to April, but there has to be some dividing line. The reason why 16 April should be chosen is clear: it was the day on which the Executive's legislative intentions were published. Before that date, it was not clear that  the Executive was planning to proceed with a statutory right to buy. That was the date when consternation was caused and from which some land agents and advisers started advising clients that, in order to ensure that they could get vacant possession back under limited partnerships, they should issue notices of dissolution. The relevant date is 14 April, which is why I am arguing for it to be specified in the bill.

Amendment 79A deals with the way in which the land is to be valued. We all accept the fact that land that is subject to a secure tenancy, on which the pre-emptive right to buy will apply, is of lesser value than land that has vacant possession. Typically, a farm that is subject to a tenancy under the 1991 act might be worth half or 60 per cent of its value if it had vacant possession. Therefore, it is sensible that the valuer is directed to take account of the existence of a secure tenancy. Although it could be said that the original section 31, as agreed at stage 2, allowed that to happen, I believe that the best approach to legislative drafting is, "When in doubt, spell it out." That is what the Executive has sought to do, and we welcome the aim behind amendment 79. The purpose of amendment 79A, which I lodged as a manuscript amendment after I saw the Executive amendment, which was lodged on Friday, is to cure what I believe is a defect in amendment 79. Amendment 79 will require the valuer to take account of "when the seller would in the normal course of events have been likely to recover vacant possession of the land from the tenant". The point of secure tenancies is that they have the capacity to be perpetual. Provided that they are not in irritancy and that they pay the rent and practise good husbandry, tenants with 1991 act tenancies can pass on the tenure to their families. That has happened, generation unto generation. Members of the Scottish Tenant Farmers Action Group advised me of a lease that has been in one family for more than 300 years, which means that the family's progenitors had the happy experience of farming the land when Scotland was independent. I fully expect such families to farm the land when Scotland is once again independent. That demonstrates graphically the serious point that 1991 act tenancies have the capacity to be—and might well be—perpetual, but amendment 79 does not say that and assumes that the landlord will recover vacant possession. That is the only possible interpretation of the words that I quoted. The valuer is being invited to make a valuation on the basis of a premise that we must accept is flawed. The aim of amendment 79A is to acknowledge  that, although the reasonable expectation in the normal course of events might be that the landlord will recover vacant possession, that will not necessarily happen. The minister said that it would be wrong not to take account of other factors, such as the tenant's physical well-being or otherwise. I do not consider such a factor appropriate for a valuer to consider. For the reasons that Alasdair Morgan suggested in his characteristically cogent fashion—

I see that he agrees with that part. It would be inappropriate for a valuer to perform a medical test on a tenant or to obtain medical evidence, so I did not suggest that. I am surprised that the minister introduced that red herring into the debate. The minister has an amendment with a serious technical defect. If that is not corrected, it will skew the valuation process, because it will take as a basis the false premise that 1991 tenancies will end.

I move, as an amendment to amendment 79, line 2, manuscript amendment 79A, to leave out from first "the" to end of line 3 and insert, (if at all) the seller would, in the normal course of events, have a reasonable expectation of becoming entitled to recover vacant possession through the termination of the 1991 Act tenancy, having regard to— (i) the age of the tenant; and (ii) which persons (if any) would be, or would in any circumstances have been, entitled to succeed to the estate on intestacy by virtue of the Succession (Scotland) Act 1964 (c.41);.

Is the minister aware that yesterday the Scottish Tenant Farmers Action Group estimated that around 60 notices were issued between April and September last year? If he accepts that in good faith as likely to be a fair estimate, the figure represents a serious justification for supporting amendment 111A and backdating the provision to April rather than September.

The minister's latter remarks have clarified the difference between amendments 67 and 102, which is accepted. We will support both amendments.

I will refer briefly to amendment 62, which deals with the new remedy for the  tenant of retaining rent where the Land Court has held that the landlord is in breach of his obligations. My colleague Richard Lochhead pressed that at stage 2, when he argued for a right of retention as a remedy. I welcome amendment 62, and the SNP will support it, but I wonder whether the minister, in his closing remarks—or now if he wishes—could clarify one important point. The new remedy will apply only where the landlord has been declared legally to be in breach of his obligations by the Land Court. That means that the tenant has to make an application to the Land Court, which will involve an element of expense and delay. In the case of Alexander v the Royal Hotel (Caithness) Ltd, Lord Gill found in favour of the tenant. I referred to that during stage 2, at column 4090 of the Official Report of the Rural Development Committee. Lord Gill stated: "when a tenant defends an action for payment of rent by asserting a right of retention, his liability for payment of the rent is not in issue but is on the contrary admitted. All that he is doing is inviting the court to exercise in his favour the discretionary equitable power". Under common law, the tenant has a recognised right to withhold rent. That right exists before it has been judicially declared by a court. If a landlord is not fulfilling his part of the bargain, the tenant is entitled not to fulfil his part of the bargain in exchange. Does that common law position remain in force, or will it be in any way diluted or amended by amendment 62? My amendments 64A and 100A bring us to the important topic of slurry towers. The amendments relate to dairy farmers who are required by enactments of law to purchase and have constructed slurry towers. That may be because the farms are located in nitrate vulnerable zones, or because of other requirements in relation to purity of water. I understand that current practice is that the tenant farmer almost always has to pay the cost of the slurry tower, and that there may or may not be a grant of up to 40 per cent. That law is already in force. There is no provision, as I understand it, that the landlord must make a contribution towards meeting that cost. However, I believe that under section 5(2) of the 1991 act, the landlord may already be under a legal duty to provide that as fixed equipment in the sector in which the farmer is farming—in this case, the dairy sector. I am not sure that that has been judicially considered and determined; the practice is that the tenant, not the landlord, meets the burden. The effect of amendments 64A and 100A would be to make it clear that the landlord must pay for the costs that are required because of our commitment to environmental standards. I would welcome the minister's comments on that serious issue. I gather that my colleague Stewart  Stevenson will make further reference to the matter. My other amendments—29, 30 and 137—were lodged before the Executive amendments were lodged. They were designed to achieve the purposes that the minister has described; I will therefore not move them.

The SNP supports amendment 58 and opposes amendment 14. We support amendment 58 because it leaves intact the  important provision under section 9(4)(d) that, when there is a rent review under the new vehicle of limited duration tenancies, it will be possible to take account of "the current economic conditions in the relevant sector of agriculture." That is a major step forward for the tenant and I hope that it will address the serious matter that emerges from an analysis of the Scottish Executive's own statistics about the relationship between rent and farm incomes over the past eight years, as is repeated in the relevant paper from the Scottish Parliament information centre, prepared by Tom Edwards. On page 10, the paper shows the relationship between rent and farm incomes between 1995 and 2001. It has emerged that, while rentals rose by a third in those years, farm incomes dropped by 60 per cent—more than half—over the same period. Although the Executive's statistical data on this topic may not be complete, it appears from the available data that there is a complete dislocation between the amount of rent paid and the amount that a farmer can make from the farm. If the current economic conditions are taken into account, that dislocation can and must come to an end. That is why my party supports the tenant in this matter.

The minister misrepresented the effect of amendments 9, 10 and 12 rather crassly. He said that, if those amendments were agreed to, the landlord would have to accept as an assignee someone whose financial standing he doubts. That would not be so. The landlord would have the right to establish that an assignee is not of the financial standing to be able to pay the rent or does not possess the capacity or the necessary skills and experience to maintain the land adequately. It is not a question of doubting or having to accept; it is a simple reversal of the onus of proof so that it rests on the landlord. I regard that as a step forward for the tenant. We will press amendment 9.

I do not agree that there is a case for amendments 7 or 8. However, amendment 6, which is sponsored by the Law Society, raises a serious point to which there cannot be any possible objection: if both landlord and tenant agree, an SLDT should be capable of being assigned. Amendment 6 would create the facility for that to occur, but it could not occur without the agreement of both parties. For that reason, we support, on this occasion, the Law Society's amendment 6, which is in Murdo Fraser's name. However, I do not promise that we will break the trend too frequently during the debate.

Amendments 9, 10 and 12 serve the same purpose. Section 7 provides for the assignation and subletting of limited duration tenancies and the amendments deal with the issue of the landlord's consent to any proposed assignation. It is important that, under the new vehicle of limited duration tenancies, tenants should have the freedom to assign their interests to another party. That is a freedom that is enjoyed, by and large, by commercial tenants of shops, offices and other commercial premises. The SNP simply believes that what is right for such businesses should also be right for the farming community and that we should not unduly constrain the tenant. The effect of the amendments would be to ensure that the onus of proof in relation to the vital commercial issue of withholding consent to an assignation should plainly rest on the landlord and that the landlord should be in a position to thwart the assignation of the tenant's interest under a limited duration tenancy only if there is clear evidence for doing so. Currently, the landlord can withhold consent if they are not satisfied on various issues. That is a subjective test. If the landlord declares that he is not satisfied, it is up to the tenant to demonstrate that the incoming tenant, or assignee, has the ability to pay the rent and maintain the land, and that they have the skills and experience required to maintain the land. I do not believe that the onus of proof should be on the tenant. Furthermore, such issues can be used as negotiation tools in relation to other matters, and it would be wrong to give landlords that extra power. Equity demands that the tenant should have as wide a degree of freedom as possible in matters relating to the assignation of limited duration tenancies. My three amendments would achieve that. I move amendment 9.

I should begin by declaring a potential interest as a member of the Law Society of Scotland. However, I never quite had the courage to practise in the area of agricultural holdings law because, as the minister has pointed out, it is one of huge technical difficulty. I am sure that members will understand my approach in that regard. In amendment 45, the minister has proposed a cooling-off provision that differs from the provision in my amendment only in the length of time involved. I lodged amendment 5 because last week I was unsure whether the Executive was going to lodge such an amendment, although I had understood that it would do so. I am happy not to move amendment 5 and will support the Executive amendments in this regard. Throughout today's proceedings, the SNP will argue that tenants have had a poor deal over the past period and that they should have a better  deal. Our approach is to ensure that that happens, which is why we will oppose the Conservatives' amendment 4. Such a pattern might well emerge throughout the day.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer, further to the remarks made by the Deputy Minister for Parliament. The minister said that he takes exception to the statement that I made that the Executive amendments must have been deliberately withheld. Can he tell the chamber whether all of the 92 amendments were drafted on Friday? If that was not the case, they must have been deliberately withheld.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer, of which I gave you notice yesterday. We are to debate stage 3 of the Agricultural Holdings (Scotland) Bill today and we received 92 amendments to the bill from the Executive at  precisely 4.28 pm on Friday—two minutes before the deadline for lodging amendments. I understand that the Executive has offered an informal deadline of five days for lodging amendments. [ Interruption. ]

That informal deadline of five days has no clear status. I would like guidance on whether the Executive gave an undertaking to comply with that deadline by ensuring that all amendments were lodged by it, or whether it is merely an aspiration. The SNP accepts that, with issues that need extensive consultation and which are politically sensitive, compliance with the deadline might not always be possible, even with the best will in the world. However, the present situation is different. At least 90 per cent of the amendments are purely technical and one expects them to be agreed to unanimously. Why were those technical amendments not lodged by the five-day deadline? The clear and inescapable conclusion is that those 80 or 85 technical amendments were deliberately withheld until the last minute. The serious disadvantage of such action is that those with a serious interest in the topic have not had a proper opportunity to consult us and to ensure that we do our job properly. The consequence is that, without bad intent on anyone's part, we might pass bad law that is technically imperfect, because the Executive flouted its undertaking and deadline.

It is difficult and perhaps impossible for any sentient human not to feel some sympathy for the plight of Conservative MSPs, because they are led—if that is the right word—by Iain Duncan Smith. The surprising thing is why they chose to have—

I will not do so just now, but I will give way later to Sir James Douglas-Hamilton. [MEMBERS: "Lord James."] I am sorry that I demoted him. Why, instead of a leader, did they choose an acronym? Who knows what IDS is? What does he stand for? Could it be "in dire straits"? The prospects of the Conservatives getting anywhere in Scotland seem about as likely as those of hearing an extempore speech in the Parliament from George Lyon. It is absolutely clear that the Scottish Conservatives have no prospect of success. They are the Eddie the Eagle of Scottish politics. They are going nowhere, no one is  interested in what they say and no one understands their message. They have no relevance to the people of Scotland and no chance at the forthcoming election.

I did not expect a ringing endorsement of confidence in IDS from Lord James, and we did not get one. I wait with interest to see whether IDS will be unleashed on the Scottish electorate during the campaign, given reports that he is to be kept in a cupboard somewhere, away from the Scottish voters. That is a very wise decision, in my opinion. I want to talk about the total failure of this Executive to tackle the real problems in rural Scotland. Let us look at the mainstays of the economy. We see the fishing industry facing what is without doubt the worst crisis in history, as a result of the total failure of the UK to stand up for Scottish fishermen. The Prime Minister, Tony Blair, exemplified that failure in an article in the Daily Record on 4 December, in which he said that 14,000 jobs in Scotland were dependent on fishing, whereas, in fact, there are about 44,000. Tony Blair got it wrong by a factor of 300 per cent, which serves only to show his total lack of commitment to the fishing industry in Scotland. We were promised an aquaculture strategy, but instead have a framework document that says nothing and gives no commitment. The reason for that is that the Executive is scared of the small number of incessant critics of the aquaculture industry. Rather than recognise the huge potential of that industry and give it support, the Executive undermines it, despite the fact that its standards have improved—so much that Scottish farmed salmon has won the distinction of the Label Rouge in France. Rather than have a forward-looking forestry policy, the Executive practices studied inertia. It has totally failed to prepare the way for the wall of wood that we will see over the next few years. Farming policies are not really formulated here; policy decisions made here are seen only as policies from a north-British outpost of the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, as Jim Walker, former president of the National Farmers Union of Scotland, has pointed out again and again. All the major decisions are made by DEFRA, and there are worrying times ahead as we anticipate the prospect of Margaret Beckett and Lord Whitty, rather than Scottish  ministers, making decisions on the decoupling of the common agricultural policy. That situation can change only if, after 1 May, we have a Scottish Executive that will stand up for Scotland on every occasion—including standing up to the ministers at Westminster who have sold out our rural economy in the past four years. Responsibility for the Holyrood project rests with the Labour party. The decision to go ahead with it was made by Donald Dewar, but it was ratified in June 1999 by every Labour MSP and by most Liberal MSPs, despite the fact that Donald Dewar rejected advice about the site, the contractor and the architect. That project surely is a Lib-Lab folly. It is their responsibility, and that will become absolutely clear at the forthcoming election.

Will the member take an intervention?

The underlying theme of the debate is whether the documents that are before us amount to a package that is a survival kit or disaster relief. Members who have argued for the survival-kit option do not seem to have predicted confidently that we have before us an option that is likely to secure the survival of the white-fish fleet. There seems to be a lack of confidence that the proposals will achieve that objective, so I want to try to be constructive. The Rural Development Committee produced a report that has much to commend it. The report urged the Executive to explore all possible means of providing decommissioning funds that would reach crews and unsecured shoreside creditors. It is disappointing that the minister has not taken up that suggestion and although I do not wish to suggest that skippers will not be willing to assist their crews—I am sure that the vast majority will—it is insufficient simply to ask and hope that they be generous.

Oh, all right . [Laughter.]

No 1; I am afraid that skippers are generally not employers because, by and large, crew members are self-employed, so the premise of the first question was wrong. No 2, I have just pointed out that the Rural Development Committee said that crews should get help; I said that the committee asked the minister to explore the means through which they might receive get help, and to find those means through legislation. The minister declined to do so and has ruled it out because it is too difficult. He said that yesterday afternoon. The committee also strongly urged the Executive to consider further the balance between decommissioning and transitional aid in the support package. Mike Rumbles spent his whole speech attacking Mr Lochhead—Mr Rumbles's whole speech seemed to me to be irrelevant. He is not in the chamber now, but I hope that he never appears on the Radio 4 programme, "Just a Minute", because every time he opened his gob he would be ruled out automatically for deviation—[ Interruption. ]—never mind for repetition, as I hear some of my colleagues point out. Balance is at the roots of the debate. Every single representative body of which I am aware in  the industry has said that the package is not properly balanced. I believe that the SFF has suggested that a 50:50 balance would have been more appropriate, or that £25 million for decommissioning would have been sufficient. I am surprised that the industry's detailed submissions have not resulted in some movement from the Executive. Of course, the instruments do not specify the amounts of aid, so there is hope that there can still be movement from the minister. I do not believe that his responses yesterday to the Rural Development Committee—in which he dismissed the arguments that have been put by the whole industry—cut the mustard. I hope that the representatives who are here today will make further attempts to bring about a change. Justification for the deal, which the minister himself described as crude, inequitable and unfair, has been given by many members, including Elaine Thomson and John Home Robertson. John Home Robertson referred to the fact that we have what he called "clear scientific evidence". I argue—I am sure that Tavish Scott would have argued the same had he been able to be here today—is that there is nothing "clear" about the science. That is the point. We should listen to the remarks of Professor Tony Hawkins, the former director of the Government's Fisheries Research Services. He is the man who advised the minister at the beginning of the Parliament, but he no longer occupies that role and is able to speak out. When he spoke out, what did he say? He said that the science about separation of stocks is "poor and uncertain". He did not say that it is clear and unequivocal information that we must automatically accept, act upon and implement in every single circumstance; he said quite the opposite. He said that the science is "poor and uncertain"—it is "poor and uncertain" in relation to the separation of stocks. The element of the deal that is most objectionable is the fact that the cuts for cod were replicated pro rata on other white-fish species. I want to hear in the minister's summing up what efforts he is making and what input he will make to the April review of evidence. I want to know what efforts he is making, following the SFF representations, to ensure that we decouple the haddock and other white-fish species quota reductions from those for cod. Does the minister accept that there are now more haddock in the North sea than there have been for three decades? Will he go to the Commission and argue for an increase in the quota? I fear that he will not, although I hope to be proved wrong. I ask him to answer those questions. That brings us back to a point that the minister made, which was that it is intended that the £10 million is to be spent over six months. What will  happen when the six months are over? If quotas are not increased, skippers will not be able to go to sea and will be forced into decommissioning or—if they do not qualify for decommissioning—bankruptcy. There is no guarantee that every skipper who applies for decommissioning will meet the criteria. I hope that the minister will address that issue in his concluding remarks. There has been much talk about SNP members in the debate and the Fishermen's Party has been mentioned. The convener of that party has said—in respect of the SNP's role and its good faith—that the SNP has fought harder than any other party for the fishing industry and that it should be congratulated for doing so. It is churlish and unconvincing to suggest that we do not speak for the fishing industry, as some members have suggested. Over many years, all SNP members have tried to do their best. What we need is simple—we need a Scottish Executive that will fight for Scotland in Europe, build diplomatic alliances and send a sufficient number of civil servants to negotiations, as Denmark does—Stewart Stevenson mentioned that. We need a Scottish Executive that regards fishing representatives as friends and allies and equivalent to advisers and civil servants, and that will use their advice and expertise in negotiations, rather than allow the French to tell our representatives what is going on at negotiations. In short, we need a Scottish minister who is not hampered by Mr Eliot Morley—in whom we have little or no confidence—or by a Prime Minister who does not even know how many jobs there are in the fishing industry. He said that there were 14,000 jobs in the industry, but there are 44,000—perhaps he should take a little time off from dealing with the inevitable war with Iraq and spend more time standing up for the Scottish fishing industry. We need a Scottish minister who will represent our industry; very soon, there will be an excellent opportunity to ensure that that is what the Scottish fishing industry has.

Will the minister take an intervention?

We all understand and agree with the objectives that the minister has described. Does he accept that there is almost unanimous agreement in the industry that the proportion of the total of £50 million that is going to transitional financial support is inadequate? Is not the answer to apply for the £20 million European Union fund that is available specifically for decommissioning? Will the UK Government apply for that funding?

Is the minister aware that, as well as having the support of many people in the local community, the proposals for the restoration of Castle Tioram were supported by Scottish Natural Heritage, Highland Council, the Royal Fine Art Commission for Scotland, the Scottish Environment Protection Agency, the Scottish Rights of Way and Access Society and the grand council of the clan MacDonald? Does Historic Scotland's refusal to grant permission show that it is about as responsive to the people of Scotland as Marie Antoinette was to the French peasantry?

Amendment 108 concerns an important issue of principle, and I welcome the opportunity to raise the matter in Parliament in the context of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill. It is in the public interest that crimes are reported. We would all accept that it is a civic duty that, when any of us becomes aware of a suspected crime having been committed, we report it to the police—we do not keep quiet about it, but act in accordance with that civic duty. As far as I understand, however, there is not a general legal duty to do so. There is no legal duty, backed by criminal sanctions, for any of us to report crimes generally. There are specific circumstances in which it is a crime to fail to report a crime that one sees being committed. For example, I believe that it is a crime to fail to report a road accident in which somebody has been injured. There are specific categories of suspected crime for which the state recognises that it is so much in the public interest to report  them that failure to do so is in itself a crime. I believe that we should act as good Samaritans, and amendment 108 would introduce a duty so to do in respect of public authorities. We know that there are many reasons why individuals will not report crime. For example, there is often widespread intimidation and fear in communities in which drug dealing goes on. That is an extremely serious problem. However, there is also a problem when crime is committed in public authorities and institutions. There are many reasons for such crimes not being reported, because a public body might not wish to launder its dirty linen in public. In crimes of dishonesty, theft, fraud or the like that have been committed in the workplace or in a public body—perhaps involving documents relating to particular employees—there are many reasons for the employer not wishing the circumstances of that crime to become known and to come under the public gaze. An institution may well seek to avoid the bad, or any, publicity that would accrue if such matters were reported to the police.

That is not what the amendment does at all.

No, it is not. The body, not the individual, would be committing the crime. The duty would be imposed on the public body rather than on the individual.

No—I have dealt with it. I lodged amendment 108 in the light of the case of a constituent who had a particularly difficult experience. It is not appropriate that I rehearse the circumstances of his case now, although I believe that the minister is aware of them. I am aware of the adage that hard cases make bad law, and I subscribe to that. In any case, my constituent wished me to raise the general principle that it is in the public interest that, when a crime is committed in a public institution, that crime should not go unreported. I would very much welcome the minister's response on that general principle. I am aware that the provisions of amendment 108 are extremely wide, and that it may be appropriate for further detailed consideration to be given to the principle before it is incorporated into the law of Scotland. I would like the minister to indicate whether he accepts that there is a  problem that needs to be addressed. From the correspondence that I have had with him, I understand that he accepts that. However, he may not accept that it would be appropriate to create a criminal offence along the lines that I have suggested. If the minister accepts that there is a general problem that we need to address—as I believe he does—would he consider inviting the Scottish Law Commission to consider the matter further, with a view to publishing a consultation paper on it? If the minister will give the undertaking that the matter will be considered on that or any other reasonable basis, I will not press the amendment to a vote. I move amendment 108.

I acknowledge that much that the minister says is correct in a general sense. I believe that there is still a serious problem that has not been addressed, but it would not be appropriate to press the matter to a vote without giving it further consideration.  Amendment 108, by agreement, withdrawn.

We can take it as read that we all abhor violence towards children and that we seek to achieve the same objective, which is to ensure that violence against children is seen as being unacceptable. We are arguing about the best way in which we can word the law to ensure—in so far as we are able—that that happens. I believe that Roseanna Cunningham's amendment 95 should be supported. As Gil Paterson rightly argued, "shaking" does not have a clear meaning. On the margins, and in relation to trivial incidents in particular, it will be extremely difficult to distinguish between restraint and shaking.  I accept the argument that Pauline McNeill and one or two others have advanced, which is that one must read the section in its entirety. It is perfectly correct to say that the first requirement for prosecution is that something has been done to a child as physical punishment and that the circumstances must be taken into account. That is all correct and good, but what about when a young child has a tantrum in a supermarket and the parent restrains the child by bringing both his arms down to his side, telling him to be quiet and emphasising the point? Is that restraint or shaking? The problem is compounded by the fact that section 43(3) says that, when shaking is said to have occurred, "the court must determine that it was not something which ... was a justifiable assault". That seems to remove the element of judgment that is surely best left to the courts. I support Roseanna Cunningham's amendment 95 that would mean that the court would so determine only in cases in which "unreasonable force" was used. To answer Brian Fitzpatrick's question, it seems to me to be perfectly obvious that zero force would be appropriate in the case of a baby that is a few months old but that, in the case of a 10-year-old, a degree of force might be appropriate. Although I understand members' intentions in using examples that we all abhor, such as those that Fiona McLeod used, they are not really relevant to the point that we are discussing. We all want to send a message to the people of Scotland that violence towards children is unacceptable. Publicity campaigns are the means by which we send messages. When we draft legislation, we must create a form of words that can be enforced objectively and fairly. Above all, we must leave our judges, not our politicians, to be the arbiters of what is or is not a crime in our country.

I am still not entirely sure from Alex Johnstone's speech whether he intended the comparison of Richard Lochhead to Margaret Thatcher as a compliment or an insult. Perhaps we will hear about that later. There is no doubt that the Scottish fishing industry faces its greatest-ever crisis. This should be a serious debate and, from time to time, there have been serious contributions. When I came into the chamber yesterday before the Rural Development Committee meeting, I met one of the skippers who are looking bankruptcy in the face, not next year but this year, unless we can do something to ameliorate what the minister has admitted is a disastrous deal for the white-fish  fleet. There are two questions that we should be asking in this debate: first, what assistance is required to secure the survival of the industry; and, secondly, how the December deal can be improved in a way that works towards that end. I wish to address those two serious matters in a considered fashion. It is absolutely clear from the responses to the Executive's proposals that the industry does not back the split between social measures and decommissioning, which is weighted far too much towards decommissioning. I cannot think of any organisation that has supported the measures. When the minister winds up the debate, will he say whether he will proceed with the scheme despite the overwhelming opposition of the industry, or will he follow the excellent advice of the lady who spoke at time for reflection and admit that mistakes can be made? Does he believe that it behoves us to improve matters while we still can? Looking at the wider scene, even if the decommissioning goes ahead, will not we be using money from Scotland—perhaps also from Europe—to destroy our fleet, while European money is being used to create a second armada for Spain? Richard Lochhead mentioned that problem, which was not ended by the current council, but was merely deferred to 2004, by which time the money must be used. The Spanish are building boats twice as quickly as they previously were. It is no surprise that, on 22 December 2002, Le Monde quoted the French fisheries minister, Hervé Gaymard, as saying during a press conference that the French fleet is practically unaffected. Are we really saying that we will proceed with a plan that everyone in the industry seriously believes puts the Scottish fleet's survival in jeopardy? I implore the minister to think about that. The second serious matter is days at sea. Carol MacDonald, who is one of the Cod Crusaders, has given evidence to the Rural Development Committee. I think that she speaks for many people. She said: "God forbid, but with the weather that they have to endure, a vessel and its crew might fall prey to unexpected storms at sea. However, they would have no time to dodge such a storm because of days-at-sea restrictions."——[ Official Report , Rural Development Committee , 11 Feb 2003; c 4272.] I have mentioned in every fishing debate in which I have spoken that fishing, unlike virtually every other industry, is a profession in which people's lives are at risk every day. Every day, wives wait to hear whether their husbands are okay. Are we going to create further risks with days-at-sea restrictions? The Scottish Fishermen's Federation and others have made many excellent suggestions as to how things can be at least ameliorated. Even if one does not wish to say that  all of us here may have blood on our hands, which is what people feel, it is absolutely essential that the days-at-sea proposals are—

I do not remember that plan, but I am pleased that the Tories backed off. I want to turn to the serious issue of European finance—I am afraid that the minister dodged that issue. I understand that the figure of €300 million, which John Farnell quoted yesterday, is wrong—the figure should be €200 million, of which some €150 million is available. From research, we know that when the Spanish fleet was prevented from fishing in Morocco, it received €197 million and that 32 per cent of that deal was used for the social fund, rather than the 20 per cent that the minister mentioned. In his closing remarks, will the minister say whether the Scottish Executive will apply for some of that money—yes or no? He said that he would consider doing so, but that is not good enough. If we do not apply for it, the whole £50 million will come from the Scottish Executive's budget, even when money is available from Europe and when it seems extremely likely that the budget line will be approved—I refer to the emergency scrapping fund—which Mr Farnell confirmed to me yesterday. He also confirmed that Scotland would be one of the few countries that would be eligible because of the 25 per cent reduction criteria. There has been much, rather simplistic, talk about the science, but it is clear from the evidence that Tony Hawkins gave to the Rural Development Committee that particular aspects of the science can be called into question. He told us that "the evidence on which the Commission based the ranking of the different fisheries was poor and uncertain."—[ Official Report, Rural Development Committee , 11 February 2003; c 4260-1.] Tony Hawkins was the head of Fisheries Research Services when Mr Finnie took up his job as a minister. Given the fact that the ultimate authority has said that the evidence can be questioned, I believe that we should do so by seeking extra quota for haddock and whiting. That is what we need to do but has the minister done it? If not, when will he do so? Let me conclude. The Prime Minister intervened in the negotiations at the stroke of midnight. Why did he not intervene before? Had he done as his  counterparts throughout Europe did, I do not believe that we would be in the sorry state that we are in now. I simply do not believe that the Prime Minister has a heartfelt commitment to the Scottish fishing industry.

Will the minister comment on the revelation by John Farnell yesterday that there has been an application for €32 million for an emergency scrapping fund? Elliot Morley said yesterday that Scotland should not go cap in hand to Europe. Does that mean that the Scottish Executive will not apply for funding from the €32 million, although Scotland appears to be one of only three countries that would, given the 25 per cent reduction criteria, be eligible?

Will the member give way?

Does John Farquhar Munro agree that one problem for businesses in the Highlands, particularly in Inverness, is the burden  that is placed on them by high business rates? The Forum of Private Business argues that rateable values of hotel premises are higher in Scotland than they are in England. Does the member agree that that serious burden must be addressed?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I gave you brief notice of this point of order, which arises from the remarks that Lord Watson made in the closing part of his speech. He said that a decision has been made on the future of area tourist boards. We have waited for that decision for a long time and it will affect the lives of many people who work for the boards. However, the minister said that, although the decision has been made, it will not be announced until after the impending general election.  Surely people—not least those who will be affected—are entitled to know what the decision is. Under standing order 13, it is up to the Executive to initiate a ministerial statement, but are not there circumstances in which the Parliament and the public may appropriately expect a ministerial statement to be made? Will you invite the minister to reflect on whether that option should be pursued as soon as possible?

Listening to Annabel Goldie, I miss working with her and colleagues on the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee.  Does Annabel Goldie agree that one of the recommendations that the Executive should follow is the recommendation that is to be found at paragraph 213? It reads: "The Committee recommends that the Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning aids HIAL"— Highlands and Islands Airports Ltd— "in renegotiating its PFI arrangements because of their impact in constraining growth at Inverness airport." Could not the route development fund of £5.3 million be used to assist the situation? Surely the use of that fund could have a significant impact on the need to attract more low-cost carriers to Inverness airport?

In my 20 years of practising as  a solicitor, I found, through the day-to-day experience of working in the courts, that Scotland is fortunate in having the highest quality personnel working in our justice system. We can rightly be proud of that. Until 1999, Scotland was the only country in the world that had her own legal system but lacked a legislature. I am delighted that Phil Gallie is now a full convert to the merits of the Parliament. Since I became an MSP, I have seen matters from constituents' point of view. What happens when the system goes wrong? Although I found through working with fiscals and others that, in most cases, the system does not go wrong, the Lord Advocate and the Solicitor General must focus on the situations in which matters go wrong to ensure that victims are dealt with properly. Like Stewart Stevenson, I could mention constituents who simply have not been given information. For example, I know of a case in which the victim of a serious assault was not informed when the assailant was let out of jail and went back to live beside the victim. When a complaint is made about such matters, the response is often truculent or arrogant, which is wholly wrong. However, I get the impression from the written response to the report to which the Lord Advocate referred that matters are changing and that there is a will to change, which I acknowledge and welcome. In intervening on the Lord Advocate, I referred to paragraphs 14 and 18 of the report. The committee's unanimous request that every member of the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service in Scotland should be given the chance to set out their views—good and bad—of how the system operates in an anonymous questionnaire was sensible. That is part of a new system of openness and democracy. It is to be regretted that the Lord Advocate rejected that approach. Had that approach been followed, the experiences of those working at the chalk face could more accurately have been taken into account. The committee has done a great job.

I do not have time to give way, as I am in my last minute. Of necessity, the committee's excellent work only scratches the surface of a huge system that involves a great many people. I know, for example, that intermediate diets have not worked properly because fiscals do not have time enough to study the papers and discuss cases before an intermediate diet. That clogs up the system, takes more time and is a waste. A few more fiscals in the busiest sheriff courts would address that problem, and action is being taken to deal with that.  I handled a serious case in which the son of constituents of mine died in a road accident and the police approach to the case was called into question. I was struck by the constituents' approach to the matter, which was rational and sensible despite the trauma of their loss. They paid particular tribute to the Solicitor General, who was working in Aberdeen at that time, for her sensitive response. I do not want to mention the couple's name, but I think that the Solicitor General will know who they were. In that case and others where the justice system fails, it does not yet respond properly to victims' and others' concerns about their dealings with it. However, now that we have our Parliament and perhaps a bit more openness, there is a willingness to tackle those concerns. I welcome that approach.

I agree with a great deal of what the Lord Advocate says, but will he come round to addressing the recommendations in the report in his remaining two minutes? Does he agree that the report, excellent though it is, would have been far better if the Justice 2 Committee's recommendation that all staff in the service should have the opportunity to participate by setting out their views in an anonymous questionnaire had been implemented? Why was that suggestion by the committee rejected by the Lord Advocate? Does not it smack of the sort of secrecy of which we want to rid Scotland's justice system?

rose—

Actually, Presiding Officer, Stewart is my middle name. My constituency contains many of the high mountains in Scotland, including the Cairngorms, Glen Coe, the Aonachs, Creag Meagaidh, the Monadhliath hills and the Drumochter hills. Because of that, it perhaps contains more people who are dependent for their livelihood on access to the outdoors than any other constituency. Those people will be celebrating the passage of the bill today. I would like to look forward to the tasks that lie ahead, as I do not believe in allowing too much self-congratulatory stuff. There is a job of work to be done. The first task is to establish the access code, which SNH has a duty to formulate. I hope that, in the light of what I have said about my constituency—which contains the Glenmore Lodge outdoor centre—the minister will accept that the logical place for the access code to be formulated by the small number of SNH staff who will work on it is Scotland's outdoor centre. I hope that that dispersal of civil jobs will begin right here, right now. Secondly, there is a problem as far as community purchase is concerned. Today we have passed the mechanism for community purchase, but what about the money, which is dependent on a £10 million budget line from the new opportunities fund? We heard from Beverley Francis the other day that the money is running out: there is only £2 million of that budget left. I know that people in the community land unit are concerned about that. We have not heard whether the money will be renewed. The Department for Culture, Media and Sport at Westminster refuses to say that it will be renewed because it is undertaking a review of all lottery funding. That is placing in jeopardy the expertise—which has been built up over a long period—of the staff in Inverness, who are on short-term contracts that will expire in August. If those people are lost, their expertise will be lost. I hope that the minister will sort that out with the DCMS soon. Two members have referred to the fact that the Labour and Liberal parties have had commitments to land reform, community ownership and access for about 100 years. They have claimed credit for their parties for what has been done today. However, one does not have to be Einstein to realise that we have achieved what we have achieved today because we have a Scottish Parliament. No single party can claim credit for what we have achieved today, because it is an achievement of the Parliament, not of one party. The fact that it has taken 100 years of failure in Scotland to achieve it speaks for itself.

During the Rural Development Committee's consideration of the bill, we heard and took on board evidence about the vital contribution that salmon fishings make to the economy, particularly in the north of Scotland. I for one am grateful that the river workers have made their views known to members. The SNP has most certainly taken those views on board. There are 14 tests and criteria in the bill that must be satisfied before a purchase can go ahead. I echo Stewart Stevenson's remarks that we must be satisfied that any proposal by a crofting community for a purchase under the scheme satisfies the test of sustainable development. Sustainable development was defined for the committee as providing "increasing social and economic advantage to the crofting community" and protection for the environment. There is one point to which Mr Aitken and Mr McGrigor have not alluded. It is important to add this comment to the debate, because it provides a complete answer to their grossly exaggerated concerns, which have characterised the Conservative party's contribution to the debate. The point is that not only must the purchase be in the public interest before the minister can approve an application to buy a fishing, but that, as section 71(2) states, "the public interest includes the interest of any sector  (however small) of the public which, in the opinion of Ministers, would be affected by the exercise of the right to buy". One of the groups that might be affected by such a sale would be river workers. It is absolutely clear that this Administration, or the next Administration—certainly if it is SNP led—will take the approach that is laid out in section 71(2). We will not do anything to jeopardise or put under threat the livelihoods of those who work in salmon fishings. We recognise those people's contribution to the economy and to the community of which they are part. To suggest that we would be part and parcel of destroying their jobs is an outrageous and ridiculous calumny and I hope that we put it to rest today.

Can Bill Aitken remind us whether it is the case that, when the Tories were last in power in Westminster, compulsory purchase was used to buy some of the land at Greenwich on which the Millennium Dome was subsequently built? If so, was that a prudent use of public funds?

Will the minister explain how the phrase "under proper control" will be defined? We all accept that it is absolutely essential that dogs be kept under proper control. That could mean keeping a dog on a lead, but might it also mean a dog that is properly trained to respond to its owner? Will the minister also explain how, in the absence of an explicit provision, there will be adequate protection against farm animals—particularly sheep and lambs—becoming mismothered, and cows possibly contracting hypomagnesaemia? Amendment 42 says that no one may be on any land where there is a possibility of disturbing wild animals. I suggest to Mr Aitken that the amendment seems to be a back-door, Tory attempt to ban fox hunting. If anyone goes on any land anywhere, they are likely to disturb deer, for example. Amendment 42 would effectively ban access to all Scotland's land. It is an absurd and  preposterous amendment.

Last year, during the foot-and-mouth crisis, the sole group of people in Scotland who received no compensation but lost almost all of their income for weeks if not months included mountain guides, climbing instructors, canoe instructors and a variety of other people, most of whom work for themselves and have a modest income. Although those people lost their entire livelihood for a long period, they behaved to a person—as far as I know—with total responsibility. I am delighted that the Executive is now persuaded that those people should not be punished for their good behaviour. I welcome the minister's aim that such people can continue to play the essential role that Duncan Hamilton, George Lyon and others have described. The question is whether, technically, the minister's aim is being achieved. If mountain guides, climbing instructors, canoe instructors, dry-stane dyke instructors and others—all of whom must have access to the outdoors to earn their modest livelihoods—are to be protected by the amendments, that is fine. However, I understood that the minister's argument was, "Well, if the amendments that we are talking about today"—which we agree with— "do not cover those people, they are covered by the fact that access can be exercised for recreational purposes." If a mountain guide takes a class to Ben Nevis, the class is there for recreational purposes, but the mountain guide is not. He or she is not there to make a lot of money, but because he or she needs to get money to survive and to continue doing what he or she wants to do. That is a possible loophole. I hope that I am wrong and that the minister will address my point in his closing remarks.

I hope that it is not out of order to begin by saying that, following my father's recent death, my family and I much appreciate the support that we have had from all members of all parties. It gives me great pleasure to support the principle of a statutory right of access. The current law is undoubtedly as clear as mud. Therefore, for the Scottish Parliament to bring clarity where previously there was only confusion is an excellent act. It is interesting that although the first Conservative speaker said that the existing law is vague, he also said that there was no need to end that vagueness. I suspect that we will hear many more such contradictions. Bill Aitken argued that there was no need to create a statutory right of access because no one had gone to court.

I had no intention of failing to declare an interest. Contrary to what Bill Aitken  said, although I am a lawyer, I assure members that I have no expectation of becoming rich as a result of the bill. I should perhaps also declare that, for about 15 years, I was a member of a mountain rescue team. I know that, in contrast to the Conservative party, that team will be delighted by the establishment of a statutory right of access. If Bill Aitken's argument is that there have been no bad landowners over the years and that no one has tried to stop folk having access to our hills, all I can say is that he must have been in Glasgow city chambers for far too long. The reason for the lack of litigation might be that people who have been prevented from getting access to our hills and mountains might have taken the not unreasonable position of not wanting to make lawyers rich by litigating on the issue. I understand that Ross Finnie's amendment 176 is not being moved, but I am delighted to support his amendment 166 and Stewart Stevenson's amendment 211, which bring clarity where there has been utter confusion.

I thought that the minister would appreciate a bit of a break because of his throat. I refer the minister to recommendation 39 from the Rural Development Committee's report, which perhaps has not been specifically addressed: "The Committee recommends that the Scottish Executive should examine the recommendation made by the NFU Scotland that the termination of a secure heritable tenancy (for example, by conversion to an LDT under section 2 of the Bill) should attract statutory compensation." That would perhaps allow the new entrants that some of us would like to see, as well as giving a tenant farmer proper compensation.

I start by thanking the clerks, in particular Mark Brough, for the excellent work that they did in helping the Rural Development Committee produce its stage 1 report. I emphasise that 98 per cent of the committee's conclusions were arrived at by consensus. The  committee spent a great deal of time and effort working on the parts of the bill that are not the subject of any great controversy. We all welcome the introduction of new vehicles that will allow leases to be entered into and we are all aware that the purposes of the Agricultural Holdings (Scotland) Act 1991 were circumvented to an extent by—I have to say this—smart lawyers. I also note that the percentage of farmers who are tenants decreased from 32.5 per cent in 1982 to 16.6 per cent in 2001; over 20 years, the percentage of farmers who are tenants halved. If that is not an indictment of the current system, I do not know what is. It is difficult to see how anything could be worse than the current system from the point of view of creating new land for leasing. I will quote the words of some farmers, and I note the work of the Scottish Tenant Farmers Action Group, which I think has done a brave and good job. I also commend the efforts of the other leading players, whose submissions have been extremely helpful. Stuart Black, a farmer in Strathspey, said: "I see the value of a right to buy in terms of the effect it would have on my position as a tenant. I would love to be able to go along to the estate as an equal partner, and I think that a right to buy would have a radical effect on the way in which individual tenants were regarded and treated by the estate." Donald Gibbon of Middleton, Fintray, said: "There has been no significant investment by the estate in farm infrastructure for over a decade, and it upsets me to see the way the place is suffering. The new generation of landlord has little common interest with the likes of me, and a right to buy would give me the chance to stand on my own feet and run the place properly. We could develop the engineering business to its full potential, and investigate some other ideas for diversification that I have in mind." Stewart Jamieson said: "Since I took over the farm from my father in 1975 we have invested over £290,000 in this farm while the estate's contribution has been a mere £40,000 ... When I retire I will get almost no recompense for this. All of the value that we have created will revert to the estate". A farmer in Sutherland said: "Our landlord, Sutherland Estates, owns a huge part of Sutherland including much of the land around Brora and Golspie. Throughout this area there is a shortage of land for housing and business development, and the local economy is strangled by this monopolistic system of land tenure. It's a tragedy really. So much enterprise and opportunity stifled when our communities should be retaining their people and encouraging new blood in." I have quoted the words of a few farmers; I could quote many more. The points that I wish to draw from those comments are as follows. First, we do not imagine that every landlord is a bad landlord—quite the contrary. I know that people such as Jamie Williamson in my constituency do their utmost to promote diversification and new  opportunities. I know that because I have visited his farm—I hope that I understand what he is doing. However, I am afraid that many landlords have the motto "let it and forget it" and that their concern is that they get the rental cheque once a year. I have spoken to many farmers in my constituency who could tell many a tale. However, many of them do not speak out. Perhaps that is why the situation has not been sorted out before now. Once we begin to scrutinise the detail of the bill at stage 2, we will have to consider some serious issues relating to the right to buy. The proponents of the principle of the right to buy must take serious issues seriously, and we will do that. However, the quotes from farmers and communities that I have read out make the case strongly that there is considerable public interest in having a right to buy, whether pre-emptive or absolute. Issues such as sporting rights are important. We must ensure that those rights continue to be exercised and I think that that can be achieved. Compensation at waygo, post-lease agreements and writing down agreements must all be dealt with and must apply to existing tenants. We must also consider the value of land. Since 1995, farm incomes have fallen by 60 per cent, while average levels of rent have increased by 30 per cent. That does not seem to indicate that the market and rental levels correspond to farm viability. The rent determination procedures must reflect economic viability. I know that the minister, his civil servants and the various parties have done a great deal of work, including during this week, for which I commend them. We all want to get a better deal for the tenant; that is my principal aim and if we achieve it there will be more economic development and opportunities in the countryside, which we all want. For that reason, we must take the issue very seriously. In a speech in September 1998 that he made in reference to tenants' responses to a consultation on land reform, the late Donald Dewar said: "The words stifling and stultifying occur again and again in these case histories. These are not people looking for an easy life—quite the reverse. These are people keen to make the best of the opportunities that should be available to them—keen to build a better life for themselves and their families and communities, but held in check by the action or often, inaction, of external powers." I hope that we can all subscribe to the aims that the former First Minister set out, and that at stage 2 we will be able to consider seriously the issues that members of the Rural Development Committee, who have grasped this task, and other members who have an interest, understand and care deeply about. We must ensure that we do not  create turbulence or turmoil in order to avoid the Armageddon that some people are predicting in an exaggerated and somewhat extreme fashion. A way ahead can be found and I look forward to working to achieve our objectives at stage 2. I support the Executive motion.

As Alex Fergusson opposes the pre-emptive right to buy, does he also oppose the rights of pre-emption that feudal superiors hold and have held for centuries?

Oh, come on.

I fully accept that the issues are  complex, but does the minister agree that the mischief to be corrected relates to past agreements? Will he advise whether the amendments he will propose will have retroactive effect? If they will not, I believe that we will not address the problem that he has correctly identified.

Does the minister agree that the Commission proposals to restrict days at sea would offer not a deal but a death warrant to Scotland's proud and viable fishing industry? Is the minister aware that the French minister who is involved in the negotiations has assured his fishermen that, if necessary, President Chirac will intervene for the fishermen as he did for French farmers? Will the Prime Minister of this allegedly United Kingdom do a Chirac or do a runner?

I believe that Nicola Sturgeon set out a formidable case for the hepatitis C victims to receive fair and proper compensation. They were infected by contaminated blood supplies through no fault of their own and Nicola Sturgeon should be commended for setting out the case in her usual eloquent and articulate fashion and for saying exactly how the maximum cost of £89 million could be funded. That issue should be taken more seriously by some members. I will focus on an issue that I believe people outside the chamber talk most about. It is the issue that has dominated the short life of the Scottish Parliament so far—I am talking about the Holyrood project. Many members of the public simply do not understand what has happened; they are angry about the rising costs and fail to  comprehend how the project has not been taken a grip of. From conversations with my constituents, I know that many of them are absolutely furious about the issue. I have held my view of the matter for some considerable time and have taken an active interest in the project since the establishment of the Parliament, although I have taken a particular interest in it since about spring last year. This morning, I will talk about one aspect of the whole sorry business, which I will call the Flour City fiasco. It relates to an estimated £3.8 million, which is money that can, should and will be recovered for the taxpayer; I have made it my business to campaign to that end. In spring last year, I was contacted by members of the Scottish Timber Trade Association who expressed concern that an unknown company called Flour City Architectural Metals (UK) had been awarded a £7 million contract. Those Scottish businesses, some of which had previously spent a great deal of time trying to secure the contract that was awarded to Flour City, had never heard of that company. I began to make inquiries. I obtained a copy of the company's file and found out that Flour City UK had no assets other than a £2 share capital and that it had no UK directors. The two directors listed in the company file were a Mr John Tang and Mr Edward Boyle. The company had no trading pattern and, according to the only accounts that it posted in the UK, no income. I asked myself how a shell company with no assets, no UK directors and no trading history could have been awarded a £7 million contract. Would any member present in the chamber contemplate doing such a thing? I made further and more detailed inquiries and, in January this year, made lengthy submissions to the Auditor General for Scotland. The Auditor General took some time to prepare a report, but a report was finally made to me in a letter of 5 September. In the interests of accuracy, I start by saying that the Auditor General's conclusion is that the contract "was not improperly made", but I am not sure what that means. If it means that there was a lack of evidence of impropriety, I accept that that is the case. Contrary to what Mr John Home Robertson said, I have never suggested that evidence of impropriety has come into the public domain. The Auditor General concludes: "there were deficiencies in the selection, award and management procedures for the award which exposed the SPCB to avoidable and possibly significant risk." I reiterate—members should bear it in mind—that those deficiencies "exposed the SPCB to avoidable and possibly significant risk."  I argue that that risk became loss. The Auditor General went on to itemise particular deficiencies and said that insufficient financial information was obtained about Flour City and that a detailed financial appraisal of the company was lacking. I have with me the pre-qualification questionnaire, which all prospective tenderers should have completed before they were accepted as eligible to tender. Did Flour City complete and submit such a document? If so, what information was given in response to the questions that asks prospective tenderers to state what previous contracts they have obtained. I have been informed that no references were obtained from Flour City suppliers, customers or bankers. I believe that that is tantamount to negligence. I discovered that in September 2000 a bad debt judgment for £1,017 had been found against Flour City in a Basildon court. I got that information by paying £4.50. Subsequently, in a letter of 12 July 2002 from the registry of county court judgments, I found that the information on Flour City's bad debt was available in September 2000. Given that the contract was not awarded to Flour City until the end of January 2001 and that the bad-debt information was available at that time, why did not the Holyrood construction managers get that information before deciding to award the contract? Concerns about the parent company—Flour City International—were not explored, but company accounts dated 31 October 1999 show that the parent company had gone from being in profit to making a loss. Those accounts also show an unexplained share transaction in which the company paid out $1.5 million to some shareholders. It is unusual for shareholders to get money from a company when, according to its accounts, it is undergoing serious financial difficulties. I do not have time to tell the rest of the story today. However, it is important that we recover every pound that we can, because £3.8 million is a lot of money. It could, should and—if I have anything to do with it—will be recovered for the Scottish taxpayer so that perhaps, at last, people will be able to see that something concrete is being done to deal with the fiasco of the Holyrood project.

I do not disagree with much of what Mr McCabe says, but will he enlighten us as to whether he expressed similar concerns in his former role as Minister for Parliament?

Yesterday afternoon, we received our customary briefing from the Scottish Fishermen's Federation. Ian Duncan said two practical and important things that we would be wise to bear in mind. First, he said that fishermen will need to be able to go to sea on 1 January. Secondly, he said that there will need to be a mid-year review next year to ensure that the fishermen can continue to go to sea.  The starkness of the crisis that faces the industry is set out well in a paper from the North East Scotland Fisheries Development Partnership. As the minister will know, the paper was prepared with the input of a former head of the Fisheries Research Services and should be taken seriously. The paper states that it is estimated that, if the profit is reduced by as little as 10 per cent, more than two thirds of the whole of the white-fish fleet will become unprofitable and will face financial catastrophe sooner rather than later. In the limited time that is available to me, I shall do what I did last year and the year before, which is to make some constructive suggestions, some of which we have had the chance to discuss with the minister today. First, we should take on board the suggestions that have been put forward by the industry. Those suggestions have not been taken on board and the European Commission has simply not taken account of the effort that has been made so far in the cod recovery programme, nor of future measures that have been mooted, such as real-time closures, seasonal closures and the use of new technical gear. Robin Harper is totally wrong and does not understand how much the fishing industry has done. The members who have spoken in the debate who represent fishing constituencies are aware of what has been done. Tavish Scott is nodding.

No, I will not. We must have regard to the fact that the fishing industry has made suggestions that have resulted in the cod stocks rising from 30,000 tonnes to 38,000 tonnes—a fact that Mr Fischler appears to have taken no account of. As my colleague Richard Lochhead pointed out, the Spanish have already secured the guarantee of a mid-year review for the proposed massive reduction in anchovy stocks. That is stated in the Commission's document. The Spanish have managed to obtain a guarantee that there will be a mid-term review, but have we? Have we asked? Will that be part of the negotiation? The minister informed us today that, in order to get the guarantee of a mid-year review, it is necessary to get the agreement of other EU states. Is not it therefore necessary to make that a condition of the forthcoming negotiations? Whatever deal is struck in the four days next week, part of it should be a guarantee that there will be a review, provided that scientific evidence can be produced to show that the existing measures are working, and that the new measures should also be given time to work. Winnie Ewing asked how much regard has been  paid to the argument made by many people in the fishing world that, of the proportion of fish that are predated, only 10 per cent is accounted for by human consumption. What about the other 90 per cent? What about those figures? Is not it the case that the seal population has become unsustainable? Is it any surprise that there is a serious problem with phocine distemper virus when stocks have become unsustainable? Why has there been virtually no research into those matters? I turn to measures that have been taken on the west coast. I know that the minister has received detailed representations from Robert Stevenson and Hugh Allan. The truth is that, of total stocks landed there in the past year, 1,200 tonnes were nephrops and only 4 tonnes were cod. Therefore, the cod bycatch is not material because it is almost zero. Under the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea rules, the bycatch's being near zero is the trigger for programmes' being considered. I hope that the minister will take account of the specific and detailed measures that the Mallaig and North West Fishermen's Association have proposed, which are constructive. Again, the fishing industry has proposed conservation measures that we should give time to work. The question of who leads the negotiations is more serious than it was previously. Jack McConnell was reported in The Herald on 1 November this year as saying that Scottish Executive ministers lead the UK delegation when it is appropriate and that UK ministers lead the delegation when that is appropriate. Scotland has 75 per cent of the UK industry, so if ever there was a case during the history of Scotland's relationship with the UK for its being appropriate for Scotland to lead the negotiations, this is it—this is when Mr Finnie should lead. That is not just my party's view; it is the view of fishing leaders such as George Macrae and Hamish Morrison. In our Scottish Parliament we always offer our full support for the minister in trying to get the best possible deal. That is a statement of the obvious and we all, as democrats, must do that. Mr Finnie must lead in the negotiations, because I have little confidence that Elliot Morley will, or can be trusted to, do that necessary job next week for Scotland.

Does the minister agree that one further method of promoting standards of numeracy among our children would be for elected representatives to lead by example in displaying scrupulous numerical accuracy? Is she aware that although 44,000 jobs are dependent on the fishing industry in Scotland, the Prime Minister estimated the figure to be only 14,000? He was wrong by a factor of three. Will she arrange for the Prime Minister to undertake a class of elementary mathematics?

This week, the Rural Development Committee created a precedent. For the first time, a committee's approval of a statutory instrument that comes before the Parliament was subject to an amendment that expressed a clear view that that statutory instrument has a serious defect. It was the committee's majority view, by nine votes to two, that the draft Cairngorms National Park Designation, Transitional and Consequential Provisions (Scotland) Order 2003 wrongly excludes highland Perthshire. The committee expressed its view on the basis of all-party agreement. Every party agreed that highland Perthshire should be in the park. I should mention that the newly emerged minority group of two comprised Rhoda Grant and Alasdair Morrison, and we must always respect the interests of minorities in the Parliament. There are five reasons why I believe that the clear consensus is that a serious mistake has been made, which I hope can be corrected. That consensus is built on the advice that was obtained from Scottish Natural Heritage, which recommended clearly that highland Perthshire should be in the park. That advice cost £250,000 and was sought by the Executive. The Executive chose to seek that advice, rather than dealing with the matter itself. SNH engaged 30 people to come up with the proposals. What happened to that advice? I believe that it was disregarded. Never can there have been such a monumental waste of money if we asked SNH to undertake a task and the Scottish Executive ignored its recommendations. The four other elements of the consensus were as follows. First, the respondents to the process, who gave evidence to the Parliament, believed that their evidence would be taken into account and carefully weighed up and considered, as I believe it was by the Rural Development Committee. Secondly, non-governmental organisations, including the National Trust for Scotland,  expressed carefully argued concerns that the exclusion of highland Perthshire may imperil the attainment of world heritage site status by the proposed national park. I believe that the National Trust's view, and those of the other NGOs concerned, deserves to be taken seriously. The Rural Development Committee took them seriously; the Scottish Executive did not. The third strand involved Perth and Kinross Council. We achieved the somewhat remarkable—and, I believe, unique—feat of achieving unanimity among the rainbow forces on that council. Fourthly, and most important, we had consensus on the Rural Development Committee, which was at first unanimous. In a letter dated 12 October, every single member agreed that highland Perthshire should be included in the national park. It was only later that the two members whose names I mentioned suddenly decided—as they were entitled to—to conduct a U-turn. That is not an illegal manoeuvre, but I would say to the particular lady concerned: "You turn if you want to—this lady is for turning." The issue at stake now is whether the Scottish Executive will listen to the Parliament or not. Will it have regard to the work of the Parliament's Rural Development Committee, or will it snub that committee? I move, That motion S1M-3706 be taken at this meeting of the Parliament.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I seek your agreement to move that a motion without notice be taken, to allow the Parliament to consider motion S1M-3706 now.

I do not disagree with any of the points that the minister has made. I understand that the NOS is not calling for national screening to be introduced. However, it is very concerned about the availability of scanning, especially for those who are most at risk. The minister and a number of other members have mentioned which categories of people are most at risk. Will he undertake to extract from each health board—particularly those where cover is non-existent or patchy—a statement indicating whether it will adopt a policy on scanning, what access will be available and what policies will be followed? Will the Executive actively pursue the issue of scanning in the future, to ensure that all people who are at risk have proper access to a DEXA scan?

I am grateful to the Parliamentary Bureau for the opportunity to debate the issue of osteoporosis for the first time in the Scottish Parliament. Osteoporosis is one of the most widespread and pernicious diseases and affects more people than virtually any other serious disease or condition that we know of. Osteoporosis, which is also known as fragile bones disease, affects men and women. One in three women and one in 12 men over the age of 50 will suffer from an osteoporotic fracture. The disease is a major cause of pain and disability and, in extreme cases, can cause death. The most common fractures that result from osteoporosis are fractures of the wrist, spine and hip. As the population of Scotland is ageing, the number of people who suffer from osteoporosis will continue to rise and the number of people who are at risk of fractures that are caused by osteoporosis is set to rise. There is a huge financial cost in social care and in the acute costs of treating osteoporotic fractures. That cost is estimated at £1,700 million a year in the UK and £150 million in Scotland. There are huge costs to the national health service  and social services. More than one fifth of all orthopaedic beds are used by patients who have had hip fractures. The acute care cost for each hip fracture patient is around £5,000, and there are approximately 6,000 hip fractures each year in Scotland. More than half of patients who have a hip fracture are unable to live on their own or to sustain independent living as a result. That of course means that some may require residential or other care, which imposes a huge cost. Behind those dry statistics, chilling though they are, lies the real issue that I want to talk about, which is the human cost—the hundreds of thousands of tales of misery and pain of the people who have the disease. The pain that is suffered, patients' great anxieties about what the future holds and the misery that the disease can create should not be under-exaggerated. It is essential that we have a better understanding of the disease in Scotland. I pay tribute to the work of the National Osteoporosis Society, which is represented in the gallery, and in particular to Anne Simpson, who is well known to many of us as she has made us more aware of the problems of osteoporosis. The NOS, which operates throughout Scotland and the UK, holds open meetings to spread awareness of osteoporosis and does a great deal of excellent work in the general promotion of good bone health. Fifteen local support groups have been established in Scotland and play a huge part in passing on information and supporting sufferers, often on a one-to-one basis; I saw that at first hand when I recently attended the annual general meeting of the Inverness osteoporosis support group. The groups provide succour to families and are a series of excellent ginger groups, the members of which—perhaps from their own or their family's experience—are well able to put pressure on local health boards and professional staff to improve services in their area. What would each of us do if we were told tomorrow that we had osteoporosis? What would be in our thoughts? Who would we turn to? How would we look towards the future? Perhaps we would be extremely anxious. We would not know what the future would hold, how serious the condition would become and how quickly symptoms would develop. We would ask obvious questions such as, will the treatment work? Can I play golf? Can I bowl? Can I do the garden? If I do those things, will I risk breaking a bone? The NOS, drawing on the experience of members of the support groups, has produced an excellent strategy document called "Reducing fractures and osteoporosis in Scotland". Where do we go from here and what needs to be done? Four issues need to be addressed. The  first of those is a positive move—the impending introduction of the new Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network, or SIGN, guidelines, which will be published in spring 2003. Those guidelines will set out best practice for general practitioners and other health professionals and hospital clinicians on the way in which osteoporosis is diagnosed and treated and how patients who are most at risk can be identified. Obviously, those who are most at risk include women with early menopause, those who take steroids and those who have a poor diet. The publication of the guidelines will raise awareness among professionals of best practice. The NOS has ensured that the guidelines fully reflect the patient's perspective. I urge the minister to ensure that the guidelines are implemented throughout Scotland. When the minister responds to the debate, I ask him, first, to indicate whether that will happen. Secondly, although the disease does not have a cure, it can be prevented and treated. To do that we should adopt a cradle-to-grave approach. We must target young people with the message of healthy bones. Surveys indicate that youngsters are not taking to heart any of the messages, which are extremely important. Free school milk for kids may seem like a costly policy, but in the long term it would provide a massive saving in human and financial terms. We must persuade kids that milk is not only good, it is cool, it tastes good, it makes them feel good, and it might even make them look good. Thirdly, it is essential that dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry—DEXA—scanners are made more widely available in Scotland. Much work has been done, notably in the Highlands, where a DEXA scanner was obtained largely as a result of the work of Lorna Young, who has harried, badgered and lobbied on that issue for years. However, many people in Scotland do not have access to a DEXA scanner, which is a fatal defect. Fourthly, we must educate health professionals. I acknowledge that the Health Education Board for Scotland and the health department have done a lot of work, but much more needs to be done. The Presiding Officer is giving me that certain look, so I will draw my remarks to a close. I look forward to other members' speeches. I am proud that we are having the debate. I hope that the minister will tell us whether a strategy will be prepared for Scotland and to what extent health boards will be invited to implement the guidelines and ensure that DEXA scanners are available to everyone. We have an opportunity to explode the myth that nothing can be done about osteoporosis, which is the exact opposite of the truth. I hope that the debate will play a part in showing that there is a will across all the political parties to find the way ahead.

To ask the Scottish Executive what its estimate is of how much the Highlands and Islands will receive in regional aid from the European Union from 2006 to 2010. (S1O-6018)

I would have thanked the minister if he had answered the question. First, will he admit that the Highlands and Islands should now have objective 1 status? Secondly, will he admit that we do not have objective 1 status because the UK Office for National Statistics bungled the job and the figures? Thirdly, does he agree that, if we had objective 1 status, we would automatically qualify for transitional relief after 2006? Fourthly, does he accept that the cost of that failure by the UK Government and its agencies could be up to £200 million for the Highlands? Finally, will he publish or keep secret the letter from the Commission, to which he referred earlier?

Will the minister publish the letter?

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive— [Interruption.]

Is the minister aware that the development to which Robin Harper refers comprises approximately 40 proposed houses, of which 10 will be low-cost, affordable housing for local people and a further 10 will be building plots for local people? Will the minister join me in commending the local planning department for ensuring that the development will go ahead and does she agree that the law should allow more provision for low-cost, affordable housing? Does  she acknowledge that many people in my constituency and elsewhere are becoming a bit fed up about outside intrusion into local planning matters by interest groups and outside bodies—and even the odd Green?

Without a hint of ingratiation, I offer entirely sincere congratulations to my parliamentary colleague John Swinney on securing the debate. The constituencies of North Tayside and Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber  are contiguous. Although the boundary at Drumochter pass is marked on the south by a hill that is called the sow of Atholl and on the north by a hill that is called the boar—that is, B-O-A-R—of Badenoch, I assure members that neither name has any baring on the character of the representatives of those constituencies. Without rehearsing them, I fully endorse John Swinney's arguments about safety and strategic importance. I agree with Rhoda Grant that many other roads, such as the A82, desperately require upgrading. I agree, too, with John Farquhar Munro that we need to look at the northern part of the A9. I urge the minister to examine carefully the detailed operation of the freight facilities grant scheme from 1997. Although the scheme has an admirable aim of taking lorries off the road, it is not working out well in practice. Some recipients of grants are treated much more equally than others—for example, Forth Ports plc at Rosyth received £11 million for taking only 2.4 million lorry miles off the road. I hope that the minister will give close scrutiny to that situation.

I accept that and I welcome it. However, Safeways receives about £1 for every mile foregone, whereas the ratio for Forth Ports is about £4 for every mile forgone. That does not seem to be equal. The main issue, which two members have raised, is how we afford the necessary improvements to dual status for which we are arguing. I would like to suggest one method of allowing us to do that. Thanks to The Scotsman and Mr Fraser Nelson's work, it has emerged that the Office of National Statistics has miscalculated the information on which the submission to the European Commission for objective 1 aid was based. As a result, we lost out on objective 1 status when we should have qualified. No doubt the statistics must be completely recompiled and resubmitted, but it appears that we should have had objective 1 status.

Hang on a second. The SNP's position is that we must move heaven and earth to get back that objective 1 status. That is not necessarily because we are losing out now, but because we will almost certainly lose out following 2006, when we move from objective 1 transitional relief to possibly zero. If, on the other hand, our existing aid was  reclassified as objective 1, we would automatically qualify for transitional relief, which would entitle us to perhaps between £200 million and £250 million. That would help fund an upgrade of the A9. The A830 is receiving money from that fund, so why should not the A9 also receive funding? The SNP will move heaven and earth, strain every sinew, go every mile and visit every commissioner to get the money back. I just hope that Peter Peacock—who has said that trying to do so is not even an option—will be overruled by the First Minister, when I question the First Minister tomorrow.

I apologise to John Farquhar Munro for being unavoidably absent at the beginning of the debate. I look forward to reading his speech in the Official Report . I will mention a point that has not yet been raised, which is that in many parts of rural Scotland the only places that can be developed are those that are off trunk roads. It is extremely difficult to get permission to do anything off a trunk road, as the rules are too tight. I could mention individual cases. I hope that the minister will examine the matter very seriously. We need to have more imaginative solutions. Farm steadings can be used to create more housing. We should promote timeshare developments, because they are occupied all year round. They do not lie empty as holiday homes do and they also contribute far more to the local economy. Zoning should be used more to allow land to be earmarked for young families with children and suitable housing to be developed for the people whom we want to attract back to rural Scotland. The main point that I want to make in the short time available is about the council tax discount for second homes. During the 1999 election campaign and in the early days of the Parliament, I raised the issue repeatedly with the Executive and suggested that, as happens in Wales, local authorities should be afforded the discretion to remove the 50 per cent special discount that holiday home owners receive. I do not think that that discount is justified. The decision should be for local authorities but, sadly, the Executive ruled that out on several occasions in 1999. It seems that there is now a rethink, although it is interesting that it came about only after John Prescott indicated that he intends to give local authorities in England the power to change the discount so that second home owners will have to pay up to 90 per cent of the council tax. That is better late than never. I hope that the minister will say precisely what the Executive's policy is on the matter.

Will the minister give way?

Last year's foot-and-mouth crisis had a devastating impact on those involved  throughout the rural economy in Scotland. We saw 735,000 animals slaughtered. The experience was appalling and it caused great pain, hardship and misery to many people in Scotland. I was pleased and a bit proud that, in response to that crisis at the time, members of the Scottish Parliament acted together in a broad spirit of consensus. Today, however, it is right that we consider the lessons to be learned from the inquiries. I would like to tackle four of the more important issues, the first of which is import controls. The SNP believes that import controls have to be tackled properly, with the view that animal diseases do not respect boundaries. I am afraid that the evidence to date suggests that insufficient is being done to address the problem. Indeed, the president of the National Farmers Union of Scotland, Jim Walker, put matters rather more dramatically in The Scottish Farmer on 22 June, when he asked what Margaret Beckett had done in practice to ensure that infected meat is not imported into the UK. He said that Margaret Beckett "has introduced the use of one sniffer dog across the whole of Great Britain to try and stamp out illegal imports of meat and meat products". In addition, the deputy director of the Pirbright laboratory, Mr David Paton, gave a warning at the NFUS annual general meeting in St Andrews this year "that a new wave of diseases could strike the UK at any time because of inadequate import controls". I welcome some of the measures that are contained in the Executive's response, but we must acknowledge that the response to date has been one of words not followed up by deeds. It has not been adequate. We should heed the warnings of Mr Walker and Mr Paton. It is essential, not only for FMD but for a host of other animal diseases, that import controls are tightened up. Other countries—New Zealand and Australia—have far more rigorous regimes. Why do we not take a leaf out of their book? If there is some sacrifice or inconvenience to people, for example in the increased use of sniffer dogs, so be it. I think that society as a whole would be prepared to thole that, rather than have the possibility of a repeat of what we saw last year. Secondly, in respect of vaccination, if we knew on 20 February last year what we know now, what would we have said? We were right to act on a united basis on the advice of the veterinary experts at the time. I took some trouble to seek out my own expert advice from various sources. We supported the Executive role, but were the situation to happen again, could we conceivably go down the same route of a slaughter eradication  policy as, in effect, the single club? I think that we could not. It is far too early to rule out routine vaccination. I note that in paragraphs 86 and 87 on page 27 of the response, it is not clear at all to what extent emergency vaccination would be used. The document does not say in what circumstances it would be used and does not respond directly to the RSE recommendation. Far more clarity is required. I do not think that the public would put up with the mass slaughter of animals again, and I do not think that it is sufficient simply to say that animals would be buried instead of burned. Of course, there are practical problems; it is not simple. The report rightly states in the section on vaccination that a number of issues are to be resolved. In order that they are resolved, there is plainly the need for substantial extra research. Indeed, according to the specific recommendation that the Royal Society made on funding, the Government should "increase investment in animal disease research and development by the order of £250 million over the next 10 years." Recently, I obtained an answer to a parliamentary question from the Minister for Environment and Rural Development, which was a first in my experience. Instead of the somewhat non-responsive answers that we are accustomed to receiving, when I asked the Scottish Executive "what information it has received on why no submission was made to the European Commission from the UK to receive a share of its financial package to fight ... animal diseases" the minister replied: "EU legislation requires member states to submit applications for such funding by 1 June. The Executive is aware that due to an administrative oversight a submission from the UK was not submitted by that deadline. Administrative procedures have been amended to avoid a repetition in the future".— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 11 November 2002; p 2182.]  I have never known a minister to reply to a parliamentary question with the admission, "It's a fair cop, gov. You've got me bang to rights." I take no particular pleasure in saying that, because we urgently require funding. That is what the report recommends, but the UK has not even asked the EU for a share of the £94 million budget line for that research. That was available but was not applied for, which was a serious error. I hope that the minister will say whether the UK will obtain any of that money—not perhaps as much as France, which obtained £20 million—and how much will be used for the research that is required to develop effective vaccination techniques. The fourth point that I will mention is access to the countryside. The Executive's rejection of the  RSE's recommendation that closure should persist only for three weeks is premature. In retrospect, it can be seen that in the areas of Scotland that the outbreak did not affect, there was massive loss and disadvantage to people in tourism and particularly to small businesses and one-man businesses such as mountain guides, path repairers, vermin controllers, fencing contractors and hauliers. Suddenly, they all lost all their income. The former First Minister Henry McLeish stated that consequential compensation would be provided and we waited a long time for that, but it never arose. I hope that the minister will pick up those four points in his winding-up speech and that we will not only learn lessons but act on and implement them. I move amendment S1M-3602.2, to leave out from "and welcomes" to end and insert: "; welcomes the fact that the Scottish Parliament was able to deal with the foot-and-mouth crisis more efficiently than it was tackled in England; endorses many of the proposals contained within the Scottish Executive response to the inquiries but considers that insufficient progress has been made to tighten import controls; believes that emergency vaccination should be deployed in any future outbreak, that there should be a total transfer to Scotland of all necessary power to handle any such outbreak and that the continued application of the 20-day rule is creating significant difficulties for Scottish farmers and crofters, and considers that the restrictions on access to the countryside were retained for far too long and had a severe impact upon the rural economy of many parts of Scotland."

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will now seek to negotiate a reinstatement of the 10 per cent reduction in the west of Scotland nephrops quotas. (S10-5911)

Does the minister agree that, unlike other species, prawns are in plentiful supply? Is he aware that only 4 tonnes of the 1,204 tonnes that have been landed in west coast ports in the past 12 months were of cod? The bycatch is not only incidental—it is near zero. Will he visit Mallaig to hear at first hand the fishermen's concerns and their fears of a bleak future unless the cut is reinstated?

Donald Gorrie mentioned that the pupils of St Ninian's Primary School, Stirling, have invited us all to adopt a Scots word. My word is "bluffleheid", which describes a person who has a very large head, but a tiny, wee brain. I am looking around me—

Perhaps the phrase "Judge not, that ye be not judged" is one to which I should pay due regard. I declare an interest as a practising solicitor, although I have absolutely no interest at all in adding to the 20 years that I have spent poring over old feu conditions, feu contracts and contracts of ground annual, especially those written in spidery handwriting. It may not surprise members to learn that after the invention of the typewriter, Scots lawyers, being an innately conservative bunch, decided to wait 10 or 20 years to check that the typewritten text would not fade and continued to use ink long after the invention of the typewriter. That general approach characterises the excellent advice on which we acted to produce an excellent bill. I say that now because I want to move on to aspects of the bill that I think can be improved. The conservative approach has cost us. For example, the Conveyancing and Feudal Reform (Scotland) Act 1970 was the first attempt to allow a legal process by which unreasonable and unfair conditions that impacted on people's lives could be discharged. However, that act did not go far enough. It was timid, unfair and paid undue regard to the interests of feudal superiors, but insufficient regard to the interests of ordinary mortals such as you and me, Presiding Officer.  Since I was elected I have been inundated by communications from constituents who complain, for example, that they want to put an extension on their house or make an internal alteration but suddenly find that they must get the permission of some feudal superior somewhere. I see John Home Robertson nodding sagely. I imagine that he knows a bit about feudal superiorities. People find that they are asked to pay £250 or £500 just to get a wee letter saying that they can go ahead and replace their toilet or build an extension. Perhaps more serious is the situation of people who own a large piece of ground. For example, a widow who wants to sell half the feu to pay for a decent life in retirement finds that the feu superior comes along and asks for several thousand pounds.

Certainly.

I could not compete with Mr Fraser in ascribing guilt among various parties. The question is whether the combined effect of section 18(7) of the Abolition of Feudal Tenure etc (Scotland) Act 2000 and section 81 of the bill goes far enough. I do not think that it does. The problem is that feudal superiors will be abolished, but their rights will live on if they can register a notice. On what criterion have we allowed the feudal superiors to survive and exercise those powers? The answer is, on the basis of the 100m rule. If feudal superiors have within 100m of their land "a permanent building which is in use wholly or mainly as a place of human- (i) habitation; or (ii) resort", then they can serve a notice. In most parts of rural Scotland, feudal superiors who own estates will usually have such a building within 100m of the estate. Therefore, those people can serve a notice and seek compensation under the terms of section 81 of the bill. The Lands Tribunal continues to be entitled to award compensation. I am pleased that there is an impediment, which is that the payment of compensation will only be on proof of "substantial loss or disadvantage". However, I would urge the minister to go a bit further. I was interested to hear that the Queen has dispensed with her royal prerogative and has perhaps ceded some interest in rights or property.  I was surprised that a more formal motion or procedure was not allocated to ensure that that was done. The Scottish Parliament has Sewel motions for the transfer of powers from the Scottish Parliament to Westminster. The Scottish National Party opposes Sewel motions, but perhaps we should introduce a different motion for the Queen's ceding of interests. If we do, we can perhaps call it a Burrell motion.

I welcome the abolition of the feudal system. However, as the minister pointed out, superiors will be able to continue to exercise their rights, albeit under another name. I notice that section 81 of the bill, which concern the powers of the Lands Tribunal for Scotland, will continue to allow X superiors to seek payments from the Lands Tribunal in exchange for the Lands Tribunal's discharging of feudal conditions. Does the minister agree that, in practice, that is one of the most controversial and unfair aspects of the feudal system? Does he believe that the bill goes far enough in preventing feudal superiors from continuing to obtain substantial payments in exchange for minutes of waiver?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it supports the establishment of Maggie's Centres and, if so, what assistance it will provide to see more centres established. (S1O-5811)

Does the minister agree that it is important to explain to the public the role and  function of a Maggie's Centre, which is to provide patients who have undergone cancer treatment with care, practical advice and support in an informal, relaxed and friendly situation, where there is more time to spend with a patient than there is in a busy cancer hospital? Will he support the establishment of Maggie's Centres throughout Scotland, wherever they are unavailable? Will he support the campaign to establish a centre at Raigmore hospital in Inverness?

On the use of wood for power generation, there has been much talk about the prospect of coal-fired power stations being run on coal and wood. If that became a reality, would the minister accept that such a development would create a substantial market for wood that could be provided from Scotland and from south of the border? Does he accept that that would make a huge contribution to the consumption of the wall of wood that we will see shortly?

I am pleased that we have the opportunity to debate the importance of the forestry industry to Scotland. I was most interested in the minister's sharing of his extensive knowledge of the flight patterns of capercaillie. I am pleased that I did not quite catch his remarks about the mother of the house. It is lucky for him that she is not in the chamber. We will read with interest those remarks, whatever they were, in the Official Report . The forestry industry is extremely important to Scotland, and it is important to underscore why that is the case. The industry provides 11,000 jobs directly and 44,000 indirectly. In the previous debate that we had on forestry, which took place in Aberdeen on 30 May, the minister estimated the value of the industry at £800 million. Along with fishing and farming, forestry is one of the three Fs of rural industries. However, it is fair to say that the industry feels that forestry interests are not being taken seriously enough by the Government, here and in London. The Rural Development Committee, in its extensive visits around Scotland, heard at first hand about the grave problems facing the industry. As some of those issues relate to reserved matters, they are outwith our control. We have not mentioned them in the text of our amendment, because we do not want to detract attention from our positive proposals. However, such issues include the strength of the pound; the climate change levy; and—perhaps most significant of all—the massive and cheaper production of wood elsewhere, particularly in the Baltic states, the import of which is displacing indigenous timber and forest products. Those problems are very serious and, although we always welcome a note of humour—even flippancy from time to time—members should forgive me if my remarks are also very serious. It is unfortunate that forestry was not the first choice of debate for today. We were supposed to debate foot-and-mouth, but of course the Executive was not in a position to proceed with its report. That underscores the fact that the Executive does not seem to take the forestry industry's interests as seriously as we believe it should do.

I will in a second.  Moreover, although I welcome some of the minister's comments in his opening speech, those comments are not reflected in the text of the motion. In fact, they have nothing to do with the motion, which refers primarily to administrative arrangements. There is much to be commended in the forestry strategy. However, the text of the motion invites us not to debate the real problems, but to discuss the administrative arrangements in the Forestry Commission. Those arrangements are not unimportant, particularly for the people who work in the Forestry Commission, but the industry expects us to address the real issues that it faces. I am happy to take an intervention from the minister if he still wants to make one.

I am sorry that the Parliamentary Bureau has not given more priority to the minister's pleas. However, the substantive point is that the text of the Executive's motion does not invite us to consider issues of importance. In the next 10 to 15 years, the volume of wood that is produced and harvested will increase by two thirds, which will create a number of problems and opportunities for the industry. It is essential that a market exists for such a huge increase in the volume of wood, and the Scottish National Party believes that we can pursue at least four partial solutions. First, we must improve the appalling state of our roads. Secondly, we must create more effective methods of allowing biomass to be used as a means of generating electricity and heat. Thirdly, Government and Government agencies must have an effective procurement policy; what we have at the moment is a complete mishmash. Finally, we must promote the use of wood as an environmentally friendly building material. I acknowledge that the minister touched on some of those issues—and that the forestry strategy document addresses most of them—but the question is when the strategy will be converted into action. That lies at the root of the industry's concerns. Although there is huge scope for wood to be used as a biofuel for the generation of electricity and/or heat, the Government does not seem to  realise that wood-burning plants do not have to be huge undertakings. That appears to be the Department of Trade and Industry's policy. Relatively small-scale plants that burn wood to heat buildings could be used in schools, hospitals and public buildings. Perhaps John Home Robertson can tell us whether any thought has been given to the possibility of such heating being used for the new Scottish Parliament building.

Perhaps we will hear from Mr Home Robertson later on the subject. The Government could do much more to encourage such developments through grants. However, the DTI does not go along with that sort of thinking.

I am certainly aware of Torren Energy's work, and very much welcome the development that George Lyon has mentioned. However, why have such developments not happened all over Scotland? What is happening in Lochgilphead is certainly more of an exception than the rule. Why have biofuels not taken off? The simple answer is that the Government's non-fossil fuel obligation arrangements did not allow operators to use existing technology, which meant that new and unproven technology had to be used instead. As a result, although one plant was built—at Arbre Energy Ltd of Selby in Yorkshire—it failed to complete commissioning satisfactorily and subsequently went into receivership. Millions of pounds have been wasted. Government policy is certainly muddled on this issue. Although there are grants for the planting of short-rotation coppices such as willow and of other fuel crops such as miscanthus, the policy is frankly a complete waste of time and money. On rural roads, it is unfortunate that the minister has not managed to fulfil the promise that he gave on 30 May to arrange a meeting involving the Executive, the rural affairs committee of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and representatives of the forestry industry. That  meeting was supposed to take place on 12 November, but it has now been rearranged for 8 January. If the minister cannot even fulfil a promise to meet the industry, does he really expect the industry to feel that he is taking it as seriously as we believe it should be taken? Furthermore, according to Highland Council, it will take 200 years to repair the existing minor road network in that area. It has been estimated that it will cost £80 million simply to maintain the current situation. I have no doubt that other members will talk about the state of roads in their areas. With the wall of wood that is due to arrive, the impact on the road network will be far greater than at present. Although some modest progress has been made, we all acknowledge that the problem is extremely serious. As far as timber procurement is concerned, the industry feels that certification is in a complete muddle. The principal standard applied to forest management was developed by the Forest Stewardship Council, which is an unelected and unaccountable body based in Mexico. Although an alternative certification standard that has been developed by the Pan European Forest Certification Council has already achieved far greater volumes of certified timber than the FSC standard, attempts by the industry and others to get the FSC to recognise the PEFC standard have so far failed. The DTI and the Scottish Executive have completely failed to sort out this extremely serious problem, which is purely one of bureaucracy. We want wood to be promoted in construction. Although I welcome to some extent what the minister has said on the issue, I want his comments to be converted into action. Building regulations might require to be altered as a result. Urgent action is required to address concerns about rural roads, to stimulate the development of biofuels and to promote the increased use of certified wood and wood products. The Government and Government departments have a vital role to play. The strategy and the words are in place; it is time now for delivery and action. I move amendment S1M-3541.2, to leave out from "welcomes" to end and insert: "but believes that the Scottish Executive has failed to acknowledge the significant contribution to the Scottish economy of the timber and forest products industry and, in particular, in respect of the existing devolved functions of the Executive, further believes that it has failed to recognise the importance of the urgent need to improve the road network used for forestry extraction, of an effective policy of procurement to encourage the Scottish national industry interest, of effective promotion of biomass to assist in the achievement of more economic means of supplying energy from renewable sources and of the encouragement and active promotion of the use of wood as a building material."

I rise conscious of the fact that at stake in this debate is the survival of the Scottish fishing industry. During the debate members who feel very strongly about the problems faced by the communities that they represent have expressed—rightly—high passion. However, if I concentrate on those speeches that shed light rather than heat on the issue, I will make a better contribution to our common purpose. We should focus not on the problems of the past—very serious though those have been—and the failings of the CFP, which we all acknowledge, but on the challenges that we face in the immediate future and the problems that confront the minister and his deputy, who in this session of Parliament represent and speak for Scotland. As I have said in each yearly debate on this issue, we would like the Scottish representative on the UK delegation to speak for Scotland and to lead in the debate. To say that that is an issue of controversy is to miss the point. I would like to make six points that are constructive and that are based on the SNP motion. First, Scottish fishermen have led the way on conservation. As the minister admitted yesterday, they have been in the van. They have introduced larger meshes that others—including  English fishermen—have not yet adopted. The minister should take up that issue—when I raised it with him yesterday, he did not respond to my point. Scottish fishermen have introduced escape panels and finer twine. There has been decommissioning. Has the effect of those steps been measured? It has not.

I will not give way. Secondly, fishermen have supplied a detailed corpus of evidence, which is to be published by the marine laboratory in Aberdeen. From a briefing that fishing representatives gave yesterday, I understand that that evidence will show that the measures that were introduced last year are beginning to work. Surely, if our approach is not to ignore the science but to analyse it properly, the scientific evidence to which I refer should be considered by Mr Fischler and everyone else before we decide what line should be taken in negotiations.

Not at this point—I want to move on. The correct approach to take to science is not to ignore it. When this crisis reared its head, the minister's first reaction was to say that we could not ignore the scientific evidence. No one suggests that information should be ignored. However, I suggest to the minister with great seriousness that we should analyse the scientific data very carefully. We agree with the major premise that the trends are worrying. However, Tavish Scott raised the point that the precautionary approach is not necessarily based on science. We know from the briefings that we received that individual features of the science might not be entirely right and, of course, there is a margin of error of 40 per cent. Thirdly, Richard Lochhead has made constructive and positive contributions and it is puerile to dismiss them entirely, as has been done. His suggestion that the fishing representatives be part of the negotiating team goes to the root of the matter. As I understand it, there will, quite rightly, be meetings between the minister and the fishing representatives, but if the fishing representatives are not part of the team, they will not be present during the negotiations; they will be outside in an antechamber or in another room.

I am sorry that I cannot take interventions at this stage, because I want to cover a lot of ground.  There might be many ways of including fishing representatives in the team. One simple way of doing that would be to second to the civil service for the negotiations representatives of the SFF who have expertise so that they can be in the room in which the negotiations are conducted. There might be other technical ways of including the fishing representatives and I ask the minister to explore such methods. Richard Lochhead argued quite rightly that our task from now until the conclusion of the negotiations is to ensure that Scotland's minister spends his time not in Scotland but travelling throughout Europe seeking alliances and negotiations with his counterparts in other countries. That is a serious suggestion and it is so obviously born of common sense that I hope that it is taken up. Fourthly, we argued last year for a tie-up scheme as well as decommissioning, rather than just for a tie-up scheme, as has been stated. Fifthly, members such as George Lyon and Alasdair Morrison are quite right to speak in favour of the retention of the existing quotas on prawns, but that is not sufficient. Yesterday, I was pleased that the minister acknowledged that the Executive is committed to the reinstatement of the 10 per cent reduction in the nephrops quota. Prawns are in plentiful supply, as not just Jamie McGrigor but all of us know. Given that there is no significant bycatch, as everybody accepts, there is no reason why prawn fishermen should lose out as they have done. I believe that that measure is also in keeping with sound conservation principles. Sixthly, the CFP has perhaps not been mentioned as often as it should have been. Until last week, we were all united in arguing that we need to protect Scotland's historic fishing rights. That was our united position until Mr Fischler made his calculated outburst and it must remain our position. There are concerns, because there are threats to relative stability. One of those threats is that our quotas will be lost if the capacity for internationally tradeable quotas is introduced. If our quotas can be sold off, as the new system of internationally tradeable quotas suggests, what will happen to our quotas? They will be sold. To whom will they be sold? It will not be to people from Scotland. Did Mr Elliot Morley rule out internationally tradeable quotas? He said that we have to look at the options. That is an example of a clear difference between the position that we should adopt as Scotland's voice, and which the minister should adopt as Scotland's negotiator, and Mr Morley's position on a key point. I agree entirely with Tavish Scott that the issue is far too important for our fishing industry to allow  anyone other than Scotland's minister, who must necessarily have—and who does have—a better understanding of Scotland's fishing industry problems, to speak for Scotland. That is not a mere constitutional point, it is not dancing on the head of a pin and it is not metaphysics—it is sound, practical common sense. In the days ahead, I hope that there will be a clear statement that that is what will happen.

Will the minister give way?

I am most grateful to the member for giving way. Could the member advise the chamber whether it was in a blinkered moment that he supported fiscal autonomy?

The minister said in his statement that he was not inviting Parliament to sign a blank cheque in respect of the bill. Whether that is true in respect of the public sector and the public finance commitment, I believe that he is asking the private sector to sign a blank cheque in respect of the bill. The impact of the bill will largely be on industries and businesses in rural Scotland. When one analyses the work that has been done by the WRc report, one sees that the estimated cost over 40 years, from this year, is £838 million. A previous estimate was higher than that. The breakdown of the figure shows that farming will face a price tag of £253 million—admittedly that is over 40 years. All the other businesses that are impacted to a major degree are in rural Scotland. There is a question that I would ask the minister if he was in the chamber—I am sorry, I see that he is in the chamber and that he is cupping his hand to his ear; as I have his rapt attention, I will ask him the question. We all support the aims of the bill. We know that it must be passed and we all recognise that it may lead to considerable benefits, but how  are rural businesses going to pay such a huge price tag? It is not possible to estimate precisely what that price tag will be, although Mr Morgan said that from the evidence that we heard in consideration of the bill the price tag might be much more than £1 billion over 40 years. What contribution will the state make? I am thinking of the wording of the financial memorandum from Mr Kerr, which indicates that any increase in expenditure is payable out of the Scottish consolidated fund. If Mr Finnie is here with us and in the perhaps unlikely event that he is in the same position, what contribution will the Administration make? I support the idea that, so far as the impact of agriculture is concerned, it makes sound sense that we should be looking to agri-environment schemes to alleviate the scourge of flooding to which many members have referred. I saw the result of flooding and the misery that it creates first-hand when I visited constituents in Inverness whose homes had been ruined by floods. There is an obligation on the Executive to say to what extent, if at all, the state will help the businesses that will be hit very hard, notably those in the agriculture sector.

There is an obligation to contribute towards the extra costs if farmers and others are being asked to join together with the state in improving the environment. If Bristow Muldoon had been listening, he would know that I have already referred to one specific way in which that should be done: agri-environment schemes and the rural stewardship scheme. There has been a review of agri-environment schemes. I think that to spend money to deal with levees, flooding amelioration techniques and so on would be far better than some of the expenditure that we have seen on the agri-environment schemes, some of which the minister admitted to the Rural Development Committee may not have served much purpose. I am also concerned about the possible impact on the whisky industry and the lack of clarity about that. The whisky industry has made it absolutely clear that there is no basis for asking it to pay for private water supplies. That is a nonsense, given the £2 billion a year that Scotland sends to London and does not get back. Rural housing is essential. Section 26 is opaque. I welcome the statement that affordable rural housing will continue to receive support, if that was what the minister said. I hope that some of the £17 million that Scottish Water will save will be directed towards affordable social housing in rural  Scotland. For the reasons that Mr Morgan set out, we cannot support the financial memorandum, but I welcome the principles of the bill and hope that we will have an answer from the minister on whether he accepts that the state has an obligation to help with the costs.

Does the minister agree that fishermen in Scotland have led the way in implementing and proposing conservation measures, including the fitting of escape panels and the introduction of larger mesh sizes? Does he agree that it is at best anomalous and at worst disgraceful that fishermen from England are still using the smaller size of meshes? What will he do about that? I am pleased that the minister recognises that it is ludicrous to suggest that there should be a reduction in our prawn fisheries. There is no threat to prawn stocks—indeed, they are plentiful. Does he share the view that he expressed a week or so ago that there should be a reinstatement of the reduction in the nephrops quotas and that nothing has changed because there is no significant cod bycatch? The scallop industry also faces closure as a result of amnesic shellfish poisoning. Will the minister give an assurance that, before the Ecodredge report and other research that should be available by next spring are available and analysed, no measure will be introduced in respect of either ASP or technical conservation measures?

I warmly congratulate Rhoda Grant on securing the debate and agree with just about everything she said. I am pleased to see that Dr Elaine Murray will reply to the debate, because I know that she has taken a close interest in matters Highland. It is matters Highland that we are debating tonight. There can be few parts of the world that have such a high recognition factor. We think of ceilidhs, capercaillies, clarsachs and clans. We think of mountains, moors, crofts and peat-land. We think of whisky, bagpipes, claymores, kilts, heather—the list goes on. When we look at the prospect of success for Inverness Highland becoming the European capital of culture in 2008, we think about those things, which are the warp and the weft in the tapestry of everything that makes the Highlands what it is. I do not believe that it is the wish of any politician or party, in supporting the bid, to attack the merits of other bids from cities in the United Kingdom. No doubt they all have their particular claims, but it is reasonable to point out that the  Highlands—perhaps exclusively—have international recognition for their unique culture and heritage. I commend the efforts of the individuals mentioned by Rhoda Grant and those of many others. I was especially struck by the enthusiastic presentation that Bill Sylvester gave today. I suggest that he should call himself Mr MacMotivator, such was the infectious nature of his enthusiasm. There are many reasons why this bid should succeed. Some are not immediately obvious. We think of when Glasgow was the city of culture. The city's image was transformed around the world. It changed from "No Mean City" to a modern European capital in the European tradition. We think of the intangible benefits of things such as this, transforming the image and reputation of a place. Part of the difficulty that Inverness faces is in some ways the difficulty of success. The city has very low levels of unemployment, which makes it difficult for some employers to find workers. I know that from a meeting I had with the Federation of Small Businesses on Monday. If we can draw people to Inverness by portraying it as an exciting place to stay, and if we can draw young people from Scotland and further afield by portraying our city as a European capital of culture, we can attract more people to the Highlands and no longer witness the emigration that we have witnessed over the years. I want to make a particular mention of genealogy and the expert concept and plan that Mr Dennis MacLeod is promoting, to establish a centre in Helmsdale to commemorate the clearances. I am delighted that the idea has received support from people of all parties and none. I played a modest part in the promotional literature for this bid—

Wisely, Mary, that photograph did not make the front page. I managed to participate in and complete the Loch Ness marathon, sponsored by Baxter's, which took place a week ago last Sunday. I achieved the twin aims of finishing and avoiding precipitating a by-election. The variety of events—both cultural and sporting—will be a key to the success of this bid. I am delighted to be taking part in this debate. I know that people from all parties will unite in the Highland cause to support this bid and make Inverness Highland the European capital of culture in 2008.

In that case, will the minister say when the decision will be taken on the application that was submitted last autumn for a PSO for the Inverness to Gatwick route?

I think that it was Samuel Johnson who said: "When a man is tired of London, he is tired of life". The Executive's consultation document is a product of that same metropolitan mindset. As we read it, we learn fascinating insights into the state of aviation in Britain. We learn that, of the 180 million passengers who pass through UK airports every year, no fewer than 100 million—well over half—go through London. We know that there is huge potential not only among the members of the SNP, who are looking forward to achieving their aims next May, but in the future of air traffic. The document tells us that air traffic will double or treble in the next three decades. That means that there are massive opportunities. If the United Kingdom were truly united, should not more of the benefits of those flights be dispersed around the UK? Are Labour members happy that well over 60 per cent of all flights from Scotland go through London as the hub? I agree with much of what Nora Radcliffe said. The situation is not sensible, but nothing in the consultation document will change it. Indeed, everything in it will perpetuate the congestion that is caused by flying through London. I agree that Scotland wants new routes. We want them to be established to other UK destinations and to mainland European and American destinations. In the short time that I have, I will address a number of matters that affect the city of Inverness. In the Highlands and in the Parliament there was a united approach to the submission of an application for a public service obligation for the Inverness to Gatwick route. I will remind members why that is so important. I will give one concrete example. Inverness Medical, which now employs more than 13,000 people, came to Inverness partly because Ron Zwanziger, the head of the company, was, as he said, able to travel from Heathrow to Inverness to get there. Inverness Medical would not exist if he had come five years later, because British Airways scrapped the Heathrow service without any notice. Only a strong political campaign by the Scottish National Party and others secured the Gatwick route as an alternative. The precedent exists; the Gatwick route must be protected. The PSO application was submitted well over a year ago. What has happened to it? Highland Council, Maureen Macmillan, who seems to find this amusing, and the Scottish Executive support it.

I am glad that Maureen Macmillan agrees that the PSO is sensible. Unfortunately, the Scottish Executive does not say anything about it any longer. It is the application that dare not speak its name.

Perhaps I will give way to the minister in a second. We heard in February, March, April and May from the Secretary of State for Transport that he would make an announcement of his decision on the PSO soon. Perhaps Lewis Macdonald can make it now.

When will we get a decision? The bid seems to have gone into the ether. The consultation document has been published as a means of shelving the decision. We need to establish new routes. I was delighted with Kenny MacAskill's proposal of a route development fund. That proposal has been supported by many, including the Scottish Council for Development and Industry, which made a submission in a letter of 1 February. Inverness airport is making progress on a number of fronts. I believe that it is working towards establishing new routes, but the main problem is high landing charges. Unless that problem is addressed, Inverness airport will not be competing on a level playing field. That is abundantly the case. State aid is irrelevant. Unless the situation is addressed, Inverness will not achieve its potential. The SNP will not allow that to happen. Sadly, the Scottish Executive seems complacent and intent on ensuring that that is what happens.

The minister mentioned forecasts of future traffic levels. Will he explain why Highlands and Islands Airports Ltd forecasts that 1.8 million passengers a year will use Inverness airport by 2030, whereas the Department for Transport estimates that that figure will be only 800,000? Why does the Department for Transport estimate 1 million fewer passengers than HIAL estimates, if those organisations are working together in partnership?

Given the huge cost of the transportation of animals from the islands to the mainland, does the member agree that it is disappointing that the Executive has ruled out even a pilot of a road-equivalent tariff scheme, a measure that is popular and is supported by many island communities?

I congratulate Tavish Scott on securing the debate. I understand that Tavish Scott is not a crofter, but he always brings an air of cultivation to these debates and I am pleased to participate in this one. The meat of the debate is in the white paper and we await with interest the responses that it will bring. It proposes a number of radical reforms that would change crofting substantially. For example, it suggests that the Crofters Commission should become a non-departmental public body. I have received representations from the staff of the Crofters Commission in Inverness, who are concerned about the possible deterioration of their employment rights and the loss of their civil service pension. Many of the workers have earned their pension rights over a long period of working for the Crofters Commission. I hope that the minister will expand on paragraph 2.6 in the white paper, as it is characteristically opaque and unintelligible—at least to me, as a mere lawyer and politician. Will those workers have the benefits of the pension rights that they have built up over the years? There is a wider argument to do with whether the private sector should meet the whole burden of public sector pensions. A lead should be given to Scotland and the UK about public pension rights as there is so little rhyme or reason in what goes on that it is no wonder that the issue arouses such concern. New crofts will be created only on the application of a landowner. I know that the National Trust for Scotland created some new crofts recently, for which it is to be congratulated, but the likelihood of private landowning estates creating crofts in Scotland, where the crofters  would immediately have the benefits of the right to buy, is about the same as the likelihood of Lord Watson applying to join a hunt—it ain't going to happen. It is therefore difficult to see why such a proposal should be made. Perhaps, however, the Executive might be willing to take a wider approach after the consultation is over. I welcome the opportunities that crofters would have to benefit from forestry schemes, but I invite the minister to seek information as to how existing forestry schemes are operating. I am told that the bureaucracy, rules and conditions are extremely tight. I know of several cases where that has caused problems and I would be happy to pass details of one of them to the minister.

Yes, I accept that. That is why I have voted for and supported the extension of the community right to buy to include fishings. However, that might not be exercised on a major scale and is a topic of some controversy. In principle, why should crofters be denied the right to benefit from the opportunities that private landowners have enjoyed for centuries? I hope that we all agree that there is no reason for that to be the case. The proposal that family assignation should be restricted to a reduced circle of relatives is likely to lead to some extremely voluble and controversial responses. There is nothing more vituperative, longstanding and heated as crofting disputes—as I am sure that those of us who represent crofting counties will know. We must await with interest what response that proposal receives. I commend the solid work that has gone into the white paper. I note that the individuals on the panel are a mixture of the distinguished, the famous and the infamous. They have come up with several novel and innovative proposals. I look forward to reading the responses to the consultation exercise.

I declare an interest as a member of the Law Society of Scotland. I begin by apologising that I will be unable to attend the rest of the debate, as I must attend a ministerial meeting at 11 am. In 1989, my wife Margaret Ewing introduced into the House of Commons the Abolition of Warrant Sales (Scotland) Bill. That is a useful starting point, because the SNP has always been committed to abolishing warrant sales. Mr Sheridan mentioned those at the coalface. As a lawyer who was an insolvency specialist, I spent 10 years trying to prevent people who had incurred debt from being evicted from their house. I would try to make an arrangement, whereby the stress and misery that families experienced could be worked through, so that they could find some light at the end of the tunnel. In my experience, people from all walks of life can face huge stress and pressure from debt. When parents incur debt, they can have feelings of guilt about not being able to look after their children properly and give them what they want. They worry about losing the house and so on. That is an horrific experience. Speaking from that experience, I want to make some positive suggestions about how the bill could be improved. The minister set out the bill's basic premise, which is that warrant sales and their new replacement of attachment will not be necessary because of the debt arrangement scheme. If that is the thesis—I believe that it is—the debt arrangement scheme must work. As Trish Godman said, not only must it work, but it must be taken up and accepted as the way that things are done. Trish Godman suggested that there should be a body to represent all the players, which should include not only the banks and lending institutions but Citizens Advice Scotland and the people who give money advice. That is an excellent suggestion and is one of the solutions to the problem. In my opinion, the current proposals are opaque, vague and incomplete. Every important question is avoided. Much of the work that was done by the Social Justice Committee shows the way that we need to go. It is totally impracticable for a debt arrangement scheme to require the consent of every creditor. That is an in-built failure. Not only will not every creditor consent, but most will not reply. That is what happens. That provision guarantees the bill's failure.  Some light at the end of the tunnel is provided by the fact that section 7(2)(g) provides that the creditors' consent may be dispensed with in some circumstances. That is good, but in what circumstances should that apply? Let me make a clear suggestion—this may not be perfect, but I think that it is fairly close to the mark. I believe that the regulations that will be introduced should provide that a debt arrangement scheme could be brought about if a majority of creditors—as measured by value—fail to dissent. That would be fair and is about as practicable as is possible. Some refinement to that proposal may be required, but I think that that approach may work. Secondly, it is essential—although this is not stated in the bill, it is perhaps implied—that there should be a meeting between the money adviser and the debtor. If things are done over the phone, the debt arrangement scheme will be guaranteed to fail. Rarely will a debtor provide all the information about his debts at the first meeting. For example, most people do not regard a mortgage as a debt and so do not mention it. As a result, information is found out in instalments. Unless there is a meeting with a money adviser, the debtor will not reveal information about all the creditors, meaning that any debt arrangement scheme will be doomed to failure. My third point is on the composition of debt and the freezing of interest and is perhaps the most difficult. Robert Brown touched on it and Kenny Gibson raised all the issues. In the report of the Social Justice Committee, it is stated that the money advice team of City of Edinburgh Council said: "Given the nature and ratio of debt to disposable income in most cases, it would be impossible to fit them into a three to five year period, without allowing composition, or stopping interest accruing. We agree most cases should be dealt with in three to five years, but that will be improbable without discounting the debt and impossible if interest is allowed to accrue." Can debt be written off? The issue is extremely difficult. Interest should certainly be frozen, but the answer is to be found in the Debtors (Scotland) Act 1987, which sets out two tables in relation to earnings arrestments. It shows the amounts that can be deducted from somebody's income each week or month. The calculation of what somebody can pay has already been done. That is the way ahead. We do not need to reinvent the wheel. That, or something like it, should be used as a yardstick to measure the amount that an individual debtor is able to pay without it affecting the essential requirements of life—the need to aliment children and look after family. The calculations that have already been done should be the key to any regulations that are introduced. I do not wish to trespass on the Presiding Officer's patience. The bill is well intentioned. It  may be that its ambition is too high and so impossible to achieve, but it behoves us to find the best possible solutions. Unfortunately, because of the 24 powers to introduce subordinate legislation, we have not yet seen the main course, but I hope that the Executive will take on board some of the comments that have been made in the debate and will introduce serious proposals to make the legislation work.

I congratulate the Justice 2 Committee on its report, which is thorough and helpful. I will touch on three areas of the bill. The first is victim statements. There is no doubt that the victim is the forgotten and unrepresented person in the justice system. I know from the point of view of a solicitor and a parliamentary representative that many victims of crime feel that the justice system has no place for them and no real interest in what has happened to them. That is not to blame any of the players in the justice system—the police, the procurator fiscal, the sheriff and others. It is just that the players do not have a sufficient remit or duty to ensure that the interests of the victim are properly taken into account. For example, the police have a duty to detect crime; they do not have a duty to go back and find out from the victim how he or she has  been affected by a burglary or an assault. The procurator fiscal does not have a specific duty to keep a victim informed. In deciding where to go on victim statements, I acknowledge the Justice 2 Committee's criticisms, but I feel that more information is required. I note from Sheriff Scott's evidence that the Sheriffs Association's enthusiasm for victim statements "is based on getting fuller and better information in order better to do justice and to reach better decisions."—[ Official Report , Justice 2 Committee , 5 June 2002; c 1526.] There is a need for a provision to ensure that that fuller information is required. The dispensing of justice must be swift. Inevitably, victims will feel, if their case has been dealt with in five or 10 minutes, that full regard has not been had to the devastating effects of the individual crime. We cannot do a great deal about that, but we can do a lot more to make victims feel that they have a part to play and that they are being listened to and heard by the criminal justice system. The measure for an interim anti-social behaviour order will be extremely useful. Perhaps the real answer to anti-social behaviour is that more training, investment and guidance should be given to those who have the duty, whether in local authorities or housing associations, to implement and use the existing powers, which currently are not used sufficiently well. The criticisms that the Chartered Institute of Housing in Scotland made are valid. A duty on the sheriff to consider a statement from the person against whom the order is sought should not be necessary. After all, interim interdicts and interim exclusion orders are made without such a right. If that is not a breach of article 6 of the European convention on human rights, I do not understand why it is necessary for section 38 to provide for such a right in relation to interim ASBOs. If it is necessary for the person to be there to make representations, what happens if they do not turn up? They are not likely to turn up. That places an obvious spanner in the works and I hope that that issue will be addressed. Similarly, I gather that, of the 95 ASBOs that were sought in 1999-2000, only 52 were granted and that 60 per cent of the people who breached ASBOs were not prosecuted. If 60 per cent of those who breach ASBOs are not prosecuted, surely we are sending a message that there is not much point in worrying about receiving such an order, because nothing will happen to anyone who breaches it. Unless that issue is addressed, the welcome measure of an interim ASBO will not take us much further. Anti-social behaviour is an extremely serious problem. I speak in the debate because of many  cases that constituents from throughout my constituency have brought to me. They show that some people just do not seem to be able to respect other folks' lives. I am sure that all members recognise that situation and acknowledge the need for more effective legislative and administrative measures to deal with it. I am probably unique in the debate in that I comment on section 43—on the physical punishment of children—not only having a parent who is a member, but with that parent sitting directly in front of me.

I thought that I might be asked questions at this point and I have not been disappointed. I must admit that I do not remember being physically chastised a great deal. My father says, "The problem with Fergus is that he wasn't thrashed enough when he was a child." [ Laughter. ] That seems to have found a consensual response. I warmly welcome the sensible conclusion that the committee has reached on the issue. A lot of hard work went into that. I question whether any Government has a mandate to introduce such measures without having included them in its manifesto. We must all remember that our views on such matters are as valid or invalid as those of any other citizen of Scotland. My personal view is that there is no mandate for the measures and I welcome the climbdown from and abandonment of the original proposals. I fail to be convinced that the existing common law of Scotland, interpreted by independent sheriffs, cannot continue to do the job that it has done. I welcome the Justice 2 Committee's work as a step forward and I hope that the Executive will study the findings of the committee's report very carefully.

I am pleased that the First Minister has acknowledged the devastation caused to families and the damage to property and transport. He has given his personal support to the Inverness Highland bid to become the European capital of culture in 2008. Does he agree that Inverness does not wish to win the bid by literally becoming the Venice of the north? If so, will he place a far more serious emphasis on flood prevention in Inverness and other cities and towns in Scotland?

What would the minister say to Neil Menzies of the Chemical Industries Association, who revealed that two pipelines that cross the border have the same rateable value but attract 10 per cent more in rates on the Scottish side?

Will the member give way?

It is absolutely essential for the future of the Scottish economy that we give our businesses a competitive advantage, rather than giving that advantage to our competitors. The Parliament has limited powers in relation to the economy. It has no power over the taxes on fuel, the oil and gas industry or the whisky industry. Those taxes apply in the UK, and we should ask ourselves whether it is an accident that they are either the highest or among the highest such taxes in Europe. For decades, the Scotch whisky industry has tried to dismantle tax barriers in other countries, such as Japan and India, only to be told by those countries, "You should start by practising what you preach at home by reducing the level of taxation on whisky." No Scottish Government would tax our national drink to such an extent—to do so is a disgrace and an indictment of successive Westminster Governments over the decades. I will concentrate on what was indubitably, in my opinion, the Executive's worst decision—amidst stiff competition. When the First Minister was  merely the Minister for Finance, he decided to scrap the uniform business rate, which was introduced in 1995 by the Conservative Government and which ended the discrimination that Scottish businesses faced of having to pay higher business rates. Annabel Goldie was sparing in her praise for the efforts of the Scottish National Party during the campaign to end that discrimination. However, I think that she would agree that many of us—including Gil Paterson and me—were very active during the 80s and 90s in that campaign. What Annabel Goldie was slightly coy about in saying that in 1995 the uniform business rate was an answer to her prayers, was that from 1979 until 1995—a period of 16 years, as Andrew Wilson has pointed out—there was no response to the prayer. One can only assume that the Tory deity was somewhat hard of hearing over that period. The calculation carried out by Craig Campbell of the Scottish Council for Development and Industry was that the amount of extra tax paid by Scottish businesses from 1990, when rateable values were harmonised, to 1995 was £1,200 million. That is Tory over-taxation—an average of 20 per cent higher business tax a year under the Tories. We take no lessons from the Conservatives on the need to provide Scottish businesses with a fair deal. Let us go back to Mr McConnell, who introduced the policy that has resulted in Scottish businesses over the past three years paying business rates 10 per cent higher than in England. The Labour ministers seem to be in a state of denial about that. They try to say that there is no discrimination because following the revaluation in 2000, rateable values in England rose by 25 per cent and in Scotland they rose by 15 per cent. Somehow that is presented as an answer. However, that is not an answer because rateable values were harmonised in 1990. The departed Henry McLeish and other former Scottish Office ministers have admitted that. Unless we scrap Jack's tax—named after the First Minister—which imposes a burden of 10 per cent extra a year, the Labour party will reap a sour reward in next year's elections.

Tavish Scott talked about the powers of the Scottish Parliament. Does he agree that we desperately need power over taxation on oil and gas? Does he agree that the recent  decision that the Westminster Government took to increase petroleum tax by 10 per cent was disastrous?

Does the minister accept that the poor growth performance has resulted in part over the past three years from the fact that the higher business rates that are paid as a result of Jack McConnell's departure from the uniform business rate have amounted to £450 million more tax being paid by businesses here than they would have paid under the regime that is used south of the border?

In an entirely impartial and unbiased way, I warmly congratulate Margaret Ewing on her excellent exposition of the topic. I will address some of the deeper issues that have led to the crisis in Moray. If young children have proper oral and dental care, they will not need to see a dentist other than for a check-up. A simple plan such as sending a birthday card from the dentist to every one-year-old child, as happens in the Highlands, will make parents aware of the need to register and will encourage them to do so, if we assume that there is someone for them to register with. Why not extend that scheme to  include two and three-year-olds? Perhaps it should be rolled out across Scotland. Toothbrushing in nurseries and primary schools does not seem to cost a lot but would make children aware of the importance of brushing their teeth, especially if they do not have proper support at home. We need more trained dentists, dental hygienists and therapists, as Mary Scanlon said. I am not sure that a new dental hospital could be delivered—I do not know how much money the Liberal Democrats plan to commit to that in their manifesto—but I would like the minister to address the serious problem that is faced by the Glasgow dental hospital. It has a budget of £3.6 million, but that goes to the University of Glasgow, with only £2 million being passed to the dental school. The other £1.6 million is taken by the university for administration. I do not know the answer to that, but I think that it is a serious problem. The dental school is being asked to train more dentists—the number of students in the first year has risen from 70 to 77—which is to be welcomed, but the problem is that there are only 45 members of staff, as opposed to the 79 that there were 10 years ago. I think that it is wrong that £1.6 million is being creamed off by the university for administration and I urge the minister to examine that matter closely. The problem of dental erosion will become increasingly more serious. I do not want to be alarmist and describe the situation as a time bomb, but one study shows that the consumption of fizzy drinks by children has increased sevenfold in the past 30 years. The acid in fizzy drinks is corrosive and one of the primary causes of dental erosion, which is hugely costly to treat. Indeed, it can be treated only by some experts. As a result, should fizzy drinks be sold at schools and in vending machines? I think not. I am happy to support other members' suggestions about training. It might be possible to have another training facility for hygienists and therapists and to extend the range of their work, as happens in the NHS. Mary Scanlon mentioned that there is not a similar legal duty to register with a dentist as there is with a general practitioner. However, there is another problem. I believe that a child's registration with a dentist lapses after 18 months. What is the point of that? At the very least, a child's registration should continue until he or she becomes an adult. That simple step could again be taken without a great deal of cost.

I am used to my wife having the last word, but nowadays she has the first word as well. To ask the Scottish Executive whether a submission should be made to the European Commission calling for the west of Scotland total allowable catch of nephrops to be increased by removing the 10 per cent reduction introduced last year and, if so, whether it has made any such proposal to the Department for the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs and what DEFRA's response was. (S1O-5503)

I am pleased to hear that news and I hope that the minister will agree that nephrops in plentiful supply are vital to west coast fishermen in Scotland, not least to those in Mallaig in my constituency. It is also important to note that the nephrops fishery poses no threat to the cod species. Does the minister agree that—to paraphrase Michael Hestletine—never in the history of the common fisheries policy have so many crustaceans survived in vain?

Is it not inconceivable that the Scottish pensioners will be liable to income tax on those payments when their counterparts in England receive the payments free of tax? Does not that amount to a regime of fiscal apartheid and make a mockery of the claim that there is fairness in the United Kingdom?

Will Bristow Muldoon give way?

I warmly congratulate Trish Godman on securing this debate and on the way in which she spoke to her motion, with obvious sincerity and care. I agree with the sentiments expressed by all other members in the debate about the importance of credit unions, which do not really seem to have been as successful as they should have been. I am sure that we all hope that the Parliament can tackle that. That is what we are here for. Citizens advice bureaux do an excellent job, not least in Inverness, by ensuring that people get the benefits to which they are entitled. The CABx have a marvellous record on advising people about benefits that would otherwise go unclaimed, and that should be acknowledged. I used to spend much time—about 10 years of my life—advising debtors on insolvency problems. In many cases, they came to me because they were threatened with eviction. That is one of the circumstances in which people turn to loan sharks—to pay off a legal lender who is threatening them with eviction. My experience in trying to help those people—usually females trying to prevent the eviction of themselves and their children—was a memorable and searing one. I do not believe that enough has been done to prevent banks and financial institutions from evicting people in circumstances where a little more flexibility would go a long way. I welcome the Mortgage Rights (Scotland) Act 2001, which we recently passed to provide a breathing space, but I am not sure that that in itself is enough. Today's debate is about loan sharks. They are criminals, pure and simple. My colleague, Kenneth Gibson, mentioned the fact that their interest rates can amount to 1,000 per cent. We are talking about a different situation from that of legal lenders who charge excessive interest rates, and we should remember that they are distinct. Legislation on moneylenders around 100 years  ago stated that 48 per cent was prima facie illegal. The Consumer Credit Act 1974 did not really tackle the problem. It is up to Westminster to stipulate a rate, perhaps linked to the base rate, which is prima facie excessive, out of order and illegal. The current system is far too complicated. Let us have a simple headline rate above which people cannot go. I must congratulate the Daily Record on its excellent campaign. It does exactly what I would like to see campaigning newspapers do: to speak out about real misery and real social issues. For Tommy Sheridan to criticise the Daily Record on the basis that licensed moneylenders advertise in it is totally wrong. He totally misses the point. He said that legal moneylenders—who, I admit, charge excessive rates—charge the same rates as illegal moneylenders. I say to Tommy Sheridan that that is complete rubbish. I am sorry to disagree with him. Legal moneylenders do not charge 1,000 per cent a week. Drug dealers' assets can be subject to legal attachment proceedings and there is a clear case that the same should happen to loan sharks. They trade in human misery and profit from human despair. Perhaps the Daily Record can take up the point that if we treat drug dealers in that way, we should treat loan sharks similarly. Their trade affects people in poverty, people who have a lack of opportunities and others whom members have mentioned. I hope that the Executive will consider that proposal carefully and I would welcome an immediate reaction from the minister on it. Why should loan sharks sit on thousands of pounds that have been extracted in a criminal fashion from the poorest people in society?

I congratulate Gordon Jackson warmly on securing the debate and on the way in which he delivered his speech—with the lucidity and clarity that we expect from a Queen's counsel, if not always from MSPs. I also thank him for the  kind remarks that he made about Margaret Ewing. I know that, had she been here, she would almost certainly have wanted to contribute to the debate. Margaret and Gordon have been the joint conveners of what I believe is the largest cross-party group in the Parliament and have been working together for the cause. Margaret is certainly examining the feasibility of a private member's bill to legislate for all student teachers—nursery, primary and secondary—to be trained in epilepsy first aid and awareness. I hope and expect that, when she resumes her parliamentary duties, that will be one of the first tasks to which she will set her hand. I also add a word of congratulation to Murray Earle, who has put a great deal of work into the subject and has written an excellent research note—one of the most comprehensive that has been provided to the Parliament. Gordon Jackson set out the need for a national framework and, in response to Mary Scanlon, he stressed the need for something more than guidelines. As has been pointed out, guidelines do not have a binding effect and need not always be implemented. There is a lack of neurological specialists and specialist nurses in the Highlands and a large tract of the north of Scotland. It is unacceptable that there should be such wide variation in provision and I hope that the minister will address that. I pay tribute to Mary Scanlon for the work that she has been doing and which I presume she will describe later. It might not be normal party politics to congratulate people in other parties, but we should give credit where it is due. Mary has done a lot of work in helping to establish a support group in Inverness. Part of the difficulty with epilepsy is that we do not understand it. I remember the first time I saw somebody having an epileptic fit—I had no idea what to do. I was slightly frightened by it and it was very dramatic. It happened to a chap in Church Street in Inverness. I felt totally helpless and I imagine that that is how many people must feel. If we can dispel some of the lack of knowledge of the condition by holding this debate, that is to be welcomed. There is a stigma attached to epilepsy and it affects people in many ways. It makes them feel isolated, it can affect their employment opportunities and, of course, one practical consequence is automatic disqualification from driving for 12 months. People who live in rural locations who have had a seizure cannot drive themselves to hospital which, in the case of Raigmore, might be a long journey in any event. There is a specific need and I hope that the minister will agree that there should be a national framework. That would be a step forward. It would  not be a panacea, but it would provide a genuine opportunity to make progress for people who have been ignored and misunderstood for far too long.

The presence of Hamish Morrison in the gallery reminds us of the need to unite in the debate and to speak out in the interests of all fishermen and of those in Scotland who rely on fishing for their jobs. That point was made by David Davidson and echoed by many speakers during the debate. The chamber has united during the crunch times of the annual negotiations and has supported the minister in his attempts to secure the best deal for Scotland that he can. It is important that I make that statement  at the beginning of my speech. I underline the SNP's agreement with many aspects of the package. It is essential that conservation and sustainability are central to the policy. Multispecies and multi-annual management is a welcome development. We certainly support the attempts to create a level playing field and we also support effort limitation, which both Jamie McGrigor and, I think, Alasdair Morrison spoke about. Fleet capacity needs to be reduced on a European level, but there was a hint early on in the debate that a question mark hangs over the lack of clarity in the proposals. We have already gone through a process of pain, as Richard Lochhead pointed out. If we have to undergo a further decommissioning programme, will that threaten the viability of some of our small fishing ports? That issue has been raised in the fishing press recently— [Interruption.] Alasdair Morrison seems to find something humorous about that; I do not. We are worried that the proposals do not make it clear that decommissioning should take place in other countries where there has been no decommissioning, before further decommissioning takes place in Scotland. I welcome Alasdair Morrison's comments about the importance of aquaculture. Anyone who represents a constituency in which salmon farming is important is bound to support those comments. I hope that his point about over-regulation will be addressed, although today may not offer an appropriate opportunity to do so. There is little time available to me in the debate to develop those points, so I will focus on a serious concern that has emerged from the debate. I do not make this point, which arose during the minister's speech, in a party-political way. He said that he was satisfied that relative stability—the key element in protecting our fishing rights—was enshrined in the proposed regulation. I do not claim to have made an exhaustive, week-long analysis of the CFP reform package documents and, in a way, I hope to be shot down and proven wrong at the end of the debate. However, article 3, which is the definition section of the proposed regulation, contains no definition of relative stability. Therefore, no definition of relative stability is enshrined in the regulations. However, a far more serious point—this is my main point—is that, as far as I can see, the reference to relative stability appears only in that context in article 20, which says: "The Council shall decide on a method of allocation for the distribution among Member States of the Community fishing opportunities for each stock that ensures each Member State a share of those fishing opportunities and/or of the fishing effort to be distributed, having regard to the need to assure each Member State as to relative stability of fishing activities."  The reference to, and inclusion of, the phrase "relative stability" is welcome, but it is beyond doubt that, by definition, a body that has to have regard to something can also disregard it—perhaps not now, but at a future date. In contrast to what the minister suggested, article 20 certainly does not say that the Council must allocate in accordance with relative stability—it says only that the Council must have regard to relative stability. That might not be of concern, were it not for the curious road map document—I cannot think of a more inappropriate term to use to describe the common fisheries policy—which says: "If the Community takes action to address these issues, on the basis of the proposals now put forward, it will gradually create a climate that will be more favourable to the introduction of more normal economic conditions and the elimination of such barriers to normal economic activity as national allocations of fishing possibilities and the principle of relative stability." Even the road map anticipates that relative stability will cease at some unspecified point in future, although we do not know whether that will happen in the short, medium or long term.

The minister must do his best and we support him in those efforts. My point is that the proposed regulation does not enshrine the principle of relative stability. That is absolutely clear and I hope that it will be accepted in the response. If the principle is enshrined, it is enshrined in the same way that clause 4 was enshrined in the constitution of the Labour party. Hugh Allen recently raised a serious point, which relates to the perilous nature of fishing. Fishing is not a normal economic activity, as Commission officials state. Fishermen put at risk their lives. Hugh Allen of the Mallaig and North West Fishermen's Association said that there is a serious risk to the life of fishermen because of insufficient crew in some boats that go to sea. That is a factor of the economic reality and the difficulties that they suffer and it underlines the urgent need for unity behind the minister in his efforts to get the best possible deal for Scotland and its fishing communities.

rose—

If there is a choice to be made between having a school and having no school, the SNP recognises that there is only one show in town. [Interruption.]

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Does the First Minister's apparent love for the private finance initiative as a method of financing public sector developments prove the truth of what Peter Mandelson said of the Labour party earlier this week, when he stated: "We are all 'Thatcherite' now"?

In the spirit of making a positive suggestion, I inform the chamber that my colleague Michael Matheson was too modest to mention that he is a member of a mountain rescue team. Does the minister acknowledge the key role that mountain rescue teams play, not only in evacuating casualties safely from the hills, but in teaching safe practice in outdoor activities, in particular in our hills, in teaching young children in lectures and by other means, and all the other work that they do—on a volunteer basis—and which they cherish?

Does the minister acknowledge the essential roles played by the Glenmore outdoor centre and the Badaguish centre—both in my constituency—to ensure that young people can participate in sport? Does he acknowledge that people with a disability have the chance to participate in a wide range of sports at the Badaguish centre, which offers the opportunity for excellence in many sports?

This debate is welcome. I congratulate Alex Fergusson on securing it,  particularly because many of the people with whom we on the Rural Development Committee have spoken who are involved in the forest products/timber growers sector feel that they are the cinderella industry of rural Scotland because their problems are not the subject of as much debate and consideration as farming and fishing. There is a measure of truth in that. I hope that we will soon have Executive-led debates on more general issues in relation to forestry strategy. Particular problems affect the forestry industry. Alex Fergusson acknowledged the value of timber to the rural economy—11,000 direct jobs and 44,000 indirect jobs. The current transport problems will multiply exponentially over the next five to 10 years. The reason is simple: we are facing an increase in production of around 100 per cent. Over the next five, 10 or 15 years, twice as much wood will require to be harvested as is harvested now. There are problems now, but they will increase manifold. This debate affords a welcome opportunity to discuss the problems that we face today. The industry is willing to engage with everyone to find solutions to the problems. Perhaps those engagements could best occur at a local level. Timber transport groups have been formed, communities have been consulted and preferred route maps for road haulage have been negotiated. Those are all parts of the solution to the problem, but the Executive must recognise that, for the reasons the timber industry has identified, the state of our roads in rural Scotland is simply not acceptable. As John Farquhar Munro said, this is not a party-political problem—although it is disappointing that no Labour MSPs apart from the minister are present at this point in the debate. Were they here, I hope that they would agree that it is simply unacceptable that in Highland Council area, for example, roads are maintained only once every 200 years. Concern about the state of the roads is felt by everybody in the Highlands. It is a serious issue, but for the timber industry the haulage problems that arise are of particular importance. The wood must be harvested, but weight restrictions on bridges make that difficult, if not impossible. I hope that the minister will take on board the need to engage locally and the need to come up with more funding for the maintenance of roads in rural Scotland. I say that seriously, and not at all in a party-political way. I hope that the Parliament can unite behind the concept that more money must be spent on maintaining our roads. Failure to do that will be a false economy. If the roads are not maintained properly now, when the maintenance is required, the cost of carrying out maintenance in five years' time will be far greater.  In other words, the problem will get worse exponentially. There are many other points that I could make, but I prefer to leave it at that in the hope that in a spirit of consensus we will obtain from the minister at the close of this debate a clear recognition that we must spend more money on maintaining rural roads and that the problems that have been identified by the industry, and the points that have been made in this debate, graphically illustrate that pressing need.

The minister has not yet mentioned proportional representation. Will he do so? If not, is it a case of PR RIP?

Will the minister give way?

When will a decision be made? Will the minister take the opportunity to confirm that British Airways and BAA have submitted letters of objection against the PSO? Has the Executive made them public? What response will it make to those letters?

Will the member give way?

It is well known that travelling to some of the Scottish islands costs about as much as travelling to the continent of America. There has been a great deal of publicity about that recently, and members of all parties will agree that the position is unacceptable and intolerable. The question is how we tackle it. Part, but not all, of the answer is to tackle landing charges. I hope that, in responding to the debate, the minister will say that he will take measures to reduce landing charges. I have met Bob MacLeod of HIAL and it is important to stress that we should not be shooting the messenger: HIAL relies entirely on the Scottish Executive. It is the Scottish Executive that can, if it wishes, help HIAL to take action to ensure that we do not lose opportunities such as those that are presented by Ryanair and other low-cost carriers, which, after 11 September, are making the running in international aviation. The Executive has a role to play. I hope that the minister, in closing, will acknowledge that for  several months he has had the precise costings of what would be required to give people in the Highlands and Islands the benefit of those low-cost routes. When did he get the costings and what will he do about them? My main remarks are about the public service obligation for the Inverness to Gatwick air link. The campaign for that is broadly based and I think that every party supports it. The Scottish Executive, Simon Cole-Hamilton of Inverness and District Chamber of Commerce, Ewen Gabriel of the Scottish Council for Development and Industry, the Forum of Private Business and the Federation of Small Businesses all support it. The business community, the tourism industry and ordinary travellers all support it. The application for the PSO was submitted because slots at Gatwick and Heathrow are entirely in the airlines' control. In 1997, British Airways announced unilaterally that it was going to cancel the Inverness to Heathrow route without any consultation. Many aviation experts fear that that could happen to the Inverness to Gatwick service tomorrow. It is perhaps more likely that the airlines will shift the slots so that they are at times that are totally impractical and inconvenient for travellers coming from America and Canada. That would have the same effect as the disappearance of the slots altogether. The campaign has had the broadest base of support of any campaign that I can recall in the Parliament. The application was submitted last autumn, to Westminster, unfortunately. However the Westminster minister has now gone and Alistair Darling has replaced him. Time will tell whether he is like Captain Darling from "Blackadder" or whether he has more independence of mind. The application has been at Westminster since last autumn. In January, David Jamieson said that a decision would be made as soon as practicable. A letter to me in March stated that it would be made as soon as possible. I have had two further letters, which said that the decision would be made soon and shortly. When are soon and shortly going to arrive? Will the delay last as long as the delay in the resignation of the former Secretary of State for Transport, Local Government and the Regions? I hope that I am not taking up too much time. Lewis Macdonald said something extremely worrying today—that no decision would be made on the PSO until after the consultation to which he referred in his speech and to which his amendment refers. If no PSO decision is to be made until some unspecified date, it will be a matter of great concern. I see the minister shaking his head. In response to my intervention, he did not say what Westminster is going to do about the  PSO. Will Westminster turn it down and blame it on Europe? If so, will he tell me why PSOs cover 30 per cent of the slots at Charles de Gaulle airport, but no slots at Heathrow or Gatwick?

I will do so. To sum up, the campaign has the support of everybody. It has not been conducted on a party-political basis. I hope that the minister will divulge what discussions he has had with his new counterpart and his former counterpart in Westminster to say how he is fighting for the people of the Highlands and Islands.

What is the status of the application of the public service obligation to secure the Inverness to Gatwick route?

I warmly congratulate Lloyd Quinan on bringing his motion before the Parliament at short notice, and on the work that he, Elaine Smith, Christine Grahame and many others have done on the subject of autism. The motion is on the subject of autism awareness week. The Parliament has done a great deal to promote awareness and better understanding of a condition that has in the past been misunderstood. Donald Gorrie, who has greater longevity than some other members, made that point. Partly through the efforts of members, we are beginning to understand a condition that remains far too mysterious. Mary Scanlon kindly mentioned Margaret Ewing—she would undoubtedly have wished to contribute to the debate had she been able to. She sends her best wishes and has been very touched by the warm support that she has received from all members of the Parliament over the past months. I will make two points. Des McNulty made one of them in part already, namely about the huge pressure on parents of autistic children. There are huge difficulties for parents who have kids who do not respond, who have repetitive behaviour and are different in other such ways. I am interested to hear what the minister thinks can be done to acknowledge that and provide concrete support. The second and last point that I want to make is about availability of single vaccines. Single vaccines should be available. I formed that view  early, after meeting constituents who must deal with this very difficult condition, and nothing that I have read subsequently has made me alter it. I come to the general point that I want to make. I have also recently spoken to a parent who already has one autistic child and who is now worried that the younger child might also have autistic spectrum disorder. He raised with me the point that whatever the general policy on the single vaccine, there is a strong case for allowing parents who already have a child who has been diagnosed with ASD the option of the single vaccine. Despite the lack of hard scientific knowledge, there must be a greater statistical likelihood of a younger child's being predisposed to ASD if an older child in the family already has it. I do not expect the minister to respond unequivocally to that point today, because the issue is complicated. I hope that he will go away and address the point later. Who knows, I might even lodge a question on it.

I want to raise a point of order, Presiding Officer, notice of which was given yesterday. Rule 7.5, which you read out, indicates that there is clear discretion for you to have permitted the members' business debate on Michael Russell's motion to proceed. Is it the case that the decision not to proceed with that debate was taken by you and was not one that you were bound to take on the advice of lawyers?

I am obliged for that answer. Having read the speech, I can say, without commenting on its contents, that it is one of the greatest speeches that Mr Russell has not made. As a lawyer, I have noticed that lawyers do not always agree. Given that no indication has been given of exactly what it was in Mr Russell's speech that fell foul of the rule, will Mr Russell be provided with copies of the legal advice, as I requested in my e-mail to you yesterday? Will that advice be published in full? If not, why not? Publication of the advice is required to give the guidance that many members seek.

Although I welcome the Executive's support for the bid thus far, does the minister agree that, for the bid to have a reasonable prospect of success, it will be necessary to demonstrate that there are good and affordable air travel links to Inverness? If she agrees, will she confirm that the Executive will carefully consider helping Highlands and Islands Airports Limited in its progress to reduce landing charges? Will the minister reaffirm the unqualified support of the Scottish Executive for the application of a public service obligation to the Inverness-Gatwick route?

Will the member give way?

Does Keith Harding not recall that for the first 11 years of the previous Conservative Government local authorities were allowed to set business rates? Does he not also recall that only in 1995—year 16 of 18 years of Tory rule—did the discrimination of higher business rates on Scottish businesses come to an end? Is that not totally inconsistent with the Tory motion that we are debating today?

Will Mr Ingram give way?

Will the member give way?

Amidst the list of largesse, can Lewis Macdonald say what investment has been made in any of the arteries that serve the Highlands, in particular the A82, the A9 and the A96? Is not it a fact that those are the roads that new Labour has forgotten?

Have the last five years vanished?

Will the minister give way?

I appreciate that Mike Rumbles is opposed to the motion, but will he support my suggestion that an independent audit be carried out before the situation proceeds? Would he welcome such an announcement from the minister?

I congratulate Adam Ingram and every member who has spoken on the powerful and cogent way in which they have presented the case. There is no point in repeating their excellent arguments in favour of an establishment that has an international reputation. I will address some questions to the minister. We require an independent audit of the whole process that has been carried out to date. Although John Scott and George Lyon are correct to argue that a fresh plan should be produced, it is perhaps optimistic to hope that the fresh plan could be produced by the authors of the previous report, which we have all condemned. In my opinion, it is axiomatic that unless there is an independent audit of the whole process, of which the minister instructs the initiation tonight, the outcome will inevitably be less than satisfactory. Such an audit should consider several matters. First, those who put forward the plan assert that the cost of the new campus in Paisley and the move to Aberdeen would be £20 million. Oh really? Should not that assertion be tested by an independent audit? Secondly, what regard has been paid to the wishes of existing students and of potential future students? What attempt has been made—through market research or consultation, for example—to assess how many of those students would go to  Aberdeen now or in the future? John Scott made that point. If they would not go, as has been postulated, what impact would that have on the £20 million? Thirdly, is Auchincruive responsible for the SAC's apparently parlous financial plight? Those whom I had the pleasure of meeting this afternoon asserted that that is simply not the case. Although the minister might be on night duty, I hope that he will address the fact that in the directors' report £1 million was written off to "failed joint ventures". Does not that merit close scrutiny? Premature retirement charges accounted for £190,000 and the golf course valuation was written down by £229,000. I have not been as closely involved as the local member of the Scottish Parliament, but I believe that all those matters merit serious consideration. The minister is directly responsible. Although it would be exaggerating slightly to describe his failure to thwart the proposed decision as an act of terrorism, it would amount to an act of vandalism. His proposed course of action surely runs counter to the forward strategy for Scottish agriculture, to the Executive's commitment to the skills economy and to integrated rural development. I see that I am running counter to the Presiding Officer's wishes. Therefore, I will close on that point.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to review the grounds for objecting to the designation of a site of special scientific interest to include economic, social and other factors. (S1O-4911)

I thank the minister for that reply, the terms of which I was broadly aware of. Does he not accept that, although it is necessary to protect plant and animal species, it is also essential to protect the human species? Increasingly, in many parts of Scotland—not least on the islands of Yell, Islay and Arran—communities are extremely concerned about the sometimes unfair and draconian impact of SSSIs. Does the minister not accept that the designation, with its detailed and onerous conditions, is  perhaps really more suited to preserving and protecting meadows in Sussex than it is to preserving and protecting tracts of land in Scotland?

We are all working towards the same aim. On balance, does Mike Rumbles agree that the pilot schemes down south being regarded as successful negates the need for a further pilot scheme and that—as Roseanna Cunningham said—we should just get on with it?

I welcome the fact that Robert Brown has initiated this debate and agree with many of the sentiments that he has expressed. We all agree on the pivotal role that is played by sub-post offices in rural Scotland, but I want to focus on taking the debate forward. The impact of the transfer of benefits and pensions payments from sub-post offices will be disastrous. The figure of one third has been mentioned, but I know that some sub-post offices rely on that source for up to 40 per cent of their income. Their income is already minute. If benefits and pensions income is lost, very few of the sub-post offices that remain will be sustainable, and that will mean the loss of the focal point of many rural communities. I am not talking about something that will happen in the dim and distant future, but about something that will happen in 2002 or within a very short time. I agree with the suggestion that "Your Guide" should already have been piloted in Scotland, but surely the motion's suggestion "that the Scottish Executive should pilot such a scheme in Scotland" comes a little bit late. In question S1W-23640, I asked the Scottish Executive "what progress has been made in the delivery of online public services". From the answer to that question, it is clear that the Executive is not committed to introducing a pilot scheme in Scotland. Allan Wilson stated:  "the Scottish Executive is paying close attention to the development of the Your Guide pilot project in Post Offices in Leicestershire and Rutland. Arrangements have been made for ministers and officials from the Scottish Executive to see the project first hand. The pilot will of course have to be comprehensively evaluated to assess the case for national roll out."— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 15 March 2002; p 149.]  How long will that comprehensive evaluation take? I do not know. I invite the minister to say whether there is a fixed date by which the evaluation will be provided to Parliament. I suspect that there is not and that the evaluation will take a long time. If there is to be a pilot scheme, it might come too late to tackle the immense problem of loss of income with which all sub-postmasters and sub-postmistresses are inevitably faced. Although I support the sentiment behind a pilot scheme, we are essentially asking for something that would be too late. The question is, what is the commitment of both parties of the Executive to having "Your Guide" used in sub-post offices. Many members, including Adam Ingram, have asked that over a long period. Wendy Alexander gave the first answer back in 16 January 2001, when I asked a supplementary question. The question is whether the Executive is committed to using sub-post offices as the delivery vehicle for "Your Guide". In the answer to question S1W-23640, the Executive stated that it is committed to a "multi-channel approach". Perhaps that means that a television set is involved—I am not quite sure—but sub-post offices do not seem to be too much in the frame. There are references to other sources of delivery, but there is little cause for comfort in relation to sub-post offices. I hope that the minister will be able to dispel the worries that I have described and to introduce certainty and commitment to the use of sub-post offices for the "Your Guide" technology very soon.

We urgently require a statutory right of access. I suggest that Mr McLetchie is totally wrong to argue that we do not. The reason why we require a statutory right of access is not because there has not been a de facto freedom to roam—as Rennie McOwan and others have argued over the years, there has—but because certain land estate owners have refused and denied access. That is why we are here today. I am delighted to speak in favour of the right of access. I am pleased that it extends to inland water and therefore to the sport of canoeing. I am also very pleased that the bill will create community ownership possibilities in Scotland, particularly in my part of the world. Community ownership is a welcome development on the isle of Eigg—as other speakers have mentioned—as well as in Laggan, Knoydart and, we hope, in Grantown-on-Spey. We welcome that, although it may have only a limited impact on the general issues to which Roseanna Cunningham referred earlier. I want to focus on section 9(2)(a). Last March, when the foot-and-mouth restrictions were imposed, an outdoor code was introduced. That code was respected and acted on by every person who would be excluded from access rights by section 9(2)(a). Among those are every mountain guide, climbing instructor and outdoor activity provider—every person whose livelihood is dependent on access to the outdoors. What do those people do? They make a profit, so under section 9(2)(a) as drafted they must be excluded from access rights. The minister's use of the word exploitation will hardly give any comfort to such people, who need to make a living somehow. Those people are engaged in providing outdoor education to young people, in particular. Who else will provide that education, which is necessary to give our young people a taste of outdoor experience, whether in my part of the world or elsewhere in Scotland? Unless section 9(2)(a) is scrapped, the people to whom I refer will be charged for access. What is the point of the announcement yesterday by the national lottery of £87 million to tackle obesity and to encourage young people to get outdoors when the bill includes a provision that takes social exclusion to a new level? That conflicts with the aims that Lord Watson correctly spoke about yesterday.  I seriously hope that the Executive will reconsider its position. If it does not, it will create a division between people who are involved in tourism and people who are involved in farming. We should not have division but should bring people together. Last year, mountain guides, climbing instructors and others co-operated voluntarily because they respected the fact that there was a need to prevent foot-and-mouth disease spreading throughout the country. They co-operated freely and of their own will. If that is not recognised by the deletion of section 9(2)(a) from the bill, I am afraid that the minister will be responsible for sowing seeds of division and for allowing some landowners to impose charges on the provision of outdoor access. The minister is shaking his head, but that will certainly happen. For that reason, I hope that he will think again.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the minister give way?

I am grateful to the minister and I could not disagree with much that he has said. However, the debate is about duty stamps. Will the minister state whether he agrees that, as a measure to combat fraud, duty stamps will not work? Will the Executive oppose duty stamps?

We warmly welcome Annabel Goldie's motion on a topic that I believe I can safely say we all enjoy in variable quantities. It is my pleasure to open for the SNP in the debate. My wife will have the last word later in the proceedings—the rules of natural justice apply in this debate. The debate is not about the worth and inestimable value of whisky to our economy, culture and society—we can all take that as read. The debate is about an absurd proposal that emanates from Westminster, from a gentleman from a firm of accountants, who thinks that a problem can be solved by a solution that many other countries have discarded as ineffective, inefficient and counter-productive. We really should focus on that issue in the debate. The Deputy Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning rightly mentioned that tax fraud is a problem. He referred to the particular problem of inward diversion, namely tax fraud in  respect of whisky coming from the EU into the UK. Of course, the primary difficulty is that excise duty in the UK is much higher than it is in other EU states. That creates an automatic incentive to fraudsters who wish to avoid paying the higher rates of excise duty in the UK. The real question is whether the proposal that has been prescribed by the Roques report will work. We have had the benefit of an excellent briefing from the Scotch Whisky Association. Its conclusion is that the proposal will not work for a number of reasons. First, the Scotch Whisky Association says that it is wrong to suggest that strip stamps deter fraud. Hungary has strip stamps and illicit goods still account for an estimated 15 to 20 per cent of the market. Secondly, it is said that strip stamps cannot be forged. History and practice show that Mexico had such problems with forged and stolen strip stamps that it introduced a new type of fiscal mark to be affixed to the main bottle label. Although the new mark was difficult to copy, it has failed to stop the tax evasion problem. I turn to the impact on the industry. I spoke to the manager of one of the distilleries that produce single malt in my constituency. The manager said that the distillery simply could not afford the cost, which is estimated at around £300,000, of introducing automation to the process of applying strip stamps. I will not reveal which distillery it was, but the manager said candidly that he did not necessarily see that the distillery would be able to survive if it were burdened with that cost. Were the distillery so burdened, it would have to apply the strip by hand, because it could not justify the expenditure of introducing a process of automation. That is surely absurd. For that reason alone, the proposal must be disregarded. The argument about cash flow costs is even more serious. The same manager to whom I spoke said that given that the whole point of the strip is to indicate that tax has been paid on a bottle of whisky, the proposal would involve—as the SWA and others have argued—pre-payment of tax by up to two years. The tax constitutes—as the Executive admits in its glossy document—66 per cent of the retail cost of each bottle, which is £5.48 a bottle. To pay that level of tax two years in advance would impose a huge additional burden. I find it difficult to fathom why any serious and responsible Government would make such a ridiculous proposal. I am bound to reflect that if the proposal for duty to be pre-paid by two years goes ahead, we will not have a Scotch whisky industry. The industry's role will be not to produce whisky, but to bankroll the Government. The industry will become select bankers for the UK Exchequer—Gordon Brown's bank—but the Exchequer, of course, will pay the bank no interest.  I believe that it is essential, as Annabel Goldie has argued, that the Executive speaks out clearly, does not sit on the fence and makes its representations in public, not in private. Unless it does so, it cannot claim to speak on behalf of the Scotch whisky industry. I move amendment S1M-2833.1, to insert at end: "welcomes the raising by the Scottish Conservatives of an issue that is reserved; believes that the taxation imposed on whisky by successive UK governments has disadvantaged Scotch in the home market, where whisky is taxed at higher levels than wine or beer, and has also allowed other countries to seek to justify their own discriminatory tax regimes by reference to those in the UK; further believes that a tax stamp system would constitute a barrier to trade, would be inefficient and ineffective as a means of combating fraud and illicit trade, will cause many practical and technical problems in respect of, for example, labelling and storage and will impose substantial costs on the industry, and calls upon the Scottish Executive to demand that all powers relating to the regulation and taxation of the whisky industry be transferred to the Scottish Parliament."

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

The debate is about the proposal that tax stamps be applied throughout the UK, a measure described by the Scotch Whisky Association as being "by far the greatest threat that the industry currently faces". Is the association right?

Does the First Minister accept that Glenmore Lodge in my constituency, which is Scotland's national outdoor centre, should receive more support if we are to encourage the winter sports success that we have seen with Alain Baxter and others? If so, will he reverse the cuts in funding that that excellent institution has received in recent years?

I will make two points in rising to support the bill. First, intermediate diets are only as effective as the preparation that goes into their conduct. Most important of all, that preparation must be done by the procurators fiscal who are entrusted with the case load that has to go before the intermediate diets. It is axiomatic that if the fiscal carrying out a particular intermediate diet has not, for example, had sufficient opportunity to consider the papers, the intermediate diet will not only not help, but may well be a complete waste of time and expense. My colleague Michael Matheson has mentioned that on a visit to Glasgow sheriff court—the busiest court in Scotland—the impression given by the Glasgow Bar Association was that intermediate diets frequently had to be adjourned because the fiscal had not had enough time to prepare properly. Preparing to prosecute a case of any complexity is by no means a simple matter and is a great responsibility. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton was right to argue that the point of  intermediate diets was to save time and money and prevent police officers' time from being wasted. Before the introduction of intermediate diets, police officers regularly had to spend days hanging around the courts, instead of being on the beat where everybody wants to see them. However, the system grinds to a halt unless the Procurator Fiscal Service is properly resourced. I had limited experience of intermediate diets as a criminal practitioner, but in my experience, they were a curate's egg: some went extremely well, as they enabled the solicitor to have discussions with the procurator fiscal that allowed for a decision that dispensed with the need to waste court time; however, others resulted in the case being adjourned. I put it to the Executive that it is a false economy to under-resource the Procurator Fiscal Service. The cost of unnecessary adjournments is massive.

My second point is that we see today the benefit of having a legislature in our own country. Until the Parliament was created, Scotland had the only legal system in the world without a legislature. Thank goodness that we now have one, because it means that we will be able to close this loophole later this afternoon.

I am happy to speak on St Valentine's day with my wife beside me—[MEMBERS: "Aw."] Yes, and I remembered the flowers. As I was saying, I am happy to talk today about my love affair with the Scottish Cairngorms. They are truly magnificent and I congratulate Elaine Thomson on suggesting this interesting idea for a debate. As a former mountain rescue team member and hillwalker, I have visited many of the tops of the Cairngorms and indeed participated in the Cairngorm hill race in 1995, in which I had the distinction of coming last. Just before the race, Gordon Lennox, who was a local  photographer with the Strathspey & Badenoch Herald , said to me, "Fergus, you're going to come last. Is that a good omen for a potential politician?" I said, "As a former minister, you know that it says in the Bible that he who is last shall be first." And so it came to pass. I am pleased to participate in the debate and I will make a few brief comments. First, although I welcome any new idea, the local community must be fully engaged. The feeling in Badenoch and Strathspey that ideas are imposed from above should be taken into account. Secondly, Elaine Thomson's idea might well be an excellent means of promoting the number of tourist visitors to the area. However, the local chamber of commerce and community councils—certainly those in my constituency, which includes most of the Cairngorms—should be consulted. Thirdly, there is concern that giving the national park structure its own planning system will add an extra layer of bureaucracy. There is no desire for a such a system. Although I know that a number of interest groups believe that that view is wrong, I feel that, instead of having a two-tier planning structure, local planners simply need more resources to deal with the work that they already have. The introduction of such a structure would set a bad precedent. Other members will have strong views on the issue, but I believe that it would be a shame to spend resources on introducing such a system when so much needs to be done to improve the environment. Elaine Thomson's suggestion would best be pursued through consultation with the local communities. Indeed, it should be pursued after the national park board has been set up and people are comfortable with the way in which it operates. Although the board does not have full support, it is generally seen in Badenoch and Strathspey more as an opportunity than as a threat. I welcome this debate and hope that it plays a part in the appreciation of the Cairngorms as a mountain range of worldwide significance.

I thank the clerks of the Rural Development Committee for their work. No member has mentioned that much of the committee's work improved the bill and was not challenged. However, I believe that the bill should be opposed for four reasons: it is flawed, unworkable, inconsistent and unfair. I believe that the bill is flawed because its concept is wrong; it seeks to ban three activities, none of which is defined. Instead, the bill sets out a wide definition of a crime, but fails to distinguish between pest control and sport, as has been pointed out. It was almost inevitable that problems would arise because of the bill's flawed concept. I hope that the bill will not prove to be unworkable, but I am mindful of the fact that the only good thing that the police could say in evidence about the bill was about the licensing system. The police said that they would be able to go into the countryside and say, "Please, sir, show me your licence." That provision has gone, so I believe that the police will find the bill difficult, perhaps impossible, to enforce. I am extremely concerned that the amendments that the gamekeeper bodies, the National Farmers Union of Scotland and the Scottish Crofters Union said were essential have not received today what I would regard as a better hearing. I hope that those members who say that gamekeeping will be able to continue are right. I feel that they are not right. In particular, I think that there will be a serious problem with mink, as Jamie McGrigor pointed out, not least in the river in Lord Watson's constituency of Cathcart, where the kingfisher and the water vole might become extinct.  I made up my mind about the way that I would vote on the bill when I visited Dumfries with my colleagues in the Rural Development Committee. We had a meeting with the Borders traders council, which was led by Peter Leggate and Wendy Turnbull, to whom Alex Fergusson referred. I realised then that the bill's victims would not be those who pursue mounted hunting for recreation, but would be grooms, farriers, saddlers and other people who earn a living by carrying out perfectly lawful activities. I had to ask myself at that point—I speak as an ordinary MSP and not as shadow minister for rural development—whether I could vote to hand out P45s to people. One of the Borders traders group said to me, "Fergus, it seems to me that the priorities of the promoters of this bill put foxes before people and I believe that to be very seriously wrong." The bill's procedures, particularly those at stage 3, were fundamentally flawed. They did not allow a proper opportunity for consultation for the bodies affected. I believe that the minister did not even afford such bodies a meeting. How can that procedure be defended? I beg to oppose the bill.

I am sure that it will come as a bit of a shock to rabbits that they are not wild mammals, but there we are. I seek an assurance from the minister, because I drafted the definition of "pest species" and provided for statutory instruments to amend that definition. The only difference in the minister's version of the use of statutory instruments is that he will be able to remove species from the list. Many gamekeepers are concerned that there might be an intention to remove hares from the list of pest species. I ask for confirmation that there is no such intention.

rose—

I thank the minister for giving way—

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. We have not had any guidance on whether the Scottish Executive supports the figure that has been mentioned, which was between £150,000 and £250,000. Will you give us guidance on whether we will get a statement from the Executive on the matter?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Can we have some guidance on whether the financial memorandum that accompanies this bill—which sets out the position in relation to the costs to the Scottish Executive—is affected by the sudden emergence of the figure that Karen Gillon has announced? There has been a lack of a clear statement from the Scottish Executive of what the costs will be. The financial referendum did not make any reference to the issue that we have been discussing.

Given that Karen Gillon has criticised the other two proposals on the basis that they do not say how much they would cost, can she tell us how much her scheme would cost?

The purpose of amendment 68 is to leave out the word "seriously" from section 3(1)(c). The requirement should be that the person who is retrieving or is in charge of the retrieval or location of a wild mammal should have a reasonable belief that the mammal is injured. To state that the person must know that the animal is "seriously" injured introduces an additional hurdle and raises the question what the word "seriously" means. I think that that would be impossible to define. Amendment 99 is similar to amendment 50, which was agreed to earlier—somewhat to my surprise—and provides that a person "takes reasonable steps", rather than "acts to ensure". That means that the person in charge of the retrieval or location of the mammal must take reasonable steps "to ensure that the mammal, once located, is captured, treated or killed as humanely as possible in order to relieve its suffering". It is not possible to act to "ensure" that that will happen. That is why I propose the phrase "reasonable steps", with which Scots law is well acquainted. I move amendment 68.

If people were to shoot where it is unsafe to do so, they would quickly find themselves in trouble with the police. Bristow Muldoon's point is irrelevant. Today is probably the last chance to allow the bill to contain a provision that enables gamekeepers' work, terrier work and other legitimate pest control work to be carried out in ways that are necessary. According to a deputy chief constable to whom I spoke today, it would be totally wrong to use a rifle to shoot a fox at the side of the road. A dog might have to be used instead. What happens if a mink gets into a chicken hut? Can a gun be used? I do not think so. The only way to dispose of the mink is to use a terrier. A trap would not work as the mink would not go into it as long as there were chickens to eat. If someone tries to shoot a mink that finds itself in a turkey hut, the turkeys' reaction will be to move to one end of the hut and die of suffocation. None of the provisions in the bill, other than section 1F, would allow the necessary use of dogs in such cases. There are countless more. Are the ministers and others who say that they believe that pest control is necessary prepared to vote for it? Do we know better than all the bodies who have advised us that they need to continue to have the right to use a dog in exceptional but important cases for the humane dispatch of the quarry?

The amendments are important technical amendments. I await with interest the Executive's response. Members who read line 21 of page 1 of the bill will see that activities to control pests and other activities will be excepted "only if that person acts to ensure that, once the target wild mammal is found or emerges from cover, it is shot, or killed by a bird of prey or a dog". So the duty on the person carrying out the pest control is to ensure that the mammal is killed one way or another. Pest control is not like that. No matter how good a marksman may be, he or she cannot always guarantee that the quarry will be shot. Therefore, I suggest that the phrase "acts to ensure" should be replaced either by "seeks to ensure" or "takes reasonable steps to ensure". The phrase "takes reasonable steps" is one that the Minister for Environment and Rural Development will recognise is a feature of much legislation—I note that I have the minister's attention. The concept of reasonable care is one with which Scots law is well acquainted. However, the task of ensuring that something happens is plainly a hurdle too high. My amendments 40, 49 and 50 are meant to be helpful. In conclusion, I will make a serious point. If it is impossible, as I suggest, to guarantee success in pest control activities, those who are engaged in those activities will not be covered by the exception. If they are not covered by the exception, they will be committing a crime if they shoot and miss.

I agree with Sylvia Jackson that amendments 41 and 94 are most important to me and to many other members who have an interest in this topic. I urge members to vote for amendment 94, which is a compromise that has been freely given and which commands the support of many members outside the chamber. Contrary to what Sylvia Jackson said, I am convinced that amendment 94 is essential if gamekeepers, terrier men and hill pack men are to be able to carry out their work in Scotland. Not only am I convinced of that, but yesterday I had written confirmation that that is the case from the Scottish Gamekeepers Association. That has also been confirmed by the Scottish Hill Packs Association, the National Working Terrier Federation, the Scottish Crofting Foundation and the National Farmers Union of Scotland. Jim Walker gave evidence on the damage that the fox did to 47 of his lambs during one short period at Easter. I put it to Sylvia Jackson that, for such reasons, those organisations are not happy to see amendment 94 fall. In some circumstances, it is necessary to use a single dog to dispatch a fox. Lord Watson himself, recognising that necessity, has allowed for exceptions, such as the dispatch  of orphan cubs below ground, and for situations in which seriously injured animals may need to be dispatched in the interests of their own welfare. Those exceptions have been recognised, but there are other circumstances in which a lurcher needs to be used to dispatch a fox. Such circumstances even occur in cities. I have two examples. There was a lady in Giffnock whose poodle pup was attacked by a fox. As far as I am aware, it is not appropriate to use a rifle in Giffnock or any nearby parts such as Glasgow—I do not mean to discriminate. On another occasion, a lady was hanging out her washing and was accompanied by her Yorkshire terrier, when a fox appeared and suddenly attacked the dog, which was carried for a distance of about 20 yards before being dropped by the fox. The dog died of its injuries. When Mr Bill O'Donnell visited the garden, he could not locate the fox. However, firearms might have been necessary. From Caithness to Glasgow and all over Scotland, it is necessary for a single dog to be involved in such circumstances. As I understand it, the only argument against the amendment—

Not quite yet. The only argument against amendment 94 is that it is a wrecking amendment. The amendment is a compromise amendment, which is designed to secure the agreement of the chamber. How on earth could amendment 94 be a wrecking amendment? How on earth could a mounted hunt procure that only a single dog affects the kill? That cannot be true. I want to make another point that undermines the argument that Sylvia Jackson has made. If using more than one dog is so bad, why is it lawful under section 1A(1B) and section 3? No attempt has been made to delete 1A(1B), under which more than one dog can be used. There is a certain inconsistency. In conclusion, I would say that the bodies that are represented in the public gallery—many of which I have worked closely with—are respectable bodies. They have put absolute clear blue water between themselves and some of the despicable campaigning tactics that we have seen and that we all deplore. They are responsible; they operate to the highest standards; they have a code of conduct that is guaranteed to prevent fox baiting; they have decades of experience; and they have informed me that they need amendment 94. If they do not get this amendment, we will be turning them into potential criminals. We must not allow that to occur. To do so would be to allow a grave injustice, which I fear would cast shame on the  role that we have played in this bill.

I am extremely grateful to Sylvia Jackson for taking my intervention. Is she aware that the Scottish Gamekeepers Association, the Scottish Hill Packs Association, the National Working Terrier Federation, the National Farmers  Union of Scotland and the Scottish Crofting Foundation have said that they regard amendment 94 as absolutely essential?

I have lodged amendment 36 because section 1D does not adequately protect the sport of falconry. Some smaller birds that are used, such as the goshawk or harris hawk, rarely kill the small wild mammal—typically a hare. They are not able to do so because they are too light and too small. Section 1D does not allow the human dispatch—usually done by wringing the hare's neck—which prevents the infliction of prolonged and unnecessary suffering. Without such dispatch, the hare would take much longer to die. The exception under section 1D applies when "that person acts to ensure that, once a wild mammal is found or emerges from cover, it is shot, or killed by a bird of prey". That is the standard; one has to act to make certain that the mammal is killed or shot. I have just explained that, in the case of goshawks and many other smaller birds of prey, that cannot be ensured. I hope that the alternative wording in amendment 36 will allow falconry, which has persisted for 3,000 years, to continue. I move amendment 36.

I cannot support the Conservative members' stage 3 amendments 2, 3 and 18. That will come as no surprise, as I opposed them at stage 2 and my arguments remain the same. They are arguments that, I hope, are based on clear rationality; if the will of Parliament is to ban mounted hunting, any landowner who knowingly permits that activity must surely be committing a crime. The wording that is used in section 1(3) is "knowingly permits". I fail to see why section 1 should be amended. I agree with the remarks that were made by Tricia Marwick, although I may not express the argument in quite the same way. I also endorse and support the Executive amendments in the group. Frankly, they are amendments that serve to tidy up the bill. I hope that members will support them. I urge members to reject the Conservative members' amendments 2, 3 and 18 and to support the Executive amendments in the group. I hope that my sponsorship of the Executive amendments will add considerably to the vote. I am not sure whether my role in the chamber makes me a quarried species—time will tell. I will be brief, but I want to make some serious remarks. We are engaged in a serious activity—the most serious activity that legislators undertake—which is the activity of creating new crimes. David Mundell was right to quote from the Justice and Home Affairs Committee report to the Rural Development Committee. That report rightly acknowledged that: "the Parliament should be scrupulous in ensuring that the scope and extent of the criminal conduct is as tightly defined as possible". The reason for that is that surely it would be wrong for anyone to turn people who are performing legitimate control activities in the countryside into potential criminals. We have a serious duty today and I hope that we will all have a free vote on the  matter. That will ensure that, at the end of the day, we do not turn gamekeepers, terrier and hill pack men into potential criminals. At stage 2, my approach was to attempt to improve what I regarded as fundamental flaws—conceptually and in drafting terms—in the bill. As Lord Watson will acknowledge, many critics at stage 1 expressed grave concerns about the need to protect those who perform pest control activities. My efforts at stage 2 were in no sense whatever intended to wreck the bill; they were intended to make the bill workable. I say that as someone who will never be accused of being the bill's most fervent supporter.

To ask the Scottish Executive what assessment it has made of the impact on the forestry industry of its and Her Majesty's Government's policies. (S1O-4607)

I have given the minister brief notice of my supplementary question. Will he seek a review of the building regulations in Scotland in order to increase the required levels of insulation in domestic house building, thereby promoting and increasing the market for home-grown Scottish timber? Does he agree that that would not only be good for the environment and for the provision of warm homes, but provide an extremely welcome boost to the Scottish timber industry and the 12,000 jobs that it sustains?

Bearing in mind the fact that the Conservatives had 18 years in which to deal with the A96 and the A95, I hope that Mr Davidson will remind us exactly what improvements to those roads they carried out during that period.

Further to the minister's answer to Mr Canavan, will he confirm that it was not the trustees but the First Minister, Mr McConnell, when he was Minister for Finance, who struck the deal whereby 60 per cent of the gross surplus of the pension funds is being paid not to the workers but to the Government—£100 million to the Inland Revenue and £46 million to the Treasury? How does Lewis Macdonald, as a Labour minister, justify a Labour Government taking £150 million from a workers' pension fund? When John Prescott described that as pillage, was he wrong?

I congratulate Alex Fergusson warmly on securing the debate. I imagine that it must have been a difficult speech for him to make. I am sure that we are all aware that ME has touched his family and that we wish Christopher well. About a year ago, I received a letter from a constituent. I spoke to her today. She does not want her name or her daughter's name to be  mentioned, but she said that I could call her daughter Georgina. Her letter read: "I am writing to you to highlight the problems faced by people with ME, and to appeal to you to do all you can to further research and understanding in this area. This is a poorly understood condition, which some Doctors still fail to acknowledge as real, and not "all in the mind". This illness can have a devastating effect on the sufferer and their family made worse by the prejudice and lack of understanding surrounding it. It is time the Government did something about ME. It is real and does not go away if you ignore it. Many young people are affected with consequent waste of potential, and cost to the country in supporting someone with a long-term illness. These people, in addition, often face an extremely long wait, while waiting to hear about Disability Benefits, all the while being ill and in need of the financial help. My eleven-year-old daughter"— Georgina— "has suffered from ME for 4 years now. As a family we have found this extremely difficult. At the moment she is very disabled, being bed-bound most of the time, needing a wheelchair to get around, and a full time carer to help her at all times. She has had episodes of fever, suffers from chronic pain in her limbs, headaches, nausea, severe abdominal pain, sleep disturbance, severe exhaustion all the time, and now in addition "fit-like" episodes of severe muscle twitching. This is her third severe relapse. She was hospitalised in 1998 for 9 months with associated anorexia, and accompanying problems all associated with ME." In all the speeches that I have made in the chamber, I have never read out so much of a letter. I did so because I could not improve on the description that my constituent gave of the tragic plight of her and her daughter, who suffers the dreadful condition. As any other MSP would, I took up her case with the relevant authorities and received fairly sympathetic responses from Heather Sheerin of Highland Primary Care NHS Trust, who described the process of diagnosing the disease as a diagnosis of exclusion, and from the previous Minister for Health and Community Care. I am sure that all members subscribe to the proposals that Alex Fergusson described. Since that letter was written, Georgina has spent four months in Yorkhill hospital and was in a coma—or shutdown, as some call it. Recently, she has come out of that and is making progress. I praise the neurological ward at Yorkhill, which has given my constituent and her daughter some succour. I hope that the debate will lead to a slightly better understanding of this dreadful disease.

Not for the first time, I thoroughly endorse the sentiments that Robin Harper has expressed. I recently met an engineer who received his training in John Brown's shipyards and who has now, like many, diversified into the oil industry. He mentioned the point that Robin Harper made: the low number of engineers who are being trained will mean a serious shortage. Scottish engineers have a reputation that is second to none. I congratulate Richard Lochhead on securing the debate and on the coherent and comprehensive way in which he put the case, as did many members of all parties. Benefits and work spread from Aberdeen to all parts of Scotland. In  Grantown-on-Spey in my constituency, McKellar Engineering has had a period of terrific growth and success that has made it one of the largest private sector employers there. It operates in high technology. The problem for the company's staff is travelling from Grantown-on-Spey to Aberdeen. A slight difficulty is caused by the interposition of the Cairngorm mountains, which make the journey challenging, and by the use of a road that can charitably be described as a goat track. I wonder whether Houston, Texas is restricted to a two-lane carriageway. Somehow, I doubt it. Nothing has happened for decades about that matter. It beggars belief for any of the unionist parties to defend their pathetic record of consistent betrayal of Scotland's interests by failing to invest in Scotland's youth and infrastructure. I appreciate that that point may be considered slightly partisan, but that does not make it untrue. Alasdair Morrison attempted to deal with that point. He said that oil executives do not talk about independence. I wonder whether he has asked them about it. Quite a few oil executives have expressed private concerns to me. The truth is prosaic and simple. If oil companies operate in countries such as Iran, Iraq and Azerbaijan, does the member think for one nanosecond that they would hesitate to operate in a peaceful, democratic, modern, middle-sized and wealthy European country?

I will follow the member's honourable precedent of not taking interventions. Do we think that gentlemen like John D Rockefeller, Calouste Gulbenkian or T Boone Pickens are going to be the slightest bit worried if they have to deal with the Chancellor of the Exchequer of an independent Scotland, as I hope will soon be the case.

I am happy to reciprocate.

Every oil-producing company has a policy of securing the maximum possible advantage from oil for its country. In the second part of the 20 th century, the politics of oil shifted. The power shifted from the oil companies to the oil-producing and exporting countries. An organisation was set up, not by an Arabian country, but by Venezuela. That shows that Scotland could play its part in that organisation. The answer to Mr Davidson's question is that Britain extracted a fairly high marginal tax rate. In  1985, Saudi Arabian oil production fell below that of North sea production. A senior oil executive told me that it was the Tory chancellor of the time who struck a very tough deal with the oil companies. That is the approach that I would advocate for the Scottish Government and for every Government. I hope that that answers Mr Davidson's question. I am happy to endorse the motion.

Following the recent release of information under the 30-year rule, we learned that Prime Minister Heath's Cabinet in 1971 rejected the proposal to set up an oil fund to benefit future Scottish generations. Does David Davidson regret that decision?

The minister is aware that the trunk roads are the responsibility of a private company—BEAR Scotland—and that the non-trunk roads are a local authority responsibility. Does the minister regard it as sensible to have two sets of gritters, two sets of snow ploughs, two sets of workers and two sets of back-up office supplies? Does not that lead to unnecessary duplication and waste? Is not it the case that the policy is no more than a Railtrack of the roads that is costing Highland folk dear?

I, too, congratulate Alasdair Morrison on bringing us this excellent debate. As he knows, I had the pleasure of visiting Stornoway last month. I spoke to people there and felt that there was broad support for the wind farm plan. I note with interest that the first news of this story came from the unlikely source of The Guardian on 26 November 2001. I imagine that that did not cause unqualified and undiluted delight in the offices of the Stornoway Gazette and West Coast Advertiser . One name is in the frame for leaking the story, but modesty prevents me from mentioning his name here. There are serious concerns about delay. Perhaps I could put into three words the name, which Alasdair Morrison did not mention, of the possible source of objection that might cause delay to the planning process: Scottish Natural Heritage. I was pleased to see that Kevin Dunion, who wears hats that include being a board member of SNH and a spokesman for Friends of the Earth Scotland, seems to welcome this type of development. However, he says that the preferred site for the wind farm is a European protected peat bog, so there is dubiety that I trust Kevin Dunion will dispel at the earliest opportunity, because I agree thoroughly that the people in the Western Isles should decide on the plan without outside interference. That is essential. I believe that the economic benefits will be the focus of much concern because all energy bonanzas—when we think of oil we think of Titusville, Pennsylvania, east Texas or Mukluk in Alaska—have been followed more often than not by neglect of the people who were living in the area before the energy source was discovered. Wind does not come in barrels, but it is worth just as much. The £3 million rental is a commercial rental, so that is not a gimmick. The Government has no contribution to make there. The Government's contribution is an under-the-rocks system that will provide a supplement to energy from renewable sources. That is all well and good, but what about the revenue from the climate change levy and the fossil fuel levy that goes to the UK Exchequer? We should have an early estimate of the billions that will be generated by the development, which is twice as large as any onshore wind farm development in the world. How much will Westminster get out of the Western Isles and how much will be given back? I agree with and endorse Calum MacDonald's judgment that the project will be the largest-ever single investment in the Western Isles. Will it be the largest-ever single investment for the people of the Western Isles?

I seem to be the third man. Formally moved.  Amendment moved,  As an amendment to motion (S1M-2577) in the name of Alex Fergusson, leave out from "calls on" to end and insert "welcomes the cross-party approach towards the policy adopted in Scotland to eradicate the foot-and-mouth disease epidemic, but believes that it is essential that all lessons are learned by means of a full, open and independently convened public inquiry in Scotland and that it is important to monitor closely the impact of the crisis upon the whole Scottish economy and, in particular, upon those regions of Scotland most affected by the outbreak."— [Fergus Ewing.]

Will Mr Mundell give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Richard Lochhead repeatedly asked George Lyon to take an intervention, but George Lyon consistently refused to give any response. Would not it have been courteous for him to say that he would not take an intervention? Will the Deputy Presiding Officer reflect on that matter for the future? George Lyon showed great discourtesy to the Parliament.

Will the First Minister give way?

Will the First Minister give way?

Does the First Minister understand the huge concern in the north of Scotland that BEAR Scotland Ltd is not able to perform its job of keeping the trunk roads clear and safe and that, as a result, some lives may well be at risk? Will he direct BEAR Scotland to ensure that there are sufficient resources, including vehicles and a labour force, to keep the roads safe for the road users of the north of Scotland?

On a point of order. I have given notice of my point of order to the Presiding Officers. I understand that there is a statutory requirement under the Transport Act 1962, as amended, that there shall be laid before the Parliament the annual report and accounts of the Scottish Transport Group, relating to the Scottish Bus Group pensioners. In a debate on 29 November, the minister referred to information contained in those accounts. However, the accounts have not yet been presented to this Parliament. Under section 121 of the Scotland Act 1998, is there not an absolute duty to lodge such reports and accounts before the Parliament? Why has the Executive had access to information in those accounts when those accounts are still not before us today?

It is perhaps salutary to begin with a reminder that, while we risk our political lives, reputations and careers in this chamber, fishermen put their actual lives at risk every day. I endorse the remarks of Winnie Ewing and others about the increasing difficulty in obtaining crew, which is being experienced all around Scotland—Mallaig in my constituency is certainly no exception—and which must exacerbate the risks to fishermen's working lives. By and large, there has been a sense of unity in today's debate, although the odd note of dissonance has been struck. I support the minister's efforts to negotiate the best achievable deal for the Scottish industry. There is a need to preserve stocks, but it is hard to see how any member—no matter their party—could conceive of voting against the motion, which states what any MSP should do in virtually any circumstances. By contrast, motherhood and apple pie are issues of extreme controversy. Given that this is supposed to be a debate, one question arises: what on earth is the basis of the Commission's proposals to reduce the nephrops quotas—by 25 per cent off the west of Scotland and by 22 per cent in the North sea—when the science indicates that the opposite is required? That is a mystery to which no answer has been given. It is a deep mystery, because we know from Tavish Scott and others that, at the time of last year's 10 per cut, the former minister, Rhona Brankin, indicated that the Executive would use its full force from January and throughout the year to ensure that evidence was produced to show that the 10 per cent cut was unjustified. Last year came and went, yet we are no further forward. We know that a lot of work was done behind the scenes. I believe that evidence was submitted to the Commission in July. I know for a fact that the Scottish Fishermen's Federation and other representative bodies have spent the year  travelling to and fro between Scotland and Brussels, where they presented the factual case. We all know the detailed arguments, which we have read about in briefings and discussed with our constituents. With all that lobbying by the Executive and the representative bodies in favour of a reinstatement of last year's 10 per cent cut, why has the Commission made its proposal despite the ICES scientific advice, which, as was pointed out, might even be slightly out of date? The reduction in TACs and quotas has been justified on the ground that it is in accordance with scientific advice. There is absolutely no justification for that. That is why we are pleased to support the minister's line that the Commission's position is increasingly ridiculous. I have never before heard any minister use such language about the European Commission. Of course, the Commission's position is far more serious for those whom it will affect. One must seriously wonder how such people can be expected to have any confidence in the European Union if the Commission makes such proposals. Perhaps today's debate should have taken place after we had found out the answer to that question. The question is the mystery at the heart of the debate and no one has ventured a solution. Although we wish the minister well in his efforts, I hope that we will say with one voice that the outcome of the negotiations must be an increase in the nephrops quotas. That brings me to the SNP's approach. We have always supported a decommissioning scheme, so we welcome the fact that such a scheme has been achieved. The credit for that achievement must go to the fishermen, who campaigned in a dignified way. It would be churlish not to recognise that. Our amendment invites the Executive to seek an increase in nephrops quotas; Ross Finnie has said that that is what he will do. It calls on the Executive to acknowledge the mixed character of Scotland's fisheries; the minister referred to that mixed character in his opening speech. It also says that we should take into account the many conservation measures that have been agreed by the industry; the minister dwelt on that in his opening remarks. However, it asks ministers to "retain an open mind with regard to fisheries management measures proposed by the industry and financially supported by the EU". The minister did not mention that, so I hope that he will take the opportunity in his closing speech to say whether we are, once again, going to turn away money from Europe that every other country grabs at. This may be controversial for some members, but our amendment also says that the minister  should be the lead UK minister on the EU fisheries council. For once, I agree with former First Minister Henry McLeish. He argued for the same thing. However, in the same way as Labour said goodbye to that First Minister, it has apparently said goodbye to the commitments that were made. I hope that the minister succeeds in achieving his targets in the negotiations at the fisheries council.

I am grateful to Mr Gorrie for giving way and I endorse his comments about Irene McGugan's opening speech. I therefore ask the member whether the Liberals will support the amendment in Irene McGugan's name. If not, why not?

The Conservatives would sell off the industry.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will reconsider its decision not to confer upon local authorities the power to remove from  owners of holiday homes the 50 per cent council tax discount to which they are presently entitled. (S1O-4165)

Will the minister explain why those who can afford to maintain more than one home should have a 50 per cent cut in their council tax? I ask him to cast his mind back to the days when he was the independent convener of Highland Council. Does he recall that Highland Council's policy is to remove that discount? Is he right now or was he wrong then?

Will Lord James address the point that the minister has not addressed and confirm that the trust deed that governs the purposes of the trust—namely the employers and the pensioners—confers upon the trustees discretion to increase the benefits? Will he also confirm that the trustees have not fully exercised that discretion and that, had they done so, the people in the public gallery and 14,000 others in Scotland would be receiving substantially more, even if his exposition of the legal position is correct?

rose—

The minister seems to suggest that the trustees for the Scottish scheme have no discretion to pay additional benefits to members. Has he read the trust deed of 1983? If so, he must realise that that is completely untrue.

Does not the minister recognise that the Scottish workers spent an additional four years making contributions? Should they receive no credit for the four years' extra contributions they made because the sell-off in Scotland happened four years later than in England? Should they be penalised because the Scottish fund performed more effectively in the gilts markets in the 1990s? Furthermore, should it be ignored that the workers accepted a modest pay rise in 1983 in exchange for the employers making massively increased contributions, which led to the fund having a greater value?

The SNP is pleased to use the time available to it today to seek a fair and just settlement for thousands of men and women who were members of the Scottish Transport Group pension scheme. The issue has been raised by MSPs from all parties who have worked for the cause, but I begin by paying tribute to one MSP who, I believe, has led the campaign—Dennis Canavan. Because of the work that Dennis Canavan has done and the close working relationship that we have had, I have invited him, with the unanimous support of my party, to close the debate on behalf of the SNP.

I have already said that I recognise that members from all parties have done work on the STG pension scheme—I acknowledge that. Every MSP has constituents whose lives have been affected. The purpose of the debate is to achieve what I believe is justice for pensioners who have waited for far too long; its purpose is to make a difference. The purpose of the debate, which is being witnessed by many members of the action group—many pensioners who are affected—is to achieve for the pensioners something that the Scottish Parliament was set up to achieve, namely, to address a manifest and long-standing injustice, which is a mark of shame to us all and to the Westminster regime that preceded us. I hope that all MSPs will support the motion. I drafted it with Dennis Canavan. Most important, the wording of the motion has been fully supported by the members of the Scottish Bus Group pensioners action committee. Any member who votes against the motion will reject the pensioners' case. I hope that that will not happen. I am disappointed that the minister who now has responsibility for transport, Wendy Alexander, is not in the chamber to witness the debate, never mind to participate in it. I will canvass the history of the Scottish Parliament's involvement in the issue so far. Last  October, in a members' business debate, which was initiated by Dennis Canavan and in which I, Sylvia Jackson, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton and other members participated, we all agreed a number of things. We agreed that the delay in pay-out was unacceptable. It is 10 years since the group was privatised and its assets were sold off, and seven years since the privatisation of the pension scheme was completed. In the motion for that debate, we recorded that some 8,000 pensioners and 4,000 deferred pensioners were still waiting. In the debate, we agreed that they must "secure the maximum possible benefit". A record 96 MSPs supported Dennis Canavan's motion, calling for the maximum possible benefit. The then Minister for Transport and the Environment advised us that a settlement would be achieved in the autumn. When the autumn came and went, we were advised that a settlement would be achieved this autumn. In the words of the song, "autumn leaves lie thick and still" and the pensioners still wait for justice. Last October, I spoke in the debate and mentioned my constituent Alex Munro. He was a bus driver with Highland Omnibuses Ltd for 36 years. I must advise members that, sadly, Mr Munro passed away on 30 April this year. I spoke to his widow a week or so ago. We think of her today, as we think of the many who have not survived to receive the justice for which we are arguing. The then First Minister put out a press release on 18 December. I have it here. It was issued four days before the Falkirk West by-election. Only somebody with the naivety of Candide could think that that was a coincidence. The press release appeared to offer good news to the pensioners. It appeared to offer a settlement. Many pensioners—many of whom were voting in the Falkirk West by-election—must have thought that justice had arrived at last. What did that press release from the then First Minister not tell us? It did not tell us that the amount of the surplus in the combined staff and transport operatives pension fund was not £100 million, which was the figure mentioned in the press release, but £250 million, which is two and a half times more than the figure that the then First Minister mentioned. The press release described what was on offer not as a repayment to workers of what they had contributed over the years, but as a "windfall"—that is, something to which the workers were presumably not entitled, despite the fact that they contributed to the pension fund over the years. The Labour deal was agreed between Henry  McLeish and Gordon Brown, but we know that it has the new First Minister's fingerprints on it because, when the then Minister for Transport and the Environment wound up in the debate on 25 October last year, she said that she had been working on the deal with Jack McConnell over the summer, because he was the then Minister for Finance. It is Jack's deal—Jack's shady deal. It is a deal that we must tear up and undo if the Scottish Bus Group pensioners are to receive justice. Why is that the case? What has happened to the £250 million? Well, £46 million has gone to Gordon Brown and £104 million has gone in tax. When Mr Bill McQueen gave evidence to the Finance Committee on 26 June this year, he said that the tax was 40 per cent. Mr McQueen was wrong: it is 35 per cent. Immediately, that gives us £12.5 million extra. Will the minister say whether that money will be refunded to the pensioners? What is the amount of the combined surplus now? It was £250 million at 31 March 2000. According to a pensions expert, at 31 March 2001, it must have been £270 million. The signs are that no payments will be made until 31 March 2002. By then, just as the costs of the Scottish Parliament building are escalating, the surplus will be much larger, up to about £300 million. What does the Labour party say should happen to that extra £50 million? Will it go to Gordon Brown in a secret deal? I hope that we get the answers to some of those questions today. I close by reminding members of remarks that were made about the matter by a columnist in the Daily Record in 1989. In an article called "Cashing in on the bus sell-off", the columnist referred to the fact that the Scottish Bus Group workers' pensions were to be sold off. He wrote: "They've found their pension scheme—to which they paid all their contributions for years—is to be wound up and replaced by a new one. But who is to receive the surplus from the pension scheme when it is wound up. NOT the workforce .... And NOT the new pension fund, either.  But the Government. " Who was that columnist? It was Gordon Brown. Do we support Gordon Brown then or do we support the shady deal now? There is no choice. I urge members to support the motion for the sake of Margaret Munro and others. I move, That the Parliament notes that both the Scottish Transport Group Staff Pension Fund and the Scottish Transport Group Transport Operatives Pension Scheme have still to be wound up some eight years after privatisation; further notes that the Scottish Executive promised in December 2000 that a total sum of £100 million  would be distributed to the pension scheme members and that this would result in a payment of an average of about £7,000 for each member; recognises that the actual total surplus of the pension funds is considerably in excess of £100 million; believes that the level of payment proposed last December by the Scottish Executive is inadequate and should be increased, and calls upon the Scottish Executive to meet representatives of the Scottish Bus Group Pensioners' Action Committee and to make available to them all relevant information to enable them to assist the pensioners in achieving a just settlement.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether its programme for road projects will include upgrading the remaining single-track section of the A830 between Fort William and Mallaig and whether it will seek any European transitional funding for such an upgrade. (S1O-4154)

My question is again one about delay. Is the minister aware of the visit yesterday of the Lord Russell-Johnston? In his maiden speech to the House of Commons, Lord Russell-Johnston raised the question of the Mallaig road. He did that in 1964.

Liberals have a certain sense of timing. Does the minister agree that the delay is acceptable? Does she consider the delay to be much of an advert for the so-called benefits of the union?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. When is the minister going to get around to the topic of the aggregates tax?

Will the member give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

Yes. As the minister will, I know, want to respond to all the other points that were raised in the debate, is it in order to extend the period of the debate to give her an opportunity to do so?

I warmly congratulate Annabel Goldie on securing the debate, and on her typically informative and persuasive speech. The main justification for an aggregates tax is that it will be good for the environment. It is my belief that it will not be good for the environment, but it will harm the environment. It is abundantly clear that it will do so in a number of specific ways. First, it is accepted that many small companies and small quarries are almost certain to close because of the burden that the aggregates tax will impose on them, which is not just £1.60 per tonne. There is a compliance cost of 30p per tonne to do the paperwork and complex compliance work that is involved. If those businesses close, I ask the minister what will be the upshot? It will be that instead of aggregates being obtained in areas such as the Highlands from smaller locally based quarries, aggregates will have to be delivered from larger quarries that are further away. That will lead to increased road transport, with heavy lorries travelling longer journeys, which we are all supposed to be signed up to reducing. I hope that the minister will respond to specific charges such as that. Secondly, much has been made of the justification for the tax on environmental grounds, on the basis that it will somehow encourage recycling. However, the experts tell us that the scope for the recycling of additional aggregates is at best limited to about 1 per cent to 3 per cent. Indeed, outside the central belt of Scotland, even  less material is available for recycling. The environmental—or so-called environmental—research upon which the Chancellor of the Exchequer's decision to impose the tax from April next year was based has been challenged frankly by the various trade associations as being ridiculous. It does not stand up to scrutiny and it has been seriously challenged. I have raised the issue in correspondence with ministers, but in every case they have refused to respond. I have one more point to make. The tax is levied at £1.60 per tonne of aggregate, but the cost of a tonne of aggregate varies substantially. It can be as low as £2.50 per tonne in rural areas and as much as £12 per tonne in London. It has been put to me that as a simplification, the cost of aggregates in greater London is twice as much as it is generally in Scotland. That means that the real burden of this tax is twice as high, generally speaking, in Scotland, or even more so. That brings to mind—I am sorry to bring back a memory that is painful to the Conservatives—another tax that was not related to ability to pay; namely, the poll tax. The aggregates tax is a kind of poll tax on quarriers; it is crude, unfair and entirely unjustified. The burden and effect of the tax will be felt by quarriers and, as Annabel Goldie said, by the rural economy as a whole. It will also affect every individual because it is plain that the cost will be passed on to users and purchasers. Local government will have to pay more. Peter Peacock has made it plain that there will be no extra money for local governments, which will therefore have to increase council tax or seek an increase in business rates. People will pay the cost of the aggregates tax, but the Executive refuses to acknowledge that. The Northern Ireland Assembly had the guts to debate the issue and all parties were unanimous in agreeing that the tax is unfair to Northern Ireland. That has resulted in the possibility of some concessions being made to Northern Ireland. It has also led to the Northern Ireland Affairs Committee of the House of Commons launching an inquiry into the issue. If the Labour party and Liberal Democrats in the Scottish Parliament had the gumption to stand up and speak for rural Scotland, perhaps we would be further ahead than we are. No steps have been taken to ameliorate the bad effect of the aggregates tax or, better still, to scrap it altogether.

Does the minister agree that it is widely accepted that it takes three years to establish any new route? The real problem with Inverness airport is that its usual landing charges are on average, 30 per cent higher than charges elsewhere in Scotland, which seriously disadvantages Inverness airport's competitive ability to attract new and secure routes.

We always enjoy it when the minister plays the man, not the ball. Long may that continue. I return to a serious point. The minister said that he has ordered the acceleration of production of the draft wildlife bill. Can he provide any timetable for when it will be produced?

SNH has stated that recorded damage to SSSIs in Scotland affects only 5,000 hectares, whereas a total of nearly 1 million hectares are designated as SSSIs. Only 0.5 per cent of SSSIs have been damaged. Why is more "effective protection" required?

There is no doubt that we all agree about the objectives that are contained in the Executive document. However, as Nora Radcliffe and Sylvia Jackson said, there is a desperate need for those objectives to be implemented. The SNP does not disagree with the sentiments that Nora Radcliffe and Sylvia Jackson expressed. Wildlife criminals need to be subject to far more serious sentences. That is the point of the document, and that is what Peter Peacock and Sam Galbraith professed they would do in March. However, when they said that they would introduce legislation, they did not say, "Oh, by the way, we won't actually bring forward legislation until some time after the next election." The central problem that the Executive faces today is that it has backtracked on the issue. The Executive cannot find time in its legislative programme for a matter that is of grave concern to almost all back benchers in the Executive parties. Members have already heard two of them arguing for legislation to be introduced. However, when I intervened during the minister's speech, she manifestly failed to put any time scale on the introduction of legislation. The Executive motion is vacuous, nebulous and unclear. Its purpose is clear—it is to let the  Executive off the hook. The Executive plans to do nothing until after the election. The purpose of the Parliament is to hold the Executive to account and, such is the feeling on the back benches, I do not think that it will get away with that. I wait with interest to see whether Sylvia Jackson and Nora Radcliffe will support the Executive motion. The minister said that the system of SSSIs has served Scotland well. That is not what is said in the document: at page 63, a whole variety of flaws is set out. I agree with that part of the document—the system is flawed. However, what does the document propose? It proposes a new duty to be imposed on SNH. There is nothing new about the proposal, as it appears in the Natural Heritage (Scotland) Act 1991—the act that set up SNH. The act states: "it shall be the duty of SNH in exercising its functions to take account as may be appropriate in the circumstances of ... the interests of local communities." Ten years on, the Executive is choosing to ignore the fact that SNH has, in some cases, not observed its duty to take account of the interests of local communities. Under section 3(1)(c) of the act, SNH has to take account of "the need for social and economic development". Under section 3(1)(b), it needs to take account of "the needs of agriculture, fisheries and forestry", and under section 3(1)(e), it needs to take account of "the interests of owners and occupiers of land". That has not happened. Indeed, in my constituency, that has not happened big style. I have to put it to the ministers that the designation of areas including Loch Sunart, Arran, Islay and various areas in Badenoch and Strathspey has gone ahead because SNH wanted it to go ahead. SNH paid little or no regard to the views of local communities, yet it had a duty to take them into account. That fact is well known in my constituency. What is not well known is that that legislation also gives ministers the right to give directions to SNH, just as is done with the Scottish Qualifications Agency. That power has not been used.

The Executive has not brought this quango to account. One of the reasons why the Parliament was created was to bring quangos to account. Many people believe that SNH—or at least its top management—stands not for Scottish Natural Heritage but for See No People. [MEMBERS: "That is SNP."] Nothing in the document will give succour to those people.

Many members will welcome the intention to legislate to introduce prison sentences for those convicted of serious wildlife crime offences. Will such legislation be introduced in this Parliament before 2003?

Will the minister give way?

It is possible that less attention will be focused on this debate than on the following debate. That does not mean that the foot-and-mouth outbreak is not the most serious of topics and I welcome the fact that we have an opportunity to debate it. I associate myself with Alex Fergusson's tone and contribution. He made many points eloquently. As the minister said, there are not huge differences between the parties. For Parliament's sake, it is sensible to remind ourselves that, when the farming community faced a crisis in spring, political parties came together and, out of genuine belief, supported the methods that have been proven to eradicate the outbreak of one of the most virulent animal diseases. The broad consensual approach was of assistance to those who faced huge sacrifices and great tragedy. Our duty is to make constructive criticism and I think that everyone accepts that lessons must be learned. The public ask about the cause of the disease, which is still not known. There are many explanations, but the importation of infected meat seems a likely candidate. The infection came to England and we recognise that there must be an inquiry into the source of the infection in England. An inquiry convened in Scotland would not be the appropriate way in which to deal with that aspect of the problem. There is grave concern about culls on such a  massive scale. Eighty-nine thousand cattle and 654,000 sheep were slaughtered in Scotland. Will the public and the farming community cope with the possibility of the slaughter of animals on such a scale again? I do not think so. However, will there be sufficient development in vaccinations to avoid such slaughter? The inquiries will consider those questions. I agree with the minister to the extent that there must be the fullest contribution from all those with scientific expertise in order to find a way ahead. Perhaps greater investment in research is more important than that, especially in the development of effective vaccinations against every strain and serotype of foot-and-mouth disease and other diseases that we should not forget. There must be a full, open, public and independent inquiry. No matter how well-intentioned or distinguished those in charge of the inquiries may be, the SNP is not satisfied that inquiries should be held behind closed doors. There are many reasons for that. First, there is huge public concern. Secondly, there are many theories about aspects of the disease, not all of which are conspiracy theories. Thirdly, the public must have confidence that the process of an inquiry will bring about the correct results. Fourthly, we must ensure that ordinary people—ordinary farmers and their wives and farm workers—have a chance to put their stories to an inquiry about the handling of the outbreak and that it is not only experts who contribute. Those people were on the receiving end and I suspect that only they can tell the true story of the handling of the outbreak and whether it could have been dealt with more effectively in Scotland and south of the border. The SNP is extremely concerned that the scope of the inquiry as outlined in the Executive amendment is limited to the handling of the outbreak. The Executive does not think that an inquiry should consider the outbreak's severe impact on the farming community, tourism, road haulage and virtually every business in the rural economy. It is wrong that its wider impact should be excluded. Similarly, it is wrong that an inquiry should not consider Scotland's ability to develop its own policies in Europe. Jim Walker of the National Farmers Union of Scotland recognised that Scotland's position in that respect was severely defective under the devolution arrangement. Despite his reasoned and considered comments to Parliament a few weeks ago, that situation will not be considered. My colleagues will develop many of those points. We join all parties in welcoming the fact that there are inquiries. However, we fear that those inquiries will not satisfy the need for a full,  open, public and independent inquiry into a serious crisis that rural communities in Scotland face. I move amendment S1M-2409.1, to leave out from "calls on" to end and insert: "welcomes the cross-party approach towards the policy adopted in Scotland to eradicate the foot-and-mouth disease epidemic, but believes that it is essential that all lessons are learned by means of a full, open and independently convened public inquiry in Scotland and that it is important to monitor closely the impact of the crisis upon the whole Scottish economy and, in particular, upon those regions of Scotland most affected by the outbreak."

I have great pleasure in congratulating my wife, not least on securing this evening's debate. I also welcome the spirit in which we are all working together for a common aim. In doing so, I praise Rhoda Grant and John Farquhar Munro for their contributions to the debate. I listened with interest to Mary Scanlon's comments, which were largely about the organisation rather than the provision of air links. That is a topic for another day. The question today is about how we can secure long-term protection for that vital lifeline link between Inverness and London. Inverness is a mini-hub to all the routes in the Highlands and provides a vital social service. On that ground alone it is essential that there is a PSO for every route that is dependent on Inverness. It is also essential for the economic development of the area that there is a PSO. I was concerned by the remarks of the Deputy Prime Minister, who indicated yesterday that questions about terminal 5 at Heathrow and a white paper in 2002 could delay a resolution to the issue. I would be grateful if Lewis Macdonald could address those specific matters today. Will the Scottish Executive join me in stating that a PSO should be obtained now, irrespective of a debate about terminal 5 and irrespective of a white paper on transport in 2002? If we have to wait until those issues are dealt with, we will be waiting until the next Government. It is germane to point out that many people—my wife, Peter Peacock, John Farquhar Munro, myself, Mary Scanlon and perhaps most of the members in the chamber—have been campaigning on the issue since that black day in 1997 when BA pulled out of Heathrow claiming that it had made millions of pounds of losses but refusing to open up the books to justify that claim, which many of us regarded as utterly extravagant and untrue. We have waited since then for the Labour Government to take action. Yesterday David Jamieson, Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Transport, Local  Government and the Regions, stated, in relation to whether a PSO should be granted, that "The Government have interpreted the regulation very tightly indeed." Why? In France, the Government does not do that. In France, every region has a PSO to Paris, but that is not the case here. No, no, not here, because apparently the Labour Government interprets the EU regulation very strictly. Well, that is not good enough. I submit that, as Mr Jamieson said, even if the Government interprets that regulation very tightly, the regulation states that a PSO is "necessary to 'ensure the adequate provision of scheduled air services satisfying fixed standards of continuity, regularity, capacity and pricing, which standard air carriers would not assume if they were solely considering their commercial interests'."—[ Official Report, House of Commons , Westminster Hall, 31 October 2001; Vol 373, c 294WH.] It is abundantly clear that the needs of Inverness and the Highlands, taken as a whole, more than satisfy that regulation. With an election imminent in 2003, I have every confidence that the collective minds of ministers here and elsewhere will be very much focused on delivering success for a campaign that has gone on for far too long.

rose—

We warmly welcome the opportunity to debate the forward strategy for Scottish agriculture. The Rural Development Committee has taken a great deal of evidence and I hope that all members recognise that there is a need for a forward strategy. I also hope that members recognise that it is important that any strategy document gets things right. I say that not just because of the minister's somewhat frosty reception of the SNP amendment, but because it behoves all members to remember that the document sets out a future map and future aims for Scotland's agricultural industry not only for the next months ahead—or even for the next two or three years ahead—but for the long term. We have lodged an amendment that offers substantive, positive and valuable criticism because we do not think that the Executive has got things right. I believe that, of the communities in Scotland, farmers and crofters are those who would most like the Parliament to work together for a plan that is for the good of their communities. I say that because I heard one or two guffaws from the Liberal Democrats.

Those seats used to be Labour seats—one is never sure. I remind Mr Rumbles and other members that the foot-and-mouth crisis earlier this year was dealt with by all parties with a degree of co-operation that served us well. All the parties responded to the need of the farming community at that time. I hope that even Mr Rumbles recognises that in a democracy it is vital to have robust debate, which is what we will get.

I have hardly started so I will give way later. The strategy document has been summarised by one of the commentators as being encapsulated in the following ideas: first, farmers must become more competitive, which they can do by cutting costs and increasing revenue by becoming more efficient; secondly, farmers must diversify; and thirdly—the other option in the document—farmers can leave or quit. The document does not mention the possibility of increased resources in respect of the subsidies and it does not give consideration to a reallocation of the existing subsidies in Scotland, which amount to a great deal of money. The document does not make reference to the number of farms in Scotland or to the number of employees on those farms.

I will give way in a minute, certainly. In a strategy document on agriculture, surely we would expect a clear statement of the number of people working in agriculture. Surely we would expect a projection of where the Executive believes agriculture will be in five or 10 years' time. Surely in any such strategy document we would expect the Executive to say how many employees are in farming now and how many it expects to be in farming once the strategy document has been implemented in five years' time. I am happy to give way to the minister if he still wishes to make an intervention—perhaps not. In the document there is no analysis of information that we would expect to receive. That information was in one of the previous documents on the rural economy.

I repeat that there is no projection in the strategy of where we expect to be after the strategy has been implemented. How many farmers will be left in Scotland in five years' time? How many employees will there be? The point is serious and not in any way political. My wife's father was a ploughman who won the championship for the straightness of his line of  plough on many occasions. His job became redundant because of technology. Many other jobs have become redundant because of technology. We cannot go back—progress is to be welcomed and valued. Nonetheless, we have a responsibility to look into the future. That is what a strategy document sets out to do. Secondly, there is no consideration whatever in the document of the reform of existing schemes. Yesterday, the Rural Development Committee debated one of those schemes—the rural stewardship scheme, which replaces the environmentally sensitive area scheme and the countryside premium scheme. The CPS was an agri-environment scheme. It included one aspect that I hope we would all agree was valuable: it had a ceiling. No single unit could receive more than £30,000 under that scheme but the ceiling has been removed under its successor, the rural stewardship scheme. We understand from one of the civil servants who gave evidence to the committee yesterday that one farmer or land occupier has put in an application for £500,000. The money that is available is about £5 million, so if that application were to be granted, one farmer or landowner would get 10 per cent of all the money that is available. Yesterday, we argued and Mike Rumbles—to whom I will be happy to give way in a moment if he still has the desire—argued that that was wrong in principle. I pray in aid the critique of the Scottish Crofters Union.

Has Mike Rumbles finished? I do not know whether I should take that point seriously. I am not sure whether it is worth while. When we develop our strategy, we should consider what other countries do. That was one of the criticisms made by Donald MacRae. He is not somebody to whom the minister would use the language that he chose to use to refer to my amendment earlier. Donald MacRae said that a major weakness of the document is that it does not have an assessment of strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats—a SWOT analysis—and that another major weakness is that  it does not include international comparisons. He referred to many positive examples that we should consider such as Switzerland, Austria and Ireland. The document does not even compare what happens in our farming industry to what happens south of the border. Donald MacRae and Fergus Ewing are united in this criticism.

I do not know what work the minister has been doing behind the scenes, but I know that it has not found its way into the document. The document has not been informed by any other country's experience except that of France—one appendix provides some information on France. I hope that the minister will publish the additional research to which he has referred. That would be helpful. I referred to the rural stewardship scheme for one reason. The Scottish Parliament has certain power and influence; it surely has the power to achieve fairness in the way in which grant schemes distribute millions of pounds. The Scottish Crofters Union has argued—I believe with force—that such schemes should contain a ceiling on the amount of financial assistance that should be received. The level of the ceiling is a matter for debate, but it is wrong that one unit can receive £500,000 or perhaps even more—some people have suggested that one unit could receive £1 million from the rural stewardship scheme, which has a budget of £5 million. It is wrong that that benefit should go to one person when thousands of farmers face bankruptcy in our island communities and in the Highlands.

Before I take the intervention, I will ask one question. Where in the document is there any recognition that this Parliament should be making such schemes fairer? The answer is that that is recognised nowhere. That is extremely unfortunate. I hope that this debate will remedy that.

One of the criteria for such schemes should be the applicant's financial standing. I did not say that people should be excluded. Regard should also be paid to the benefits such as job creation that will flow from investment in agri-environment schemes. Where I disagree with Alex Fergusson is that I think that this issue is germane to today's debate. I have mentioned the rural stewardship scheme. There is also the less favoured areas scheme, which was supposed to move from production-based to area-based payments and recognise the problems faced daily by the farmers and crofters who farm the most difficult upland terrain that forms the 85 per cent of Scotland classified as less favoured area. The result of that deal has been met with widespread dismay by almost all the players. Even today, we are not sure whether the 90 per cent safety net has been secured.

In a second. If that safety net is reduced to 50 per cent, what is the future for crofters and small farmers? The basic question that the strategy document does not address is whether there is a sustainable future for the small farmer and crofter in Scotland. My party will not support today's motion because if one reads the strategy document with care, as I have done, it is clear that not only does it not give assurance to those people, but it should be greeted with great concern by crofters and small farmers. It says that no one owes a farmer a living, which is true, but does not really provide much comfort. It points out that there will many fewer farmers in the dairy sector and that smaller farms will go to the wall. I was in a farmer's kitchen when he talked about stopping his milk production the following week and doing something else if he could. We all know the real dilemmas and problems that farmers face; some members who are also farmers will know them far better than I do. However, the document's major defect is that it does not offer reassurance, hope or positive measures for the small farmer and crofter in Scotland. I wish to move on to discuss land management contracts, which is the other idea contained in the document.

Although we support such  contracts in principle, we have severe reservations about them in practice. Above all, farmers might feel that they form a new bureaucracy, and that they are a new form of contract that leaves them very little bargaining power, imposes duties upon them and gives them very few rights. Although we welcome the concept, the devil will be very much in the detail. I move amendment S1M-2278.1, to leave out from "welcomes" to end and insert: "believes that the Scottish Executive's A Forward Strategy for Scottish Agriculture does not contain an analysis of the strengths and weaknesses of the sector, does not consider the policies implemented in other European countries, does not provide or suggest any mechanism by which the aims described in the document can be achieved, nor does it provide any assurance to the small farmer or crofter that they have a sustainable long term future in agriculture."

I have heard many of those comments before, sometimes in the House of Commons where I served as an RCN panel member. Will the minister give one concrete example of action that will be taken by the Executive in response to the many points that have been raised by members?

I congratulate Margaret Smith on securing the debate and Janis Hughes on her contribution to it. I am sure that there will not be a great deal of controversy about anything either of them has said. We all value nurses—that is the aim of the RCN's campaign. We all want action to follow the campaign. The most obvious specific measure that the RCN has advocated is the implementation in Scotland of a policy that is already in place in England and Wales—funding for the £1,000 return-to-practice course.  Whatever else we get from the debate, I hope that the minister will respond clearly to that. It is one thing that we expect of him. I say that with regard to the fact that £700 million has not been spent this year. Why could that money not have been spent on the one simple measure that I mentioned—along with many other measures that have been proposed? Many other members wish to speak. I will make one more point. I will visit the Royal Northern infirmary tomorrow as a putative shadow nurse. I do not think that they could have made a worse choice, but there we are. I look forward to the experience. I will learn more about some of the things that I have heard about the practical, day-to-day difficulties of being a nurse in the Highlands. Nurses there face difficulties such as paying for their own travel. Kim MacLean mentioned that she uses up to £700 a year from her own pocket. Nurses throughout Scotland, but particularly in the Highlands, have the difficulty of paying for their own training, which is quite insulting in this day and age. I will learn about the difficulties for nurses, doctors and those in professions allied to medicine—such as physiotherapists, occupational therapists and podiatrists. We rarely mention PAMs. Sometimes, those in such professions feel left out because we tend to talk only about nurses and doctors. Ancillary workers are also neglected. I look forward to hearing what other members have to say in the debate. I was slightly surprised to be called to speak at such an early stage. I hope that the minister will give us specific assurances.

I appreciate that the minister has been candid enough to admit that there has been an inordinate delay in dealing with the matter. Of the 12,000 workers who have been waiting for their pensions, how many have died without receiving a penny piece? Will the surviving spouse—or dependant—in each case receive the full amount or less? If they will receive less, how much less will they receive than they would have received had their partners survived to receive the payments to which we all believe they were entitled?

To ask the First Minister when the Scottish Executive expects the export ban on meat and livestock imposed by the European Commission to be lifted. (S1F-1267)

That response had an uncharacteristic and singular lack of optimism. Is that because the OIE, the international body for animal health, must declare Scotland to be disease free before the ban can be lifted and that that cannot occur until that body's next meeting, which is in March 2002?

I may not automatically spring to mind as the chamber's foremost animal lover, but I am. My wife and I had a pet dog, which was a black Labrador called Sgian. Because Sgian became rather elderly and incapable of climbing up the stairs to the third floor of the tenement in which we stayed at the time, we moved to a house with a garden, where he spent his later years in happy retirement being looked after by me. At times, this debate has been fractious.  However, we would all accept that even in the most austere exterior there lurks a beating heart. We all want to see cruelty tackled. Elaine Murray's remarks were worth considering because the bill does not tackle cruelty in the widest way that we should. I would support Elaine Murray's amendment were it not for the fact that the final sentence ties us in too closely to equiparating the treatment of domestic and wild animals. That should be considered, but it should not be taken as a given when we set out to examine an issue. I speak on behalf of the committee—

Not just yet, but perhaps later. I stress that, apart from on the major decisions that were taken at the end, the committee did almost all its work by consensus. Only two issues of moment were decided by division. Most of the 102 paragraphs of the committee's report were reached by consensus. Not enough consideration has been given to that. The issue of what is cruel is complex and needs to be considered carefully. I recommend that members consider the SSPCA's statement that "Although there is much research into cruelty and abuse of animals, there is little to enlighten us on the responses of hunted animals." We regard things with our faculty of reason and we have morality. Animals do not; they are different. The area is extremely complex. I hope that the promoter of the bill accepts that his bill would have anomalous impacts that would cause greater cruelty. For example, the SSPCA accepted in its evidence that, without the vixen, orphaned cubs might die of starvation in a den over a long, lingering period. What could be more cruel than an orphaned cub dying of starvation underground, possibly over a period of weeks? There is also clear evidence that the bill could lead to increased snaring. We would all accept that that it is a more horrible way for an animal to die than a quick dispatch is. We can surely all agree—as all members of the committee did—that we do not want an animal to die in that way. I have already discarded 90 minutes of my speech, so I will move swiftly on to a couple of issues that arose during the debate. I hope that, in doing so, I will not breach my remit in speaking on behalf of the committee. There is a strong consensus that the bill that most people wanted was one that would tackle blood sports and would make a clear distinction between pest control and sport. That is not the bill that we got. I have grave reservations on whether the bill can ever be turned into a bill that the majority would want. I do not  believe that it will be possible to amend the bill in that way. The bill has serious flaws. It has been put to me that all those flaws can be amended. Of course they can be amended—any bill can be amended—but can they be amended effectively? The first issue to be considered is that raised by Mr Rumbles, Mr Tosh and others, who say that for procedural reasons we will not be able to achieve what we wish. If we assume that that is true—I make no judgment on it, because it is not my place to do so—would it not be better for Mr Watson to withdraw his bill now? If he cannot correct the flaws, a far greater number of members will vote against the bill than will do so today. Members of all parties have already expressed severe reservations. I have learned a lot during the progress of the bill and my views have changed a great deal—like Mr McLetchie, I am a former city dweller. We had to reach a conclusion on conflicting evidence, and rarely can evidence have been so conflicting. For example, all the animal welfare groups said that it was quite possible to carry out pest control in accordance with Mr Watson's bill. However, Mr Naisby, who controls foxes on hill farms in Argyllshire, told the committee: "We could not operate without using terriers below ground ... If a fox goes to ground, that fox must be dispatched. We must have the means of dispatching foxes that go to ground." At the same meeting, Robbie Rowantree—who I believe is here today—said: "Without a dog, it is almost impossible for us to locate foxes."—[ Official Report, Rural Affairs Committee, 28 November 2000; c 1443-44.] The bill will make the job of gamekeepers, of members of the Scottish Hill Packs Association and of terriermen quite impossible. I think that we all know that. We must have a mechanism to allow the flaws in the bill to be taken into account. Another serious flaw in the bill has not been touched on. Mr Watson has indicated that he is withdrawing the licensing provisions from the bill—on page 295 of the committee's report, members will see the amendment that he introduced a long time ago. However, Ian Gordon, the police officer who gave evidence to the Justice and Home Affairs Committee on 19 September 2000, said that the only thing that really commended the bill to him was that it proposed a licensing system, because that meant that he could go up to someone and demand to see their licence. With that piece of paper, the job of the police would be made much easier. We can therefore already see that one proposed amendment will take us backwards, making the bill worse and not better. Some bills just cannot be made to work. I say  that having, as a practising lawyer, studied legislation in order to find holes in it for about 20 years. A bevy of lawyers will find this legislation riddled with holes if we are misguided enough ever to allow it to find its way on to the statute book.

Does the minister accept that the Executive's proposals constitute a major  change in social policy, that they have not been put to the people of Scotland in any manifesto—Labour, Liberal or any other—and that such a policy should not be pursued in the absence of a mandate that was sought and obtained at a general election?

The First Minister has stated his commitment to tackling poverty. Is he aware that the current income of small farmers in Scotland is barely £1 per hour? Can he identify one provision in the new agriculture strategy document produced by the Labour and Liberal parties that will address that problem?

I wonder whether it would help to inform the consultation process on legislation, and whether it would be an indication of positive support by the Executive for the national young carers forum, if the minister agreed that it would be helpful to hear the stories of some young carers in this chamber and to have young carers from throughout Scotland come to this chamber—in a similar way to what has happened on other occasions on other issues—so that we can hear their stories and hear what they would like from legislation.

Will the member take an intervention?

Given that the Scottish Executive is the paymaster for whatever amount the blank cheque requires, will the Executive put an appointee on the Holyrood progress group?

The Assembly Hall is a fine debating chamber. In my opinion, it is better than any new debating chamber could be. I support that view, but the Labour party and the Labour Government have decided that we will go to Holyrood, so that is where we will go. We should all be sensible and responsible when we address this issue. When a project goes over budget, the first step any sensible person would take—and the first step we should take—is to consider ways of minimising the final expenditure. As the SNP's rural development spokesman, I met representatives of the Scottish Timber Trade Association, who told me that the wood that is being used for the MSP block windows is oak, which will be laminated, or glued together. The oak is not grown in Scotland but in America. It will be shipped to Thailand, laminated and brought to Scotland. It was suggested that, if we were to use a native Scottish wood such as Douglas fir, we could save up to £1 million on the cost of the wood alone. I do not know whether that figure is correct but, in the interests of finding savings, the point is certainly worth exploring. I am pleased to say that John Home Robertson, who sits on the Holyrood progress group, agreed to a meeting, which the STTA and I attended. As a result, Mr Home Robertson agreed to do an accelerated weather test—he will not conduct that test personally, I am pleased to say—to see whether the misgivings and concerns are well placed. If they are, we may need to reconsider. Surely we should consider responsibly what we could do to effect savings. Surely that would be a mature and responsible decision, although it may not be interesting or grab headlines. Last night, during our question-and-answer session, a member stormed out of the chamber—I see that he is present today—and got great headlines for his contribution. When it comes to constructive debate, the Conservatives espouse the Rab C Nesbitt school of politics, as they have nothing positive to say—not even their leader. This morning, when Mr McLetchie was asked on radio what savings he would make, he said, "That's not for me to say." I am extremely surprised that the Conservatives pursue that line. It seems that instead of the Conservatives using the slogan "carpe diem", we see them carping daily; instead of looking for savings, we see them grabbing headlines. We should use Scottish businesses and  materials wherever we can and we should find savings wherever they can be found.

Does the minister agree that there never has been any threat to prawn stocks on the west coast and that the only justification for the reduction in the quota was the possibility of a bycatch? Does the minister agree with the Mallaig and North West Fishermen's Association that there has been minimal cod bycatch? Is it not therefore extremely bad news that there is to be a further delay before the application to the Commission can be made? When will that application be made, to protect the livelihoods of fishermen on the west coast of Scotland?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I appreciate that you have just taken the chair, but the Deputy Minister for Social Justice began her speech by attacking an SNP member for not accepting an intervention, then went on to refuse to accept any interventions, despite making a series of personal attacks by name on members. Is that in order?

rose—

Will the minister give way?

rose—

Is the minister interested in debating the issues?

Karen Whitefield is to be congratulated for introducing for debate an issue of such major concern to us all. I have found the debate interesting and, at times, moving. I am thinking of the contributions from David Davidson and Christine Grahame, who described their own experiences. Mary Scanlon and I are not ashamed to say that we have worked together on many issues, including that of carers. In Badenoch and Strathspey, there is no place in which those who suffer from dementia, for example, can be cared for. That means that carers must travel long distances to Inverness or Nairn and those journeys take up a large part of carers' lives. They do not grudge the travelling, but the practical difficulties of travelling anywhere by public transport from Badenoch and Strathspey are very difficult indeed. I know that the minister will be sympathetic to such points, which is why it is useful to have debates of this nature. One of the few advantages that I may have over other members in the chamber is that I fought a number of losing election campaigns that gave me a great deal of time to acquaint myself with my constituents to be. One of them now cares for her mother, who lives in a remote part of Lochaber. From one of my unsuccessful campaigns, I knew the lady to be an active member of the community—she was a schoolteacher. I went to visit that lady in her home, but she had gone from a life in which every day was full of work and social activity balanced in the busy life of a schoolteacher, to a life in which, because she is looking after her mother who has dementia, she has only about an hour a week when she is out of her house. Carers who look after elderly people with dementia are particularly isolated. They do not have the conversation and they have to deal  with the sadness as well. I hope the minister will take that point on board. In a letter on behalf of another constituent, I ascertained from the minister's predecessor that the £10 million a year contribution to which Karen Whitefield made reference in her opening remarks has been earmarked. In a letter of December 1999, Iain Gray said to me that, if that money proved to be insufficient, the issue would be reconsidered. There is no doubt that the provision of services to carers is a priority area. Other areas, such as the escalating costs of certain buildings, cannot be so described. Domiciliary care is another area that has not been mentioned. One of the few decisions that the Highland Council could perhaps be criticised for was its decision to withdraw, to a certain extent, the provision of domiciliary care and basic care for housework and shopping in Inverness. That caused great hardship. Some people came to people like me and Mary Scanlon to complain. Others had advocates who consulted us. However, I worry about the larger number of people who did not complain and did not have advocates because they were too proud or did not want to make a fuss. I would like to see a statutory obligation—as I understand it, no such obligation exists at the moment—to provide domiciliary care. Since we are talking about respite care, we must also mention people with special needs. There is an establishment in my constituency called Badaguish that provides excellent care for children with special needs and gives them access to virtually all types of outdoor activity. For example, a young child who was blind first heard the sound of running water by putting her ear to the burn in Badaguish. Badaguish is situated within the future Cairngorm national park. The aims of the national park are wide enough to allow the provision of respite care to allow people with special needs to have the same opportunities as other people who do not have a disability. I hope that the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care will see his remit as encroaching on to that of Allan Wilson. On Saturday, I shall participate in an event called the Caledonian challenge, which hopes to raise quite a lot of money through the 1,280 people who will participate. The charity is called the Scottish Community Foundation and I believe that this year's target is £1 million. I know that the Scottish Community Foundation is interested to hear from members who feel that they have a worthy constituency charity or community project that the foundation could help from the £1 million that it is hoped will be raised. I am sure that David Fox-Pitt, the terrific fellow who is the organiser of the event, would be delighted to hear of any applications that members feel are worthy of  support.

Will the member give way?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister include in that consultation the role of the trunk roads authority? Does he accept that, in the north of Scotland, the only place for any development is often land off a trunk road? Does he agree that the trunk roads authority needs to act with far greater flexibility and sensitivity to local needs, especially in the north of Scotland?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

On listening to the radio this morning, I was pleased and relieved to hear that, rather like Baldrick, Mr William Hague is in possession of a cunning plan. That cunning plan is to reduce the level of fuel tax. I commend Mr Hague, the former putative leader of the Opposition, for developing that cunning plan, but I fear that, as with Mr Baldrick's efforts, it will go awry because of one fatal flaw. The flaw is that it is clear to everyone except Brian Wilson and Helen Liddell that Mr William Hague has about as much chance of being in a position after the general election to implement his cunning plan as Mr Ronald Biggs has of becoming a High Court judge. At least the Conservatives have recognised their sins of the past. We must always welcome the occasion when a sinner repents. However, I offer the advice that when they make a confession, they should make it a bit more fulsome and perhaps a bit longer. It was the Conservatives who introduced the fuel duty escalator. That policy was introduced in the guise of helping the environment.

Certainly, once I have moved on a little. While the Conservatives' motives were ostensibly of green and greenery, we know that the real motive was greed—the greed of successive chancellors.

I will take the lady first, as I am sure that Alex Fergusson would urge me to.

Certainly. I think that I am addressing the amendment, which relates to high fuel costs. We certainly have a shining example of the highest fuel tax in the world, which has been imposed by Maureen Macmillan's party following the Conservatives' example and which is deeply damaging to our tourism industry. The figure that the Labour party is putting to the people of Scotland is zero, as it will not even recognise that the problem exists. Our figure is 10p per gallon as an immediate cut. Members will recall from my previous speeches that we are committed to reducing the level of fuel  tax in Scotland to the European average. That is where the Conservative proposal is flawed, even if it were not a cunning plan that is bound to go awry. The Conservatives must recognise that the problem is the competitive disadvantage that affects tourism and other areas.

I must move on to deal with the point that the minister for tourism, enterprise, lifelong learning and general election campaigns made, which was that we talk down the tourism industry. That argument is the last refuge of a minister who has no coherent criticism to make. It is incoherent and meaningless waffle. I take the opportunity to praise the efforts of David Noble and Delia Holland of HOST, which covers a massive area of Scotland, as it is important to praise the people who are delivering on the ground. However, their hands are tied by a dreadful rates relief package and "The Comeback Code", which leaves decisions in the hands of the landowners whom the Labour party is supposed to bring into line. The survival workshop is a complete waste of money. It provides up to £2,000 for legal advice for people who know well that their problems are lack of market and loss of business, about which no lawyer or accountant will be able to do anything. The Scottish Licensed Trade Association pointed out the fatal flaw and the reason why we lodged our amendment. The SLTA states that the problem is that decisions taken by successive chancellors "are making the cost of taking holidays in Scotland prohibitive, even to Scots. VAT at 17.5% on accommodation and meals, the high cost of fuel, the exorbitant commercial rates and"— I stress this point for the minister— "the strong pound have made Scotland too expensive for both British people and for visitors from abroad." That is the real problem, but the Labour party has no appetite even to recognise that it exists.

We subscribe to the idea that schools should be free to determine which hostel—whether an SYHA hostel or one in the independent sector—provides it with accommodation, but the point is whether the Executive will consider making any additional commitment to achieve the aim, which I described, of allowing more children to visit the countryside and stay in a hostel. In particular, I refer to children who, because of geography or local factors, are  excluded from such an experience at present.

I congratulate Kenny MacAskill on securing this debate. It is extremely sad that the 70 th anniversary of the SYHA has coincided with the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease in Scotland—an outbreak that has had devastating consequences for the whole rural economy, especially the tourism sector and agriculture. The effects of the outbreak are graphically described in the SYHA briefing, which the minister will have seen. The association faces a deficit of more than £1 million, through a reduction in its revenue this year of at least 20 per cent—a loss of 120,000 overnight stays. Like any responsible organisation, it is now looking to the future and considering how the bad news can be replaced by good news and how it can meet the challenges. The SYHA has put forward a challenging proposal that is based on the simple premise that all young people should have access to the countryside. The organisation has traditionally provided that first taste of the countryside for young people. Those of us who are somewhat long in the tooth—including me—may find it hard to remember what it was like to visit somewhere else for the first time. However, we should consider children in poorer areas of our cities who know nothing but the surroundings in which they have been born and raised and for whom a visit to somewhere such as Loch Morlich, in Aviemore, must seem like a visit to another world. That is why I back the idea that all children should be able to enjoy such an experience. I believe that that is the SYHA's central idea—I hope that I have not misinterpreted the association. Bill Forsyth of the SYHA said that, in Germany, every schoolchild is guaranteed a residential hostel experience as a key element of their general outdoor and environmental education. In Scotland, much depends on individual schools and staff and on the availability of funding. Our system seems to be far from satisfactory; I am sure that Allan Wilson will agree with that and will wish to find a way to resolve the situation if that is possible. The solution will not be found without some resource cost. Despite the fact that no other members of the coalition parties are present to listen to the minister's message,  Scotland will listen if he says that he is prepared at least to consider devoting additional resources to ensure that disadvantaged kids are no longer disadvantaged. I will make one more point in closing—unless I can have five or six more minutes, which I would be delighted to fill, Presiding Officer. The SYHA briefing refers to the Scottish Tourist Board proposal to introduce a new grading scheme of one to five stars. The scheme would affect the SYHA and the independent hostels, representatives of which I met on 27 April. David Dean OBE of Independent Backpackers and Hostels Scotland and Gavin Hogg of Highland Hostels are gravely concerned that, instead of spending resources on the SYHA initiative to bring young people to the countryside, the Scottish Tourist Board will spend goodness knows how much money on introducing a new bureaucratic grading scheme for hostels. The mood of the meeting that I attended was that that idea should be set aside and that there should be a full engagement with the independent associations, which are led by Mr Dean and Mr Hogg, so that a scheme can be arrived at that would guarantee basic standards of comfort and cleanliness and the availability of the facilities that one expects to find in hostels. The feeling was that the bureaucratic scheme should not be implemented. The issue is a matter of grave concern to the independent sector, which operates many hostels in my constituency and throughout Scotland. I hope that the minister will touch on that issue when he closes the debate.

The minister is talking about the trustees. Can he explain why the founder is making the decision about 65 per cent of the surplus?

We listen with interest to the description of the legal complexities and appreciate that these are serious matters, but is not the basic problem that the law permits the employer to extract a notional surplus from a pension scheme? That is a law that could have been changed over the past four years but which, unfortunately, has not been.

This debate is about the many men and women who will lose the valuable pension rights that, as many members of all parties have said, they should have as of right. It is about many of my constituents who are in that category. It is about Mr William Humphreys of Inverness, Mr James Walker of Nairn, Mr David Shaw of Inverness and others who have written to me to express their views and feelings now they are in the situation that many members have described. A sentiment that constituents commonly express is that McDermott was a good employer that made a large contribution to the economy of the area. That is appreciated. It is not ignored and it is not forgotten. Jimmy Gray made that point when we met him earlier today. The message that we are sending to the company today is that we want it to live up to the claim on its website that it is moral and ethical. The issue that underlies the debate is the fact that the law allows the notional surplus of an occupational pension scheme to be used by the employer and, in effect, taken from the potential beneficiaries, both present and future. I do not want to introduce a note of discord, but I have to say that the practice was first allowed in the late 1980s, by Mrs Thatcher. It has not been stopped since, so I do not think that anyone is suggesting that there has been illegality. The taking of a surplus from a pension fund has not been outlawed. It could have been, but it has not been. Let us be clear about that. The current Government has had four years to end it. This is, of course, a complicated issue, but McDermott must acknowledge and act upon specific points. For example, in the calculation of the so-called surplus, it is assumed that no one retires early and that no one becomes disabled. Those assumptions are wrong. Their application in the calculation of the so-called surplus artificially inflates the size of the surplus. Those are just two specific points; I know that there are more. As Margaret Ewing mentioned, this may subsequently be the subject of legal action. One hopes that that will not be necessary. Other companies are notorious for using their employees' pension fund money. One is AI Welders in Inverness, who—as members will recollect—did so in 1991. A long campaign against Verson, which owned the company at the time, resulted in the preservation of that important engineering business for the north of Scotland. Another was Mr Robert Maxwell, but for the sake of decorousness I will not say anything about him or mention the name of his associate.  If—as I believe—McDermott International wishes to preserve its good reputation in the north of Scotland; if it wishes to be seen as the moral and ethical company that it professes to be on its website; and if it does not want to be associated in any way with Robert Maxwell and all his works, it must do the decent thing, negotiate with Mr Gray and his colleagues in the union and give justice to the McDermott International work force.

I am conscious that I am closing the debate as the deputy convener of the Rural Development Committee and that I joined the committee on 23 November 2000, when the vast majority of the work had already been completed. I am aware that I did not participate in all the meetings that were held around the country. With those caveats, I believe that the conclusions of the report merit serious consideration. Today's debate has contained a number of useful speeches, through which has run the common theme that the Executive must give more serious consideration than it has done so far to the serious body of work that has been produced on the subject. Tavish Scott mentioned the need for the internal flight from London Heathrow to Inverness to be the subject of a public service obligation. That is a cause in which I am very interested. However, I do not know what the Executive's response to that suggestion might be. I wish that we could find that out. The need for a social remit for the Scottish Enterprise network is demonstrable. The arguments against it in the Scottish Executive response that we have read do not stand up to examination. I hope that the issue will be revisited, as members of many parties have indicated that it should be. The threats to the sustainability of rural life have been referred to by many members, including Irene McGugan, Alex Fergusson and Alex Johnstone, the convener of the Rural Development Committee. I agree with the vast majority of what has been said in that regard. I am not suggesting that the minister and the deputy minister have no regard for that matter—of course they do—but I am not persuaded that the report has been taken seriously enough. I would not go as far as Mike Rumbles, who generally goes pretty far—

I was not speaking in terms of spatial distance. Today, we heard from Mike Rumbles that he was astounded. I have heard Mike say that he is appalled, and that he is astonished—today he was astounded. I am looking forward to the day when he is merely mildly surprised. Although I agree with the spirit, if not the wording, of his expression of astonishment that the response to the committee report was less than positive, I found his adroit but swiftly executed U-turn, which showed him to have a tighter turning circle than a Hackney cab, less than impressive, and I say that  from the point of view of criticising his contribution in a rational way. David Mundell's comment, that the tone of the response was unhelpful, was nearer the mark. I will make two points of my own, which arise, I stress, from the committee's work. The starting point is that the Executive's response has misrepresented the fundamental conclusion that the committee reached. The committee did not conclude, as the Executive response purports it to do, that "most rural employment is in decline". The conclusion of the committee's work was: "Employment in most rural sectors is in decline". If the minister and deputy minister look at key finding 1 under the summary of key findings, they will see that it states that there have been some areas, such as the service sector, in which there has been growth, not a decline. However, the report goes on to spell out in great detail, in paragraphs 17, 19 and 20, that there has been a "decline in employment in agriculture." That was before the dreadful foot-and-mouth outbreak, which has obviously made the situation much worse. Employment in forestry has declined by 40 per cent, to 7,000, and, over the past 30 years, employment in agriculture has declined from around 68,000 or 70,000 to 32,000. I hope that no one is denying that the traditional sectors are in decline. What is unhelpful about the Executive's response is that it highlights the committee's having stated that all or "most rural employment is in decline". In fact, we did not say that. I do not think it helpful in a serious debate such as this if such a blatantly false representation is made in response to one of the longest, most serious reports that we have considered so far in the Parliament. An even more serious matter, which relates to an issue highlighted by Alasdair Morgan and Tavish Scott, is the price of fuel. As members will know, that is a topic in which I take an occasional interest. I notice that the word fuel—perhaps because it contains four letters—is not one that the deputy minister chose to mention in her closing speech, but the committee did make recommendations on the matter. They were made by the committee on a collegiate basis, and therefore merit serious consideration. Recommendation R16 states "that mechanisms be investigated for bulk-buying petrol in rural areas and passing on the discounts to petrol retailers and to customers". What was the Executive response to that proposal?  "It has been suggested that the proposed Highlands and Islands Integrated Transport Authority might operate a bulk-purchasing scheme. The recently published report by Deloitte and Touche on their study into the setting up of a HIITA found little support for this." I say to the minister that the reason why the HIITA "found little support for this" was that it was not asked to consider it. The remit of the HIITA is to "Encourage the establishment of regional transport partnerships". If members read further in Deloitte & Touche's report, for which, incidentally, it was paid more than £100,000—which, if I may use the John Farquhar Munro device of offering a personal view when speaking on behalf of the committee, is money down the drain—they will find that the specific aims of the study, although no doubt worthy, did not include anything to do with considering the bulk purchase of fuel. Why, then, when a suggestion was made on a cross-party basis by the committee, that the matter should be investigated, did the Executive respond in what I can only describe as a disingenuous way? There is a word that one hears from time to time, called spin. That is slightly misleading. There is an old-fashioned word that is more accurate: obfuscation. That is what we have seen in the Executive's response. As I approach the conclusion of the speech that I am making on behalf of the committee, I hope that I speak genuinely on behalf of the majority of the committee in urging the Executive to revisit its response to the 21 recommendations. There is an appetite for more work on many of the recommendations. I believe that that is the mood of Parliament and that it has not been met with the response that we would expect from the Executive when a committee produces a serious and worthy report—I see the Liberals almost imperceptibly nodding as I close. I hope that on this occasion the Executive will agree with me and accept the invitation to look again very seriously at those matters.

I cannot compete with my wife in terms of the number of distilleries that are located in my constituency—at least, the ones of which HM Customs and Excise and I have been officially notified—and long may the variety continue. Royal Brackla, Dalwhinnie, Tomatin and Ben Nevis provide some of Scotland's finest whisky, as I found out when I revisited Andy Shand and his staff at Ben Nevis on Friday. When asked what he thought of the prospect of drinking simply one whisky, Norman MacCaig said that it would be just a provocation. What we are debating is a provocation. I can find no justification whatsoever for the imposition of this system of a register of abstractions on the Scotch whisky industry. All members from whom we have heard—John Farquhar Munro, Brian Monteith, Jamie Stone, Margaret Ewing and Richard Lochhead—have noted that we have the finest drinks industry in the world. We have heard how it operates and I shall not repeat that. There is no need whatsoever for the regulation and I wonder what on earth we are doing here discussing it.  I wonder why the Executive has not responded more seriously when it has had the opportunity to do so—such as when I asked S1W-14793—and announced that an exemption will be sought. All of us must want to join together to present a united front on this issue. There is no evidence that I am aware of that whisky distilling poses any threat to our water supply. We have seen evidence of that from the Scotch Whisky Association and from the Malt Distillers Association, which have shown us figures such as the fact that the amount of water that is abstracted amounts to one part in 1,000. John Farquhar Munro has pointed out that water that is borrowed is given back. The borrowing of water is, therefore, of no relevance at all, nor is the water temperature, which is well controlled to 1.5 deg C. Why has the Executive not made its position clear? Could it be that SEPA is imposing a dead hand on this issue? I understand that SEPA, in a letter to the convener of the Transport and the Environment Committee dated 1 May, said that it could see "no reason why the Scotch Whisky industry should be exempt from the Water Framework Directive's requirement for abstraction controls."  SEPA also said that, at present, "there is no monitoring of abstractions. SEPA believes that the majority of distilleries do not have a negative impact on the environment. However, anecdotal evidence suggests that around 20 % of distilleries do." SEPA admits that it has only anecdotal evidence, yet it has formed a conclusion—even though it has no evidence. SEPA is supposed to be a responsible organisation and this Executive is supposed to be against red tape. I hope that the minister will say on what basis SEPA has come up with the ridiculous statement that it can see no reason why the industry should be exempt when I detect that the cross-party mood in this Parliament is that there is no case for burdening the Scotch whisky industry with more costs and regulations. There is no appetite—or thirst—for that whatsoever.

I thank the minister for providing us with an advance copy of his statement. The SNP is delighted that the policy of stamping out appears to have been successful and we welcome the minister's statement that the epidemic has turned the corner. This morning, I was concerned to learn that a number of farmers in New Luce were blockading their farms against a visit by slaughtermen who proposed to carry out a cull. Those farmers had heard an announcement—apparently from Downing Street—on yesterday evening's news that there was to be a relaxation of the rules regarding which animals and farms would be affected by the cull. Does the minister agree that the announcement of that news by Downing Street in a press release rather than before Parliament was disgraceful? Will he condemn it absolutely? Will he give an assurance that every farmer involved in New Luce will be contacted immediately today to clarify whether, under the new rules, their farms will be affected? With regard to the economic impact, examples have been given of lay-offs at abattoirs. Is anything being done to help the staff who have lost their jobs? Can the minister give an assurance that the lack of fodder is not causing severe welfare problems? Will his department take any steps with regard to that important matter? We welcome the relaxation of the movement restrictions. Can the minister state what work has been undertaken on an application to the European Commission to secure a relaxation of the export ban? If that cannot be done immediately for the whole of Scotland, will he investigate the possibility that the provisionally free area can, as a zone of Scotland—as recognised under the OIE, or office international des épizooties, rules—be subject to a limited lifting of the export ban?

I have not one shred of doubt that the majority of people in Scotland, and especially in the Highlands and Islands and rural Scotland, agree completely with the proposition that the cost of fuel in Scotland is far too high. I say that in all seriousness because I have been disappointed by aspects of the debate, one of which was mentioned by Mr Tosh. The seriousness of the topic was driven home by Sandra White, who pointed out in a straightforward, down-to-earth manner the impact that fuel prices have on those on low incomes. That point was first forcefully underlined to me after I was elected, when I met two people in my constituency who live in a part of Scotland called the Cabrach, which is about as rural as one can get. It is miles from the nearest stick. The married couple both had to work on very low wages.

Mr Kerr should sit down, as he had his shot earlier. The amount of money that those people have to pay for fuel from their weekly earnings is totally unjustifiable. In its impact on those on low incomes, the fuel tax is far more punitive than the poll tax ever was. I am disappointed that not one back-bench Labour MSP in the Parliament has had the guts to speak out on the issue, although I am not surprised, because—

If Mr Kerr is saying that he will speak out, I will read his press release after the debate. I am having my turn now, so he can sit down on his bahookie. Labour MSPs—all 56 of them—have copied that example from their models down in Westminster, not one of whom, over four years, has rebelled against Tony Blair. I issue to Labour MSPs a challenge, from which Mr Kerr is excluded. Can they find a random sample of 56 people in Scotland in which a single person does not think that fuel tax is too high? Despite their opinion surveys, focus groups, consultants' reports and the millions of quid of taxpayers' money that they say they are so concerned about but which they blow away on advertising, not one member of a random sample of 56 people would agree with them.

That is because we have a serious problem to address. I want to discuss how that problem should be dealt with and to tell the Conservatives, who have tried to propose a serious argument, why I believe they are wrong. First, fuel tax is too high. Secondly, as Murray Tosh recognised, we must be able to compete with our European competitors. How on earth can our businesses compete with those in countries such as Greece, where the cost per litre is cheaper by nearly half, at 43.69p as opposed to 78.5p? How can we compete with countries such as Ireland, a close competitor in many fields of business, where the cost is 48p? How can we compete even with Italy, where the cost is slightly higher than that, at 55.87p?

I do not know whether there is a problem in Tuscany. I do not know whether there are higher prices in Tuscany, as there are in the Highlands and Islands, although I should be very happy to hear an intervention from Mr Alasdair Morrison who, I believe, could probably tell us what the price of fuel in Tuscany is.

How can we compete with our competitors if we are saddled with that unfair burden?

I fear that I shall just have to  speak up, Presiding Officer. The other problem, of course, is that the Conservatives' measure of a one-off cut will not do, because it will not begin to tackle that competitive disadvantage. We must have a level playing field in that regard. One of the very real disadvantages is that 40-tonne trucks coming into the UK can carry 14,080 litres of fuel and can drive for 2,500 miles. The amount of smuggling that goes on costs hundreds of millions of pounds a year, according to the Road Haulage Association, and it is not a problem that affects only businesses.

Mr Kerr should sit down and learn something. I have been advised that, in Northern Ireland, it is estimated that as much as half the fuel bought by domestic purchasers may be brought over the border. People whom I have met recently tell me that, at one specific petrol station, they saw one person buying 140 gallons of fuel in a car and in various jerricans. Quite apart from the fact that that must be a huge danger, it is economic madness. The Labour party has made no attempt in the debate to say what the hidden cost of smuggling is, nor has it made any attempt to address the problem of the cost to business. When I was elected, I made a pledge that I would raise the topic of fuel from time to time, and I hope that I have done so—perhaps not as often as I should have, but I shall try to put that right. I was told by a haulage contractor that he could not continue profitably in an otherwise very successful business unless action was taken to tackle the disgracefully high level of fuel tax. The most intractable problem is how to deal with the differential that we have suffered in the Highlands and Islands for several decades. Indeed, when I was a member of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, I quoted a 1976 editorial from The Press and Journal about that. Of course, we welcome any measures that will tackle that problem, but we are far from convinced that there is any real will on the part of the Government to do so.

No. Sarah Boyack's saying that she recognises concerns about high fuel prices should be seen in the context of the fact that the Labour Government has had four years to address the problem. I am afraid that LPG, as has been pointed out by many members, is frankly not the answer. Sarah Boyack could not tell me how many cars in the Highlands take LPG, but all I can say is that I have not seen any and I think that I have seen only one garage in  my constituency where LPG can be purchased. [Interruption.] I did not go to Tuscany over Easter. At Westminster, the SNP has consistently voted on every single occasion for the policy that we support today for a reduction in fuel tax. Our policy has been utterly consistent. It is one of the policies with which I am most familiar, because I wrote it, and it was passed unanimously at conference, irrespective of my persuasive skills, I am sure. The level of fuel tax hits every business in Scotland and every family in Scotland. I believe that in a few weeks' time, when people have the chance to say who they believe on the issue, they will send the clear message that the SNP stands up for Scotland, while the Labour party has betrayed the interests of Scotland for the past four years and will continue to do so for time immemorial.

Is the minister aware of the importance to the economy not only of Lochaber in particular but of the Highlands generally of the  west highland way? A value of £10 million has been mentioned. I have met a number of people whose livelihood came to a halt five weeks ago and who have had no income since then because of the closure of the west highland way. Is the minister aware that there is no immediate prospect of its being reopened? If the last word, the responsibility and decision-making power rest with landowners, what happens if landowners refuse to carry out a risk assessment? If they do carry out a risk assessment, what happens if they refuse to act on a risk assessment that indicates that there is no risk? In short, what will the Executive do, given that it has passed all power to landowners, if a small minority of irresponsible landowners shows no enthusiasm to decipher "The Comeback Code"?

I welcome the minister's statement. All members who have spoken to farmers in Dumfries and Galloway in the past days and weeks will echo what the minister said about the human dimension and the anguish that those who have been affected have suffered. It is therefore particularly apposite that the minister should make the statement before the recess. All parties recognise that the stamping-out policy is correct. I am pleased that there has been no wobbling—in this Parliament at least—with consideration of vaccination as an alternative. There appears to be an all-party consensus that vaccination would not work in the circumstances. The idea has not been considered or used in a party political or other sense. I will ask the minister about three issues, the first of which is the cause of infection in recent cases. In the first weeks of the crisis, the minister frequently said that one small crumb of encouragement was the fact that each new outbreak could be traced unequivocally to contacts with Longtown market or Hexham market. I have not heard that recently in the minister's statements. Today, he suggested that infection could have been passed by contact between animals, the movement of people or vehicles, or aerosol spread. Does that mean that the minister and the department think that more recent outbreaks have been caused by aerosol spread? If so, what steps are being taken on that? Could the aerosol spread have been a result of the pursuit of  the policy of burning rather than burial? I mention that, but I appreciate the difficulties of using burial in the area, for many reasons. My second point is about regaining export markets for Scotland. The markets cannot be regained for Scotland as a whole until evidence exists that the disease has been stamped out. However, Northern Ireland has restored its export market—I believe that it had one case. Could not the export ban be partially lifted in the provisionally free area, for example, where there have been no cases? Will that option be considered? Will the groundwork for that be laid, including the necessary approaches, communication and negotiation with the European Commission? My third point is about access, which has important effects on the tourism industry. Given the minister's justification for choosing 16 April as the date from which the restrictions on the movement of animals will be lifted, would not that date also be a suitable one on which to draw a distinction and introduce access guidelines that are based on the new situation? If there is no risk that the virus will be obtained in the northern zone—because, from 16 April, we can rule out the possibility that animals will be infected—the only risk in allowing public access to the provisionally free area is that the virus might be brought in. Does not that merit a rather stronger line and a firmer direction from the Executive? Otherwise, we run the risk that private landowners will deny access for reasons that may not be directly related to the current crisis. It is my personal view that the people's hopes that the Scottish Parliament could pursue an issue of this nature in a bipartisan way—different from that of the Westminster Parliament—may, at least to some extent, have been realised.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. In light of the experience of this debate, could we have some guidance about the precise circumstances in which a minister should accept an intervention, particularly when that minister has directly attacked material that has been used by the member who initiated the debate and which was included in the text of his motion? It seems to me that we did not have a debate or a dialogue this evening. Some guidance would be appreciated.

I congratulate Richard Lochhead not just on securing the debate today but on leading a campaign on this issue throughout Scotland. The campaign has focused on the iniquity whereby the water authorities are, in effect, picking on the weakest in society—volunteers and voluntary organisations. In the Highlands, there are a great many voluntary organisations, all of which have one thing in common: they spend a great deal of their time and effort simply raising enough money, through charitable donations, to survive. Rich voluntary organisations, such as RSPB Scotland, could no doubt afford to pay increased charges. However, the attack on organisations such as Highland Hospice, whose charges will rise by an extra £2,500 and, in five years' time, by an extra £12,500, or on Capability Scotland, whose charges will rise by in excess of £90,000 per annum by 2005, is totally unsustainable.  Today, I received a copy of a letter of formal complaint that has been made by the Scottish churches committee, which comprises representatives from many of Scotland's churches. The letter, to the water industry commissioner for Scotland, is dated 27 February. It is the most serious complaint that I have yet seen to the commissioner, who, in my experience, is not noted for responding positively to complaints. If the commissioner does not take the complaint seriously, that will raise questions about the usefulness of Mr Sutherland, and the body that he heads, as the so-called watchdog and so-called customer champion for the water industry in Scotland. The Scottish churches complain that they sought to be involved in the consultation process, but were rebuffed, and that they asked East of Scotland Water repeatedly for the right to put forward their views, but were spurned. In addition, they complain that East of Scotland Water was, basically, in cahoots with the water industry commissioner, who did not consult them properly, and with the Scottish Executive. Where do we go from here? I suggest that if the Executive wants to give a lead, it should instruct the water authorities to suspend, very quickly, any implementation of the measure. I also suggest to the minister that, if the water authorities really wish to find the money, perhaps they should take a close look at their own activities. I have seen independent analysis and critique of NOSWA and it seems to me that many questions should be asked and that the Executive should put in place a great deal of scrutiny. For example, a proposal for an extended sewage works in Aviemore was put out to consultation. There was, supposedly, more than one option, but before the consultation process began, the water authority had purchased land on its preferred site. Does that not call into question the validity of that so-called consultation exercise? It is up to the Executive to supervise and scrutinise quangos such as NOSWA. That ain't happening, and unless the Executive gives a lead, it will be letting down the voluntary organisations and many of the weakest members of society in Scotland.

Annabel Goldie began by stating that the Conservative amendment goes further than the SNP motion, but she now states that a moratorium means deferment—it does not mean a rates amnesty or the waiving of any element of business rates; it merely means a putting-off or a deferment. Surely that shows that her amendment does not go as far as the SNP motion. Her amendment does not address the immediate hardship that businesses in Dumfriesshire and elsewhere will face.

Will the minister give way?

I begin by emphasising, as has been mentioned before in debates following ministerial statements on the subject, that, in pursuit of the Scottish Government's policy to eradicate the disease, the minister has the Scottish National Party's support—as well as, I believe, that of the other parties in the chamber. There is a degree of unanimity among the parties that it is up to us to work together to complete that task. The minister's remarks focused not on the practical detail, huge logistic problems and personal tragedy that surround the policy to eradicate the disease, but on the other parts of the rural economy. I therefore intend to restrict my remarks to those other parts. We must not pit tourism against farming and those who work in tourism against those who are in farming. The industries are interlinked and interdependent. We know that many farmers are engaged in tourism in a plethora of ways. We should never forget that our tourism industry is almost totally dependent upon the scenery of Scotland. That scenery has not been created by accident but by the cultivation and the activities of the real stewards and conservationists of Scotland—the farmers and crofters who have been tending the land for centuries. We must not allow anybody who seeks to make divisions between tourism and farming to succeed. I hope that there is unity on that point. I urge the minister to reconsider the proposal that I made on 28 February and again on 15 March, because I believe that there is still confusion and misunderstanding among the public as to the do's and don'ts of foot-and-mouth. I am mindful of the fact that Mr Michael Meacher, I think on 20 March, called for a public information campaign for precisely the reasons that I have advocated. Had the minister not been so chivalrous, and accepted my intervention as opposed to my mother's, I would have asked whether he intended to engage in such a campaign. If he wishes to intervene now to tell me the answer, I will happily give way. To be serious, I hope that the minister will go away and reconsider the matter. Scotland is now divided into three areas and people will  immediately ask what that means. They will ask what, in practice, it means for them in each of those areas. They will ask whether they can go to the countryside or not. I am sure that the minister will address those issues. Scotland's rural economy is facing an unprecedented crisis. I say that in all seriousness, having spent the past three weeks almost totally engaged in the matter and in dealing with messages from my constituents and from all around Scotland. Those messages—especially from people in tourism, but also from mountain guides, from people working with livestock, from hauliers and others—are heartrending. I want to refer to some of them. Mr Bulmer, a mountain guide, wrote: "Twelve years ago I formed a company in Newtonmore to provide walking and mountaineering holidays in the Highlands. Due to the Foot and Mouth outbreak my firm now has no income. All hill movement is completely restricted ... Skiers have been told they can go to the Cairngorms to enjoy their sport. I however have been cancelling bookings at guest houses and hotels because I am not allowed on Cairngorm to do my job." He has no income. He is not alone. Another message was from the owner of an Icelandic horse-trekking business in Spean Bridge. She states: "We have cancellations from overseas for our riding holidays operating from May—Sept ... Total financial loss stands in the region of £15,000.00". Another message from the company that runs a barge called Fingal of Caledonia on the Caledonian canal refers to losses of £5,000 a week. Those messages are a representative sample. I understand that the economic assessment that the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning has spoken about is necessary and I am pleased that she has stayed for the debate. I praise the efforts of the Federation of Small Businesses, which has been doing a sterling job—especially in the Dumfries area—to discover the real effects on business. It has found that nine out of 10 small businesses in Dumfries face termination. That indicates the depth of the crisis; and I am not sure that the crisis will be any smaller in areas such as Lochaber in my constituency. I say that because of the constant messages and phone calls that I receive while trying to respond immediately to constituents, to find out their problems and experiences. That is why I was pleased to hear the First Minister say that he was able to develop consequential compensation. I hope, however, that that phrase will not become one that is associated with an expression of broad good will towards a group in Scotland that is in dire need. Rather, I hope that it will translate into a measure  around which we can all unite.

I did state specifically that I welcome the economic impact assessment as a step that needs to be taken. I was pleased that in response to the intervention from the leader of the SNP, the minister said that a statement will be made next week. We expect that statement to encompass the First Minister's remarks that we must consider consequential compensation. Because this is a crisis of unprecedented scale, we must act promptly and with a sense of urgency. That is recognised in the news release from the Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning and Gaelic, Alasdair Morrison, entitled "Immediate hardship relief package", but I am bound to say, with great respect, that the measures in the press release will not do. They just will not do. We must do better than that. I speak as somebody who has run a business when I say that asking the Treasury or the Inland Revenue or HM Customs and Excise not to send out bills just will not work, because they have statutory obligations to fulfil. VAT bills must be paid quarterly, and unless those bodies are given a direction, which we have not seen and about which no details have been given, I worry that the press release is merely words. I hope that there will be an emergency package of aid measures. I welcome the fact that there will be clarity in the guidelines on access to the countryside, because as the minister stated on 15 March, there is confusion and conflict. It is a desperate priority to re-open Scotland. The message from the SNP is that in order to demonstrate a real commitment to rural Scotland, we must have a far better package and far more than has been proposed so far. I move amendment S1M-1771.2, to leave out from "the Scottish Executive's" to end and insert: "the united approach taken by the Executive and opposition parties in recognising the need to eradicate the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease; believes that the rural economy is facing unprecedented difficulties; urges the Executive to launch a public information campaign in relation to the disease with clearer and more precise guidelines governing access to the countryside, and believes that the extent of the financial difficulties now being suffered is so grave that a comprehensive package of measures must be introduced to assist all aspects of economic life in our rural communities."

rose—

In the minister's long-term plans, will he seek to reduce what has come to light in relation to the enormous amount of movement of animals across great distances?

To ask the Scottish Executive what specific steps it is considering that will help tourism and rural businesses affected by the foot-and-mouth disease outbreak. (S1O-3154)

Although I am grateful for that answer, is the minister aware of the depths of the financial crisis that faces businesses in Dumfries and, increasingly, in other parts of Scotland, such as Lochaber and Badenoch and Strathspey, where businesses face bankruptcy and financial ruin? Does she agree that the package that she has announced—although it was long—contains no specific pledge of any money whatever? Will she please think again on the basis that the package is, quite simply, inadequate?

I begin by expressing the Scottish National Party's support for today's measures, which must be taken in accordance with the advice of the chief veterinary officer. I express my party's sympathy for the 500 or so affected farmers, with up to 200,000 sheep being slaughtered. No statement announced in this Parliament has contained news that caused more anguish than will be caused by the one that we have just heard. In the same spirit of constructive opposition that we adopted towards the statement of 28 February, I will ask several questions. First, is the minister satisfied that the rigorous policy of disinfection that I advocated on 28 February is being pursued, particularly within infected areas and on the road network? Is there a need for more rigorous disinfection, especially at entry points to the UK, which is a policy that has already been pursued for some weeks in other countries? Has there been sufficient precision in the advice that has been given to the public so far? I seriously urge that we adopt the proposal of a public information campaign that was suggested on 28 February, especially in the light of this grave ministerial announcement and the possible implications that it might have if it is not effective from this morning. Furthermore, will the minister very carefully consider the Road Haulage Association's evidence this week to the Rural Development  Committee about the possible contamination at abattoirs and the possible lack of rigorous disinfection procedures for vehicles? Will he endorse the approach of a risk assessment, which is the advice that has been issued by the foot-and-mouth disease unit in relation to issues of allowing limited access in areas such as the north of Scotland that are outwith infected areas? Finally, we must ask when the advice from the chief veterinary officer was first given. Although we support today's measures, why has it become apparent only now that the sheep flock has the potential to act as a reservoir? If there is a need to bring the virus under control, why did Nick Brown state last Sunday that he was absolutely certain that the disease had been brought under control? I hope that the minister will clarify those inconsistencies in his response.

rose—

On a point of order.

Further to the Minister of Parliament's previous point of order, when he asked about the inability of members who press their buttons to be certain whether their votes have been recorded, can you give us a clear direction, Presiding Officer, that members who are not  present and who choose not to be present will never be counted as having voted?

Can the minister say whether, in the proposals that have been put to the Commission, a capping mechanism was included, whereby the winners would have their gain capped? If not, why not? Will he now include such a mechanism in his amended approach to the negotiations?

I congratulate Alex Fergusson warmly on securing this debate and on the measured way in which he, as usual, introduced the topic. I also congratulate Maureen Macmillan on her speech. I find it difficult to understand how we can be in the situation that we now find ourselves in: we have a deal called the less favoured areas deal that actually gives more payment to more favoured areas. Those more favoured areas receive £45 or £39.40 per hectare, as opposed to £30.40. Alasdair Nicholson, a leading SNP member from the Western Isles who is in the public gallery this evening, wrote to The Herald on 2 December 2000, describing the reaction in the Western Isles to the deal. I believe that that reaction is shared throughout the crofting communities. He said: "The sense of betrayal in the change from headage to acreage-based payments, which favour large farmers and landowners, as opposed to crofters, is compounded by the process and approach that the executive has taken on this issue, and the virtual silence from New Labour." Well, I think that he was perhaps being a wee bit harsh on new Labour, because there was not total silence. Calum MacDonald MP broke that silence by saying in a letter to The Herald later that month: "In Scotland, however, Mr Finnie has broken with that fundamental principle and has decided instead to give the highest rate of payments to better-off farmers rather than to the most disadvantaged." I agree with Calum MacDonald, although I am bound to reflect that he has no vote in this Parliament. It seems very convenient for Westminster MPs to express their opposition to matters on which they have no vote. We see a new tendency emerging in Scottish politics and a new species of Labour MP—the rebel without a vote. How have we reached the position that we are in today? It is quite simple; the crofters were not consulted. The Scottish Crofters Union was not consulted until some days after a meeting in October, and even then it did not hear the full plan. Back in August, however, Ross Finnie stated in a press release that "This safety net is excellent news." "Safety net" is a curious expression; the scheme involves the removal of 50 per cent of people's income. If I were to ask the staff of any factory or the staff of the Scottish Parliament whether they thought that we could accurately describe docking their pay in three years' time by 50 per cent as a  safety net, I think that I know what they would say. I also think that I know what unions such as Unison and the Transport and General Workers Union would say if we proposed to cut people's income by 50 per cent in three years. They would say that that was out of order. We find ourselves in an appalling position, and it is compounded by the fact that, rather than the Rural Development Committee being consulted specifically about how to sort the mess out, it has not been consulted about the detail of the statutory instrument. We must look forward and we must sort out the situation, and I know that the minister has expressed views to that effect. We must involve the Rural Development Committee in that process. If we do not, the problem will not be sorted out. We must also involve the SCU and other interested organisations; I know that there are steps afoot to do that. The question is quite simple: do we want to have crofters and small hill farmers in Scotland or do we not? If we do, the deal must effectively be rewritten by every means possible. If we do not, the Executive should say so quite plainly. I await with interest what the minister has to say in response to the debate.

I am sure that members of all parties will join together in expressing our deep sympathy for the farmers who have seen their life's work destroyed in the past few weeks. It is particularly heart-rending to see farmers who have built up their herds and who must witness the destruction of those beasts. In one case, a herd of belted Galloways, which had been built up over centuries, has had to be destroyed. I know that there is a great unity of purpose in the chamber this morning on most of the issues that are under discussion. I welcome two statements that were made by Ross Finnie this morning: first, on the Royal Scottish Agricultural Benevolent Institution; and secondly, about the steps that are being taken as we speak to permit further relaxation of the strict but necessary movement controls, particularly for the purpose of animal welfare. That was mentioned by Alex Johnstone and Margaret Ewing. The SNP amendment highlights the priority of containing and eradicating foot-and-mouth disease by means of a policy of slaughter, disinfection and strict movement control. I think that we all accept that, but it is worth stating it explicitly. I emphasise that the apparent and suggested alternative of a policy of vaccination is not one that, in my opinion, stands up to scrutiny. It is important to point out that food-and-mouth disease is not some sort of animal equivalent of the common cold in humans. The pain that is suffered by infected animals is, according to one vet, so severe that it could be described in human terms as being equivalent to cutting one's tongue in half. Infected animals are unable to eat or to stand. To allow the infection of more animals and further suffering from the disease would be extremely cruel. For that reason and many others, particularly the fact that we would be for ever deprived of the possibility of export were we to go down the vaccination route, the SNP supports the Executive's slaughter policy and the measures and approach that it has taken. The SNP wants to use the opportunity that is afforded by this debate to look towards the future. We hope that containment will occur and we are pleased that the minister has been able to state today that, despite the sad news of more cases,  no instances cannot be traced back to Longtown and Heddon-on-the-Wall. That news is reassuring, and long may it remain so. If it remains so, the prospect of containment must increase, although it is far too early to be over-optimistic. However, as that is the case, we should start to look toward the long term—I know that the Executive will consider specific measures. I was concerned to read suggestions that there has been profiteering. The Times reported yesterday on the imported meat that is being sold by some supermarkets. It said that "Safeway increased its charges for pork by 15 per cent and lamb by 7 per cent", and that Tesco and Waitrose are also raising their prices. I hope and trust that Her Majesty's Government is looking into that very closely indeed. We should also consider the introduction of payments in the light of the cash flow problems on many farms. We should also put pressure on the EU to introduce country-of-origin labelling. If we had effective country-of-origin labelling, many of the problems that Alex Johnstone described would never have arisen. Alex Johnstone is right to say that importation of meat that is infected with BSE material cannot go on, but we must act prudently. Alex Johnstone staged a limited retreat when he said that, if adequate measures can be introduced, there should not be an import ban. He acknowledged that the work of the Meat Hygiene Service—which is currently inspecting 100 per cent of carcases—the measures that have been taken by the EU Commission in suspending the licences of two abattoirs in Germany, and the other steps that the minister has mentioned today should provide some assurance that all reasonable steps have been taken, although it is difficult to know whether those measures will be sufficient. I urge the Executive to consider the plight of the tourism industry. I hope that, outwith infected areas, it will be possible to allow limited access to the hills—in accordance with proposals for my constituency and others, which I have relayed to him—but only if it is safe to do so according to the advice of the chief veterinary officer. Yesterday, the Chancellor of the Exchequer talked about limited measures to help certain sectors of our society and deprived areas in specific ways; I hope that that is not restricted to deprived urban areas. There is a very strong case, once this outbreak is contained, for examining the introduction of limited measures to help the rural economy in Scotland in sectors such as tourism, haulage, food processing and others. Bodies such as the Federation of Small Businesses, the Road Haulage Association, the Royal Institution of  Chartered Surveyors and the National Farmers Union of Scotland have suggested measures. Now is not the time to take decisions—it is the time to consider what we must do if the rural economy is to survive and prosper again. I move amendment S1M-1726.1, to insert at end: "; further resolves that the urgent priority in this crisis is to contain and eradicate foot and mouth disease by means of a policy of slaughter of infected animals, disinfection and movement control; notes that the nature and extent of restrictions upon life in rural communities should be based upon advice from the Chief Veterinary Officer; recognises that the restrictions are creating real financial hardship for those working in tourism, haulage and many other related industries in rural Scotland, and calls upon the Scottish Executive and Her Majesty's Government, once the outbreak is brought under control, to consider as a matter of urgency the plight of all of those whose livelihood has been materially affected as a result of this crisis."

On a point of order.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Do not standing orders provide an opportunity for members to ask questions about a ministerial statement? The events this morning are unprecedented. The minister has refused to allow any questions to be asked, despite the importance of the matter.

Will the minister give way?

Yes or no?

To ask the First Minister what measures have been taken in connection with the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease and what other measures are being considered. (S1F-870)

I thank the First Minister for that answer. Today's news is the news that we all hoped we would never hear. The disease was eradicated 34 years ago, so will the First Minister confirm that it can be contained and eradicated again, if proper and effective measures are taken? Will he give serious consideration to using the statutory powers that are available to extend the use of the policy of disinfection? Will he confirm that there will be sufficient quantities of disinfectant? Many people suspect that there may prove to be shortages. Will the process of distribution of disinfectant be sufficient or will other agencies require to be brought in? Does the First Minister agree that public information is essential at this time? Does he agree with the suggestion  that was put forward yesterday that a television and radio public information campaign about what is safe and what is unsafe should take place in the next day or so?

It is always illuminating to listen to Lord James Douglas-Hamilton speak. I endorse his recommendation that we consider the export of one of Scotland's last and greatest assets—Scotland's water. As history unfolds, that resource may perhaps be found to be more valuable than Scotland's oil. The debate concerns the meaning of the phrase sustainable development. What exactly does it mean? The odd thing about it is that all of us, from all parties, can support it. That does not occur every day on every issue. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton reminded us of Sir Martin Gilbert's fine words. He set out a fine exposition—indeed, a statement of principle. I suggest, however, that that statement of principle has become rather sullied: the ideal has become policy and, from time to time, the policy has, perhaps, become an excuse. It is very convenient for politicians to be able to argue that we are in favour of sustainable development. It sounds very encouraging, but what does it actually mean? I suggest that sustainable development means what we want it to mean. It prevents us from grappling with the real problems of bureaucracy, of failed policy and  of catharsis on the part of the Executive that must be tackled, especially in the rural communities with which I am concerned. I have been grappling with some such policies for some time now. I shall give one example. A landfill site has been proposed in Strathnairn. It is opposed by everybody in the community of Strathnairn. I will oppose it with all vigour. Why is the landfill site necessary? Because it is not possible to use the Longman site to a greater extent, because the former convener of Highland Council did not fight that battle, because of opposition from some environmental groups. Perhaps he felt that it was wrong to take on the arguments of those groups, but other communities in the Highlands may now be paying the costs for that failure, which is a failure to address the arguments as they are and the facts as we face them. In facing the current crisis in fishing, members of our fishing community have the dilemma of deciding whether they should go to fish in pursuance of a so-called conservation policy that says that they must catch immature haddock. Imagine what it is like to be a fisherman when the net comes out of the water full of immature haddock. That is the great conservation policy that has come from the Commission. No wonder fishermen are coming here tomorrow to demonstrate their concerns. They deserve to have their plea for a tie-up scheme considered far more sympathetically than it has been up till now. The aggregates tax will punish Scotland by imposing a rate of tax per aggregate tonne that is twice as high as that in England. What kind of policy is that? It will lead to the closure of small quarries. When that happens, lorries will have to travel further. There will be more, bigger lorries travelling more miles on our roads. What kind of sustainable policy is that? We have no sympathy at all from the Chancellor of the Exchequer and other members of the Treasury, with whom I have long corresponded on this issue. Not one whit. They refuse to accept that their information is wrong. You are tapping the microphone, Presiding Officer. I hope I have another 30 seconds.

Finally, I will address the point that the minister, who is now absent, patently failed to deal with. Motorists in the west Highlands, in the north generally and in many other rural areas face the awful situation of trying to sustain life with the necessity of the motor car. They have to pay a penalty of 5p or 6p extra per litre on top of a fuel tax and fuel cost that is already the highest in Europe. I do not think that that is necessary in  the interests of the environment. I do not see tailbacks in Tongue, pollution in Poolewe, gridlock in Gorthleck or cars tailing back from Mallaig to Fort William every morning as they go down the freeway that is otherwise known as the A860—the only single-track trunk route in Britain. I hope that the Executive will finally stop spouting fine words and start to address real problems, some of which I have touched on briefly.

Will the minister give way?

On the meeting in the Highlands, does the minister feel that an additional 6p per litre on fuel tax and fuel costs in many parts of the remote Highlands is an example of sustainable development? If not, will he bring it to an end?

I wish to express the support of the Scottish National Party for the measures that have been taken and our total support—which we have expressed from the outset—for the emergency measures, including the export ban. I also express my appreciation to the minister, his staff, the veterinary surgeons and all those who have worked around the clock since the crisis began, both north and south of the border, to ensure that the aim of the eradication of this most contagious of animal diseases is achieved. I received the courtesy of an advance copy of the statement an hour ago. I hope that I am not transgressing any rule by saying that that advance copy stated that 39 farms were under supervision, but the minister has revealed that since I received  that copy that figure has gone up to 41, which illustrates the gravity of the situation that we face. In supporting the measures that have been announced today, I urge the minister seriously to consider going further in three respects. First, the minister should consider using the powers under section 7 of the Animal Health Act 1981 to introduce a programme of compulsory disinfection. I am sure that we have all heard stories—the evidence is perhaps anecdotal at this stage—that some people are not paying heed to the commonsense advice that is given. Indeed, I heard of one person who, instead of walking over straw doused with disinfectant, walked around it to avoid getting his feet wet. Is disinfectant available? Is it available in the areas in which it is most needed? That is an issue that is raising great concern in many parts of Scotland. Much more disinfectant will be needed if a programme of compulsory disinfection is considered necessary. Secondly, it is obvious that the public, most of whom, like myself, are too young to remember the last outbreak in 1967, may not be aware of just how horrific this disease is. In echoing the concerns of the convener of the Rural Development Committee, I will go a little further by urging that the Executive and Her Majesty's Government consider running a television advertising campaign on both the BBC and independent commercial channels to advise the public, first, that there is no risk to human health from the consumption of meat and, secondly, of the dos and don'ts in this matter, such as the need to keep away from farm animals and the need for all farmers to remain vigilant. Such a television advertising campaign should commence before the weekend, when many people might otherwise be tempted to stray into areas into which they should not go. Finally, on compensation, we welcome the announcements that have been made today, although agrimonetary compensation has nothing to do with foot-and-mouth disease, as is stated. Will the minister consider the economic catastrophe that faces our rural communities and the individual tragedy that faces many farmers, as well as the plight of hauliers whose businesses are devoted to carrying livestock and who have no alternative means of obtaining an income? I hope that the minister will consider those points sympathetically, although I know that he cannot give definitive answers now. I hope that our approach of constructive opposition will be of some comfort to him and his department at this time.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will support the Camanachd Association's case for an increase in its core annual funding from sportscotland from £15,000 to around £50,000 and, if so, what direction it will give to sportscotland on this matter. (S1O-2993)

Does the minister acknowledge that, during the parliamentary debate in December, members from all parties expressed support for the modest increase in funding that was sought by the Camanachd Association? Will he tell us why an unelected quango has been allowed to overrule the decision of elected members of the Parliament? As a former sportsman, will he step in and order the quango to overturn the decision or show it a red card?

I do not think that the complexity of the work that is carried out by citizens advice bureaux in relation to clients who have debt problems is widely appreciated. The problems are not easy to resolve and it is often difficult to get at the facts accurately. I join other members, notably Fiona Hyslop, who initiated today's debate, in paying tribute to all the CABx and credit unions. I am sure that all members would want to encourage credit unions and promote their activities as the most effective, the cheapest and perhaps the friendliest way of obtaining credit, especially for those who have least resources. In my constituency there are credit unions that do an excellent job. I spent about a decade as a solicitor specialising in insolvency law, acting purely for the debtor. Typically, I would be consulted a week or so before someone was due to be evicted. Usually, I was contacted by a female—I notice that all the Labour MSPs here tonight, bar one, are females—who had been left to take on the responsibility of trying to resolve the financial difficulties that were once perhaps the responsibility of a male in the family. The circumstances of many of the people who came to my office were absolutely dire. The misery that debt causes is, I know, appreciated by all those who are involved in trying to help people with their plights. It is quite moving for them to have someone in their office who is breaking down in front of them, and whose life has been ruined by debt. It is up to us to find practical ways to resolve such situations, and I will make some suggestions. Bankruptcy legislation must be reformed and liberalised. The stigma of bankruptcy, although justified when it comes to rogues, is not justified in most cases. The stipulated three-year period must be shortened, and the termination of warrant sales should come now, not in two years' time. I am aware that 500 or 600 warrant sales will go ahead because of the unfortunate decision that was taken on the timing of the provisions of the Abolition of Poindings and Warrant Sales (Scotland) Act 2001. The main problem is the attitude to enforcement procedures of those who are responsible for the  credit policy of banks and building societies. The loss of local bank managers, at least in my experience, has brought with it the loss of flexibility and understanding. In some cases, the ability to reach a sensible decision has also been lost. It is not in our remit to tell banks or building societies what to do, but, during my 10 years of experience, I often had to complain to an almost unbelievable extent. As members can perhaps imagine, I do not find the activity of complaining a difficult experience. However, those complaints often had to be made to the governor of the Bank of Scotland, to try to prevent the eviction of someone who was able to pay their mortgage and whose arrears were modest and plainly affordable. I had to complain to the governor to stop the eviction going ahead because nobody else could understand the problem. That is because all the bank managers have gone into some twilight zone; they have disappeared and been replaced by clerks—it is not their fault—computers and letters generated at 25 quid a throw. That all penalises the poor. All that must go; all that must change. It is no coincidence that I see no bank managers up in the public gallery. I suspect that lots of people from CABx and money advice centres are there. Where are all the bank managers today? Will they listen to or read this debate? I think that they should, and I hope that Margaret Curran, when she gives us her pearls of wisdom at the end of the debate, will join me in urging the well-heeled fat cats who are running our banks to take heed of this debate.

Does the minister agree that, in the circumstances, there is a case that the directors of Cathelco should have personal liability to meet the redundancy payments?

I declare an interest, as I am the owner of a property in respect of which there is a liability for non-domestic rates. In moving amendment S1M-1627.1, the SNP shows its full support for the decision of the Local Government Committee to hold an independent inquiry into local government finance. The SNP fully endorses that decision, which was taken by all members of the Local Government Committee, despite the view of the Executive, which was not supportive of such an inquiry. That view is maintained in the wording of the Executive's amendment, which says merely that it notes that the inquiry is taking place. Mr Sheridan would do well to attend the nine sessions that are planned at which oral evidence will be taken. I commend to him also the written evidence that has already been submitted, part of which I hold in this folder. It shows that local government finance is, as has been said, a serious and complex question. Indeed, it has been compared in complexity to the Schleswig-Holstein question, which I believe only three people understood—one of them died, one of them went insane and the other one forgot. I am sure that there are people in Scotland who are able to understand some, if not all, of the complexities of local government finance, but I do not believe by any stretch of the imagination that Tommy Sheridan can be said to have done so today, not least because no one else in Scotland supports his proposals. I hope that the Local Government Committee will consider the problems in the round and will examine the impact that council tax has on widows and widowers, on senior citizens who have retired on low incomes and on the discount for second homes, which I believe is extremely unfair, especially in areas where holiday homes have acquired a massive value, creating a barrier to access to housing for young people in many parts of my constituency. I believe that the SNP has taken a principled stance in favour of local income tax as a method  of finance, but we will not prejudge the outcome of what will be one of the most major inquiries that the Parliament will undertake and which will last for a year. That would be like pronouncing a verdict in a trial before the evidence has begun to be considered. It would be foolish and irresponsible and therefore we do not adopt that approach. In the short time available to me, my final point is that the burden of council tax between Scotland and England is unfair. As Mr Peacock well knows, the Local Government Finance Act 1992 created a system of fiscal apartheid, so that the range of values in Scotland is from £27,000 to £212,000, but in England is from £40,000 to £320,000. That, translated and put into a stark comparison, means that a house worth £50,000 in Scotland pays an average council tax of £855; in England, the figure is £659. That means that, for a house of the same value north and south of the border, the Scottish householder pays an extra £196. That is a Scottish surcharge. If the Executive is interested in removing unfairness, I hope that it will examine this issue when it gives evidence to the Local Government Committee inquiry. I move amendment S1M-1627.1, to leave out from first "believes" to end and insert: "endorses the unanimous decision of the Local Government Committee to carry out an independent inquiry into local government finance, and believes the outcome of that inquiry should be awaited before any fundamental changes are made to the current system."

rose—

To ask the First Minister what pledge or undertaking the Scottish Executive will make with regard to crofters and hill farmers in less favoured areas. (S1F-827)

Does the First Minister agree that, unless the rotten deal on the less favoured areas is materially altered, in three years' time, when crofters and small hill farmers lose 50 per cent of their income, they will face no future in crofting or farming? Does he agree that, as a consequence, the Executive will have succeeded where Patrick Sellar failed? Is the Executive proud of such a record? Does the Executive regard the dreadful deal that has been done as a betrayal of its principles and of the once honourable tradition of the Highland Liberals?

Had the First Minister or Mr Henry given way to me earlier, I would have asked them whether the omission from the programme for government of any reference to the proposed privatisation of trunk road maintenance contracts was deliberate. I looked in vain for any reference in the programme to the fact that a Labour Government is planning to press ahead with that privatisation. I am sure that members from all parties will welcome the delegation from Highland Council, led by David Green and the council's transport convener, Sandy MacKenzie. Like council representatives and leaders of all parties throughout Scotland, that delegation would have welcomed the abandonment of the Executive's policy on trunk road maintenance, which enjoys the support of hardly any members of the Parliament, bar the Minister for Transport. I begin with a quotation that I believe sums up the Rural Development Committee's first report, which was published earlier this week. Under the convenership of Alex Johnstone, the committee concluded that "the combination of poverty and the decline of traditional industries is a threat to the sustainability of rural life as we know it." I am sure that we are all of good intentions—no one ever quarrels with that and we must take it as read. However, the enormity of the committee's conclusion has not yet been grasped. People in rural Scotland face a deeper crisis than ever before. Two elements constitute that crisis: hidden poverty and decline and crisis in many of the traditional industries. No one would pretend that there are magic solutions to those problems, but it is disappointing, to say the least, that the issue that was raised at  every meeting of the Rural Affairs Committee, as it went around Scotland, is not mentioned—it does not even find utterance—in the programme for government. I am referring, of course, to that unmentionable, four-letter word that begins with F: fuel. At every meeting, fuel tax was mentioned as the single greatest problem for the rural economy. That is why, at the forthcoming general election, the SNP will pledge to make an immediate cut in fuel tax and to aim to cut levels to European averages. The tragedy of this Parliament and of this Executive is that the Government will not speak out against Westminster policy where such policy is plainly opposed by the majority of people in Scotland and where it causes, in my submission, grievous damage. We read of the effect of that policy on the traditional sector of farming in today's edition of The Press and Journal , in which the north-east board chairman of the National Farmers Union says: "My fuel costs at harvest are normally between £6,000 - £8,000, but this year were about £14,000". Alternatively, we could turn to the comments of a married fisherman, who said that, last year alone, his extra fuel costs amounted to £76,000. At the same time as that massive increase in fuel costs, there is a massive fall in farm incomes. Given that a sheep farmer's income is £5.76—not an hour, but a week—we must recognise that the rural economy is facing more problems than ever before. Nothing in the programme for government will go any way towards tackling that crisis.

Will Hugh Henry give way?

Will the First Minister give way?

Politicians are often in receipt of advice and sometimes even take advice. It seems to me that Robert Burns gave us all some of the best advice when he wrote in his address to the Scottish members of Parliament in his day the following lines: "In gath'rin votes you were na slack,  Now stand as tightly by your tack:  Ne'er claw your lug, an' your back,  An' hum an' haw, But raise your arm, an' tell your  Before them a'." Reflecting on the events of the past 48 hours, I think that it would have been much more straightforward if a simple plan had been in a manifesto and had been promptly delivered after the election. That was the advice that Robert Burns gave. In our heart of hearts, we all know that it is valuable advice, which we will ponder for many a while. I congratulate David Mundell on lodging the motion. I do so for many reasons. When Burns is celebrated, it is by the people. Burns suppers have lived on as an expression of the support of the Scottish people for our national bard for all these years. Many people criticise Burns suppers, but I have always found that to be elitist and muddleheaded. Surely, if our people gather to celebrate Burns, it does not matter whether the dinners are formal or informal, posh or couthie, in the community hall or in the Hilton Hotel. The fact is that people gather to celebrate the memory of our bard. If some jokes are of a blue nature, we do not mind; in this chamber, we all laugh. We celebrate Burns in many different ways. When "Burns: The Movie" is made, I make a special plea to ministers that it is made not in Ireland or Hollywood but in our own country, perhaps even with a Scottish actor—Sean Connery is perhaps a bit old for the part, but I am sure that there will be many other contenders.

Duncan Hamilton has been  suggested. I know that he has many talents, but I do not know whether acting is one of them. I will conclude by being non-controversial, as always. In response to the question whether Burns was a nationalist, there is only one answer—obviously, patently, demonstrably and incontrovertibly yes. Why? Because he wrote these words, which I will sing: "Fareweel to' our Scottish fame, Fareweel our ancient glory; Fareweel even to the Scottish name, Sae fam'd in martial story!" Members will know the rest of the words; they are on the SNP CD, which is now remaindered, but still available. I hope that we can all join in toasting the bard at Burns suppers that we attend this year.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Is it not the case that you are required to turn a blind ear only when singing occurs?

I am grateful that Shona Robison has allowed me to intervene; the minister would not accept an intervention. The review process is being carried out by Halcrow, a company that played a part in the tendering process. How can a company that played a part in the tendering process be given—by the minister—the job of judging its own performance? Is not that absolutely ludicrous?

Will the member give way?

Will the minister give way?

Let us try to make progress. Every reasonable member would acknowledge that the minister is well intentioned. I hope that my remarks will invite the minister to address a number of points that have not been mentioned in the debate. The inevitable focus on the so-called cod recovery plan—which is really a plan to terminate rather than to conserve either stocks or fishing communities—has perhaps distracted attention from the impact that the plans will have on the west coast. Any measures will result in more fishermen leaving the North sea to fish off that coast. I invite the minister to address three questions that the Mallaig and North-West Fishermen's Association asked to be raised in the debate. First, are there any plans for a cod recovery plan for the west coast? Secondly, what progress has been made on the work on log book data to make the case for a minimal bycatch of cod by prawn fishermen, with a view to rolling over the reduction in the prawn quota, which many of us feel was never justified? Finally, for more than 18 months, the industry has been promised sight of a draft statutory instrument that will address technical scallop conservation measures. We have been told that the draft instrument has been held up, first by the Scottish Executive's legal department and now by MAFF. What is the current position and when will the delay end and progress be made? The question that we face today is whether the Scottish Government wants a fishing industry in Scotland. Is there a future for fishermen in our country? I do not believe that that is putting the question too baldly, nor have I put the question that way to create a sense of false drama. It is a statement of fact. I hope that the debate will give rise to a common purpose about the need for investment. Commitment to the future of the fishing industry will be demonstrated only by a commitment to invest. In that regard, proper investment will recognise that the size of the  fishing fleet in Europe and Scotland is too large for the fishing stocks. Restructuring is required and a properly funded decommissioning scheme is the only way to achieve that. An immediate benefit of announcing such a policy would be to reassure the banks. In defence of the Royal Bank of Scotland—which has, perhaps undeservedly, experienced a hard time in the past couple of days—I should say that fishermen recognise that many banks have shown their commitment to the fishing industry by extending the period of repayment on the massive loans that are the norm for Scottish fishermen. I also urge the minister to address seriously a question that will not go away: who speaks for Scotland? Is not there a case for decommissioning one of the three sets of civil servants with whom our fishermen must negotiate year after year? That cannot be right, as other speakers have pointed out, and it is hardly surprising that there is confusion. Finally, perhaps the most sombre fact of all is that, although the Scottish fishing industry is like all other industries in most respects, it differs from them in one: day and daily, fishermen imperil their lives at sea. In the past four years, 43 Scottish and 103 UK lives have been lost and last year's figures demonstrate an alarming trend in which the risk is increasing. Last year, 14 lives were lost from Scottish fishing communities. I suggest to the minister that that is happening because of the increased financial pressures that face fishermen. Many boats are going to sea—and have been going to sea in the past year—with insufficient crews because many fishermen are leaving fishing to go to the oil industry. That situation is placing many lives at risk. A decommissioning scheme would provide reassurance, commitment and confidence and I believe that all parties are united in their aim to back such a policy.

Will Malcolm Chisholm give way?

Many members have been involved in the campaign for acknowledgement and understanding of and provision for autism and autism sufferers. I hope that the Presiding Officer will not mind my opening by mentioning the role that he played as George Reid MP in the 1970s. I hope that I do not embarrass him by pointing out that he played a major part in establishing the Scottish Society for Autism in Alloa. Thereafter, he continued to work for the campaign through Autism-Europe and the World Autism Organisation. As with Elaine Smith, Nick Johnston and many other members, several constituents have consulted me about the issue, to which I have come lately—more lately than my wife, who has campaigned on it for a long period. I have been struck and devastated by the experiences of parents at the hands of local authorities—which are not always as sympathetic as we all recognise they should be—and in the daily grind of their lives. I will canvass only one issue. A clear question exists, to which the Governments in Westminster and Holyrood must respond. Do parents have the right to have a single vaccination? The Government's response—saying that there is an absence of causal evidence—is wrong and will not be sustained. As Tommy Sheridan said, the important point is that there is no evidence of a lack of a causal link. The approach that I adopt and that I imagine others would advocate is that of the precautionary principle. That is the approach that the Government in Westminster has advocated in respect of the BSE crisis. As I understand it, even now there is no proof of a causal connection between human consumption of BSE-infected material and new variant CJD, yet the Government acted on the precautionary principle. Therefore, the policy that the Government in Westminster has adopted for this issue is at odds with the policy that it has pursued for the BSE crisis. For that reason, the current policy is unsustainable. I hope that the minister will deal at length with the argument, which has been made at least three times. I make the plea that if devolution is to mean anything worth while, it should mean that we respond to the concerns of the people who put us here. A programme of single vaccination, carried out with great care and full consultation  with all the relevant authorities, would show that devolution works.

If I understood the minister's earlier remarks correctly, he supports the two parts of my amendment to the motion on the bill that say that the bill is limited in its scope and that there should be consolidation. The third part of the amendment says that there should be an action plan. Does the minister support that part of the amendment? If not, what does he suggest as an alternative? Will he apply the precautionary principle to the threats to salmon during their marine phase about which we have clear research?

I think that all members are in total agreement on the importance of salmon fishing for Scotland. It is essential for tourism and for the economy of many of the constituencies that we represent. We can therefore agree—and we have all agreed—that we all share the aim of conserving salmon, which is, in many ways, a symbol of Scotland abroad. The question is whether the bill achieves that aim. By acknowledging the bottom line that fewer fish are surviving the marine phase of their lives, the minister clearly acknowledges that that is where the real problem lies. We welcome the measures in the bill, although there are serious imperfections in the bill and although we are reliant on the good intentions of the minister of the day in exercising widely drawn powers in a responsible way. I remind members of the comments of the director of the Association of Salmon Fishery Boards, who said that he wished "strongly to emphasise that only some of the causes of reductions in salmon stock . . . can be attributed to the part of the life cycle over which Salmon Fishery Boards may exercise any control. The Association believes that many of the major drivers of salmon stock abundance are in the marine phase of the species' life-cycle". Rhona Brankin acknowledged that in her remarks, and repeated that there are many bodies that give advice. However, I urge her to reflect on why, if everything is hunky-dory and if all those bodies are providing adequate advice, we have seen such a spectacular decline—85 per cent in four decades—in the level of salmon stocks. It seems that the existing procedures are not operating correctly. That is why the SNP believes that there should be an action plan. Many of the Nickson report's recommendations should receive more careful consideration. That report was published five years ago. I was pleased to hear the minister confirm that there is an exercise to consolidate the existing legislation. To answer John Home Robertson's point, to reform the law one must first know what the law is at the moment. We obviously want fundamental reform of the existing law. In order to achieve that aim, we need to have a clear understanding of the many statutes that exist. I believe that most members recognise that. It is absolutely imperative that an action plan be drawn up, and I hope that, however members vote today, the Executive will give my proposal serious consideration for the sake of conserving salmon.

rose—

rose—

I listened with interest to members' comments. I regret that amendment 14 has not attracted more support and that the minister has not provided responses to the substantive points that I raised. In the circumstances, I believe that there should be a vote on my amendment.

Given the minister's commitment at the outset of the debate to issue a  consultation, or green, paper and the fact that amendment 15, while slightly different from the amendment that I lodged at stage 2, none the less deals with the same area, which has been debated, it appears to me that we should not debate it again. I will not move amendment 15.  Amendment 15 not moved.

Further to the point of order, Presiding Officer. The minister contends that the reasoned amendment deals with matters that could and should have been dealt with at stage 2. That is not so. We have already heard from the minister that the points that the amendment raises could not have been within the scope of the bill.

The minister's amendment 12 provides a statutory undertaking and declaration that the persons to be consulted shall include "such district salmon fishery boards as the Scottish Ministers consider appropriate". Alex Fergusson's amendment 13 specifically states that the board to be consulted is the one "which would be affected". Surely it is a matter of simple logic that any consultation on a proposed regulation should be undertaken with the board that would be affected by the regulation. For that reason alone, it is a simple proposition of elementary logic that Alex Fergusson's amendment be preferred.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The amendment that Mike Rumbles is talking about was not this particular amendment—it was another one.

The purpose of the bill is to conserve salmon. At stage 1, the minister pointed out that salmon stocks in Scotland "have declined to an all-time low". She added: "The bottom line is that fewer fish are surviving the marine phase of their life."— [ Official Report , 23 November 2000; Vol 9, c 334.]  That point was made by virtually all the consultees in the bill process and by every witness who gave oral evidence to the Rural Affairs Committee. The minister highlighted the gravity of the situation when she quoted statistics that show that, in "1960, 1,443 tonnes of wild salmon was caught in Scotland"—[ Official Report , Rural Affairs Committee , 7 November 2000; c 1289.] and that, by last year, that figure had been reduced to 198 tonnes: a reduction of 85 per cent. It would seem—to use Jamie McGrigor's phrase—that salmon is already under threat, if not severe threat, in Scotland. The same can be said of trout, as there has been an 86 per cent decline in trout catches over the same four decades. Those are massive reductions, which highlight the scale of the problem that we face. Amendment 14 seeks to address what all the witnesses agreed was the bill's main task: the conservation of salmon against the threats that are posed to them during their marine phase. The amendment was debated at stage 2, and the minister gave two responses. Her first response was that "the bill is about conservation of salmon in the freshwater phase".—[ Official Report , Rural Affairs Committee , 12 December 2000; c 1544.] However, I have the benefit of having read a letter to which the minister has referred, from Mr Andrew Wallace. In paragraph 7 of that letter, Mr Wallace points out that, although the bill will cover the whole land mass of Scotland, "it is clear from the 1986 Act that the new sections 10A-10E will extend to 'Scotland' which, as is usual in our legislation, includes its territorial sea."  I invite the minister to comment on whether the bill will cover the marine phase of salmon, contrary to the impression that was given at stages 1 and 2 of the debate.  Amendment 14 proposes the establishment of a body that will consider all the numerous threats to salmon, including predators, threats to habitat, environmental concerns, drift-netting off the north-east of England and the potential threat of sea lice, about which there has been great controversy following the broadcast of a BBC documentary programme. Irrespective of the success of the amendment, I hope that the minister will call for what is sought by all those who are involved, no matter what their political views—that is, an independent inquiry into the potential threat that fish farming may pose to wild salmon stocks. The purpose of the body that is proposed by amendment 14 is to ensure that the advice that all political parties feel is necessary for the production of an action plan is obtained. Why is it necessary for such a body to be convened if, as the minister pointed out at stage 2, there are already numerous bodies that provide advice? I refer to the minister's comments at stage 2, when she named the bodies that are involved: the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea, the Fisheries Research Services, the Scottish Agricultural Science Agency, the Institute of Terrestrial Ecology, the Natural Environment Research Council and various others. Those bodies are all having different cycles of meetings and saying different things to different groups of people, rather than uniting to address what everyone acknowledges is an extremely serious problem. That is not good enough. Given that Scottish salmon are nearly facing extinction, it is time to address that problem. I hope that, if the minister does not agree to amendment 14, she will say whether the Executive is planning any steps to tackle the acknowledged threats to salmon in their marine phase. If not, there will be a striking similarity between the Government ministers—with regard to the marine phase of the salmon—and King Canute in his marine phase, some years ago. I move amendment 14.

As Rhona Brankin said, this amendment has been altered—I would say radically—since we debated the thrust of the idea at stage 2. It is fair to say—perhaps Mr Robson will concede this—that the previous version was defective for technical reasons. The debate therefore focused on the technical objections rather than the merit of the idea behind the amendment. The SNP agrees that while the amendment is of limited benefit it is nonetheless a useful possible method of conserving salmon. We therefore feel that it should be supported. The minister said that a reason for voting against amendment 6 is that some district boards would not have the resources to produce a plan. That is a fair point, but the amendment does not require every board to produce a plan; it says that ministers may require the production of a plan, so that point would be  taken into account. Reference has been made to the fact that information about habitats is already provided in certain circumstances. It does not seem to be too onerous a requirement that the information should be provided anew in another form. For those reasons, we recommend support for this worthy, albeit limited, amendment.

The principal problem here is that section 10A(3) confers on Scottish ministers the widest possible powers, which are almost entirely unfettered. It provides that the Scottish ministers "shall have power to make regulations . . . if they consider that it is necessary or expedient to do so for the conservation of salmon." The objection in principle is that the wide drafting  of those powers is unacceptable. I am mildly reassured by the fact that we are no longer watching a Government, but an Executive; while we may worry about Governments abusing the massive powers that they possess, we know that Executives do not possess sufficient powers for us to be concerned about such abuse. We are aware that Mr Andrew Wallace, the director of the Association of Salmon Fishery Boards, and a plethora of the landowners to whom Alex Fergusson referred, have been involved in a late lobbying exercise. The fact that, at this late stage, there are issues of such substance and such real concerns—which have been raised by many members in the debate—about the technical drafting of the bill illustrates that the procedure that is being pursued in it cannot be said to be beyond criticism. We should not find ourselves in this position—we should have better drafting. The minister's response to amendment 2 is that it is necessary for ministers to have unfettered power; it is a case of "Trust me, we're the Executive. We will not abuse those powers because we will use them only in extremis—in an emergency." Mr McGrigor, not unreasonably, says, "Well, if that is your argument, why not write it into the bill?" We are not unsympathetic to that argument.

It is touching to hear that a former minister, who is unfettered by the responsibilities of current ministers, has such faith in current ministers. If he really believes that that is a satisfactory answer to whether ministers should have such wide-ranging powers, I can only say that I disagree with him in principle. Statutory instruments should not be so unfettered. The role of primary legislation is to set out the principles; the role of statutory instruments is to set out the detail. Amendment 2 is defective because Mr McGrigor uses the phrase "severely threatened". Surely powers are justified when salmon stocks are threatened, not just when they are severely threatened. The minister apparently agrees, although she did not mention that particular argument. The phrase "without delay" should be defined. We will not support amendment 2, although we believe that it is well intentioned. It is unfortunate that we find ourselves here; quite frankly, it might be better if we went back to a  stage 2 debate on the issue. Mr Robson said that should an order be made that closes a river in Scotland so that salmon cannot be fished for for five years, there should be absolute certainty that if stocks recover and the bill becomes law, it will permit the revocation of that order. If that is not the case, not only lairds, but every fisherman who fishes for salmon in Scotland, will be prejudiced. I see Mr Robson nodding in support. I urge him to move—and press—amendment 3. If he does, the Scottish National Party will be behind him.

Will the minister acknowledge that Highlands and Islands Enterprise covers Mallaig, the coastal communities of Moray and Lochinver, which all depend on fishing? Will those areas be fully involved in the action group that was announced today? HIE has not been mentioned in that regard. As there is no scientific evidence to support a cut in nephrops quotas, and as the minister accepted that there is no justification or need for such a cut, why was that not resisted? Will she visit the Mallaig and North West Fisheries Association early in the new year to discuss how a rollover can be achieved? Does she recall that,  yesterday, the Prime Minister called the millennium dome a great success? Are we really expected to believe that this rotten deal is, likewise, a great success?

We recognise that the lottery funds have made a substantial contribution, but does the minister agree that most of that money has gone into improving grounds and stands? Those grounds and stands are used by many sports other than shinty and, in many parts of the Highlands, they are a community resource. They also play a significant role in tourism through events such as Highland games. Lottery funds should be regarded as a contribution not to shinty alone, but to the culture and economy of the Highlands.

That money goes to clubs, not to the international event.

I would like to begin by thanking the business managers for this opportunity to put in the Scottish Parliament for the first time the case for shinty. I draw members' attention to the fact that the president and executive officer of the Camanachd Association, Donnie Grant and Alastair MacIntyre, are with us in the public gallery. They may be slightly embarrassed if I point out that Donnie was a member of the winning Kingussie team of 1961, while Alasdair was a member of the winning Kilmallie team of 1964. They are now involved in more sedentary pursuits. Shinty's Gaelic name, camanachd, identifies it as perhaps the oldest organised team game in Europe that is still played by virtually its original rules. In 563, St Columba left Ireland for Scotland in the wake of a quarrel that is supposed to have broken out during a game of camanachd. Shinty was brought to Scotland in that year, if not before. It was first introduced to north-west Scotland along with Gaelic and Christianity, as Alasdair Morrison will know. The heartland of the sport remains in the Highlands. However, it is played throughout Scotland, especially in universities. It is played in the central belt, where teams include Glasgow Mid Argyll, Tayforth and Edinburgh East Lothian, formerly Musselburgh. I believe that at least one parliamentary researcher plays regularly for the last-named team, when chosen. There is even a team in England, based in Staffordshire, known as The Highlanders. I thought that members might be interested in those facts. Shinty is a vigorous game. It has been described  as a form of legalised mayhem. There are fewer rules in shinty than in hockey, but more rules than in politics. There is now an international fixture—first played in 1924, resumed in the 1970s and now staged annually—between Scotland and Ireland. It involves a hybrid of shinty and hurling. This year there was some controversy because finances were so straitened and cash was so limited that, at the end of the game, which unfortunately Scotland lost, the Scottish players were not permitted to swap jerseys with players from the Irish team—despite the fact that the game was watched by an audience of some 70,000 people. Today I want to make the serious point that shinty has been underfunded for a long period. I argue—and I hope that this will be supported by all parties—that there are very strong reasons for providing shinty with a fairer financial deal. On Tuesday this week I had the pleasure of meeting Mr Robson and colleagues at sportscotland, with whom I discussed the financial support that shinty now receives. Since 1994, it has received a core support grant of only £15,000. That is a very small amount by any standards. Shinty receives some other support, but that is hypothecated to funding youth development officers and to other specific purposes. Four years ago, the Camanachd Association—the governing body of the sport—was asked to submit a development strategy, which it did. As members can imagine, that took a great deal of time and effort. All sports governing bodies find reaching an agreement that is supported by all clubs and participants a slow and time-consuming process. It did, however, submit a detailed plan two years ago. The response from sportscotland's predecessor, the Scottish Sports Council, was that it did not have sufficient funds. The Scottish Sports Council said, "Go away and argue with the politicians that we should have more money. If we can get more, we will be able to give the Camanachd Association more." Shinty has made great efforts to obtain commercial sponsorship. It has had long-standing and loyal support from Glenmorangie, with which I expect some members—probably all—will be familiar

I am not sure whether Mr Stone was trying to stand up or asking me to give way. I certainly would not disagree with Jamie Stone, if his intervention was a sedentary one. As well as Glenmorangie, Marine Harvest is a loyal commercial sponsor. Commercial sponsorship will be slightly reduced this year. That strengthens the case for a fairer  deal from the state. Commercial sponsors are more interested in major headline sports such as football. That is where most of the commercial sponsorship money tends to go. The sport minister announced at the beginning of November that sportscotland's budget would increase by no less than £6 million over the next three years. That is an increase of around 20 per cent. If its budget is being increased by 20 per cent—around £2 million a year—the request that the Camanachd Association has made in its development plan, of core funding of around £50,000 for each of the next four years, is relatively modest. The Camanachd Association argues that for it to achieve its goals of youth development, coaching, club development, recruitment and training of volunteers, it needs the flexibility of having the funding that is sought in its plan. It specifies those goals in detail. I do not want to look back in anger; I want to look forward in hope. I understand that the minister has taken a keen interest in this topic. I hope that he will pledge his personal support for shinty and that he will come to the Camanachd cup final this year. Core funding that has been pegged at £15,000 for the past six or seven years is not ideal, satisfactory or fair. I urge that all parties and all members who participate in this debate join me in urging the minister to use his persuasive abilities with Mr Robson to attract a fair deal for the sport of shinty from Mr Robson and his colleagues.

rose—

If the minister will not announce today that papers will be returned to pupils, will he accept the recommendation by Bruce Robertson, the director of education of Highland Council, that anomalous papers—where the results do not reflect the expected result—be returned, either to the head teacher or to the education authority of the local council area in which the school is located?

Events tend to move more swiftly than the production of parliamentary reports. I feel that this morning's debate has moved to such an extent because of the announcements that we have heard from Mr McConnell, who I see is choosing this moment to leave the chamber. His announcements were worthy of serious scrutiny. Members of all parties recognise that the action that has been taken by the new minister is welcome, but I am seriously concerned that he may need to take other steps and that the independent appeal process that he has announced must be considered very carefully. I say that because we know that there is a possible threat of court action, which has been the subject of publicity. It is based on the simple proposition that the existing process does not comply with article 6 of the European convention on human rights, which states that everyone shall have the right to a full and fair hearing before an impartial tribunal. We have already seen in the case of County Properties and Developments that Scotland's planning law is essentially in abeyance because it does not comply with article 6. At first glance, it seems to me that the existing system of exam appeals is in breach of the ECHR and I therefore welcome Jack McConnell's announcement that there will be a panel, but will the panel be independent? Will the teachers—experienced teachers, I believe he said—who serve on the panel be involved in teaching? Might that be said to compromise their independence? Do not we need an entirely different, separate and independent panel, whose members are not involved in the teaching process? I understood Mr McConnell to state that he rules out the return of papers at the moment. That is what he said and it seems to me that the implication of that is that he is not ruling out the return of papers quite soon. I urge Mr McConnell to accept the recommendation, which I believe was made by the Education, Culture and Sport Committee, that papers be returned, and I do so for one simple reason. If they are not returned, I fear that there is a possibility—how great a possibility it is not for me to say—that we will face the spectacle of a court action in which pupils say, "Why didn't they let my teacher see my paper?" That point is unanswerable. Today, I received the distinct impression that Mr McConnell has conceded that papers must be returned—if not to pupils themselves, to their head teachers or at least to the education authorities. I welcome the announcements that Mr McConnell has made and I make my comments in the hope that the decisions that he has announced today will be considered carefully and, perhaps, fine-  tuned, so that imminently we may have a further decision to return the papers. This episode shows that there is an unhealthy relationship between quangos and the Government. Quangos are very useful things, because they cushion the Government from the impact of unpopular decisions. That is convenient for the Government from the point of view of news management, but if we regard being accountable for our actions as an essential principle of democracy, it is wrong. It is essential that the SQA should complete its work for this year. As a result of today's news reports, however, I am becoming concerned that there is trouble afoot and that the existing measures, welcome though they are, will not be sufficient to solve the problem.

The measures that Jack McConnell has described are welcomed by, I believe, all members. Has he seen a report in one of today's newspapers in which the SQA states that, in respect of the vital process of registration, it is perhaps one month behind where it would have been had that process been correct? Has he received particular reports about that? Does he believe that the measures that he has thus far announced will, in themselves, be sufficient to solve the serious registration problems that were the subject of detailed comment in the report of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee?

Will the member give way?

That must be an in-joke.

I thought it both fitting and appropriate that, in her speech, the deputy minister referred to the unique nature of fishing. It is a highly dangerous profession and activity in which lives are lost. We should remember that, in the fishing industry, the past year has been extremely difficult and representatives of the industry have expressed concerns that the financial pressures that they have faced this year—even before they face the difficulties that are ahead—threaten safety at sea. Because the pressures of simply surviving affect the level of wages that skippers can pay, it has been difficult for them to find enough crew to man their boats. The debate has been useful. Members of all parties have recognised that as well as conserving fish, we must address our attention to conserving fishing communities in Scotland. Those communities are at stake if we do not act on the range of measures that members from all parties have highlighted. Alex Salmond—who, as far as I know, is the MSP for Peterhead, not Peterborough—made an impassioned and eloquent speech born of years of experience of the fishing industry. I suggest that we have a good read at what he had to say about the way ahead for a recovery plan. It has been predicted that the whitefish industry will this year lose up to a third of its income after what has been a very difficult year for many  fishermen. How can that happen without jeopardising safety at sea? We must be gravely concerned about that. We also know that the Executive is spending only 0.03 per cent of its total budget on fishing—only 1.1 per cent of its rural affairs budget. When members whinge and moan about the SNP, saying that we must act for the fishing communities, they should search their conscience and the Executive's balance sheets. Perhaps a little less should be spent on spin doctors and a little more on our fishing communities. We heard eloquent and impassioned arguments from Duncan Hamilton on, for example, the cost of fuel. What is not appreciated is the fact that catches must be hauled three times: from the harbour to the market, from the market to the processor and from the processor to the consumer. Haulage costs must be paid three times, in the context of the iniquitous fuel taxes on which I shall not dwell further today. Irene McGugan made the only speech that dealt solely with the problems that are faced by processors—other members touched on the issue, but she devoted her whole speech to it. She highlighted the fact—and this is also my view—that increased water charges and expenditure on health and safety measures are bringing the fish processing business close to extinction. The minister will remember from his previous career that accountancy is not so complicated: if more money is going out than is coming in, the business ends. That is called bankruptcy, and I know a bit about that. In my former employment I was—and I still am—an accredited specialist in insolvency law. Richard Lochhead showed his years of experience in this subject when he suggested specific measures that need to be taken. Many other members talked of specific measures and all parties put forward good ideas, which I do not have time to deal with one by one. It is evident from the debate that a recovery plan for our fishing industry must be brought to the Parliament next month. If it is not, we will seriously let down all those who work in the industry. Lest anyone think that I am overdramatising the issue, I point out that the leading active conservation measure that the SFF, in its excellent briefing paper, said should take place relates to spawning and nursery closures. When does the spawning of cod take place? Between January and March—so we have only weeks in which to act. I hope that the minister will act on my suggestion and issue a statement. It is appalling that we have only one debate a year—and not even a half-day's debate, but a couple of hours—in which to discuss the fishing industry. That is unacceptable.  I know that members would not wish me to neglect the issue of who speaks for Scotland. I was interested in the MAFF concordat document, which tells the truth that some members of the unionist parties are coy about. It says that Westminster takes the lead in EU matters, as I assume all members know. Under the heading, "Pre-Fisheries Council Meetings", it states: "Before each meeting of the Fisheries Council the MAFF Minister acting as leader of the UK delegation will meet industry representatives". Anyone who has ever been involved in negotiation knows that the important period in negotiation is right at the start—before all one's negotiating partners have adopted lines from which they will not move. That document says that Mr Morley is speaking up for Scotland, and that has been proven in the debate by the references to the important meeting with Mr Fahey, in Ireland, at which Scotland's interests were discussed. In conclusion, it seems to me that on the European stage, Scotland's role is not that of a player, but of a prompter; not that of a leader, but of a passenger. Instead of producing a carefully worked out package of measures to ensure that our industry survives, we are the bystander at the councils of Europe.

Will the member give way?

Does not Mr McLetchie agree that he is being slightly disingenuous, because he has made no reference to the fact that arrestment covers incorporeal movable property, that is shares, money in bank accounts, building society accounts and holdings of that order, which are much more significant than sticks of furniture? That remedy exists, as does sequestration for debts of more than £1,500, which is probably the most effective diligence that there can be. To suggest that there are no alternatives is downright misleading, and paints a very partial picture of the law of diligence in Scotland.

Is the minister aware that, in the past few days, the Cabinet in the National  Assembly for Wales promised that by summer next year, every child in every nursery and primary school in Wales will enjoy free milk every day? If that can be done in Wales, can it be done in Scotland?

To ask the Scottish Executive what impact fuel costs will have upon the rural economy in Scotland from now until April 2002 and what measures it will take to address any such impact. (S1O-2585)

Does the minister agree that nothing has been done for rural motorists, especially those who have low incomes and who rely on a car to travel to work or to find work? Does she agree with SNP members that an immediate commitment to cut fuel tax to European levels is needed; that we must end the inequity of the price differential in the Highlands and Islands; and that we need an immediate cut of 10p a gallon in excise duty on fuel?

I accept that the statutory background is as the minister describes. However, many members in today's debate have recommended that, rather than relying on the existing bodies, which have not provided an adequate response, the Executive should seriously consider establishing a new body—perhaps to be known as the seal commission—that would examine the impact of all predators on salmon stocks.

I apologise to the Deputy Minister for Rural Development for not being present to hear most of her speech. As an occasional parliamentary poacher—I suppose that I can class myself as that—I was having a private meeting with the parliamentary chief gamekeeper, the Presiding Officer. I apologise if I duplicate any of the minister's material. The starting point of my speech are the remarks that the deputy minister made to the Rural Affairs Committee. My involvement with the bill began on the Subordinate Legislation Committee, and I migrated to the Rural Affairs Committee as the bill progressed. The minister said:  "In 1960, 1,443 tonnes of wild salmon was caught in Scotland."—[ Official Report, Rural Affairs Committee,  7 November 2000, c 1289.] By last year, the figure was 198 tonnes. That 85 per cent depletion makes graphic the problem that we face. The trout figures over the same 40 years, measured by catches—which, as Alex Fergusson said, may not be the most reliable method of measuring—fell from 224 to 36 tonnes, a similar depletion of 86 per cent. Richard Lochhead pointed out that no effective legal measures to deal with the problem have been taken in the past 40 years. During those 40 years, bar the past 18 months, Westminster has been in charge—that is axiomatic—so the collective smirking from the unionist ranks when Mr Lochhead made his point was less than gentlemanly. It is true for all to see that the problem is serious and has been neglected by successive Westminster Governments.

Piety is not a useful characteristic in a retraction. Richard Lochhead did not and would not make personal comments about John Home Robertson, who I am pleased to see is back in his seat. To say that Richard Lochhead did so is to make a false accusation. He was commenting on the fact that Westminster Governments have not tackled the problem for a long period. That is why we are here now. I want therefore to turn my remarks to that problem. [Interruption.] I see that members are unhappy to be reminded that for 40 years Westminster has done nothing to tackle the problem—their constant barracking and heckling will not alter that.

I must move on.

Perhaps I will have the pleasure of giving way to Jamie McGrigor later. The most important criticism of the bill is to be found in the—

Yes, but it has not been addressed in an effective way, as I think John Home Robertson— [Interruption.] I used the word "effective"; if members read the Official Report , they will see that. The serious problem with the bill was remarked on in a letter dated August 2000 from Andrew Wallace, the director of the Association of Salmon Fishery Boards, to the Executive, which the Executive circulated to the Subordinate Legislation Committee and the Rural Affairs Committee. I believe that Mr Wallace represents 53 fishery boards and so I presume that he speaks with authority and knowledge. Mr Wallace said: "The Association believes that many of the major drivers of salmon stock abundance are in the marine phase of the species' life-cycle and that further Government resources need to be applied to resolving these problems. In some cases, Government action (e.g. sanction/action to reduce the population of predators) would deliver far greater benefit  to the conservation of salmon and sea trout than would application by DSFBs of the enhanced powers covered within this consultation paper." There we have it. The bill will not solve the problem, although the SNP will support it. In fact, the bill may not ameliorate the situation materially. Unless the Executive is willing to examine the various measures that I will come to in a second, the major criticism of the bill will be that it addresses a problem in a wholly insufficient way. The bill could be compared to dealing with the problem of a dirty latrine by deciding to apply a toothbrush to clean it. I hope that the Executive will address the problems that were raised in the evidence given to the Rural Affairs Committee. A number of experts appeared before the committee, all of whom agreed that the serious problem of marine mortality was not being addressed. Other members referred to different problems that, in their opinion, may have caused or contributed to the depletion of salmon stocks over the years. Those problems include sea lice, which, I believe, Elaine Murray mentioned, and various species of birds, including cormorants, which, I think, were mentioned by Rhoda Grant. However, unless the problem is tackled openly and honestly, we will be derelict in our duty. How should we address the problem? Elaine Murray said that we should not go around indiscriminately pumping away seals—I believe that that was the phrase that she used. No one would advocate such an approach, but it is germane to point out that the current method of controlling seals is not by use of the contraceptive dart, as happens in Canada, but by shooting them. I know that members might be slightly coy about addressing that topic today, but the current method is to issue  licences for the shooting of seals. We gleaned that information from the deputy minister when she appeared before the Rural Affairs Committee and said: "The Conservation of Seals Act 1970 allows for shooting. Licences to shoot fish-eating birds are issued under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981. I thought I should draw members' attention to that."—[ Official Report, Rural Affairs Committee , 7 November 2000; c 1291.] We also received advice from Jane Wright that—

I will not take an intervention from Euan Robson yet, as I am developing my argument. Jane Wright told the committee: "In the 1950s, a Government committee decided that 34,000 or 35,000 represented a healthy population of seals. The number of seals has now reached between 120,000 and 130,000."—[ Official Report, Rural Affairs Committee , 7 November 2000; c 1267.] Everyone supports the idea of undertaking more research and I hope that the deputy minister will update us on the answer given by her predecessor. I also hope that she will enlighten us on exactly what further research is being undertaken. The Scottish Fishermen's Federation recommendation that there should be a seal commission merits serious consideration. Someone recently argued that, if there is a Deer Commission for Scotland, there is no reason why there should not also be a seal commission. That would help to tackle the problem in a way that would avoid the emotive and overwrought reactions that I fear some Labour members have had to the issue today. We can either ignore a problem and pretend that it does not exist or we can tackle it. We shall hear from the minister's response which option the Executive intends to pursue. It was a great pleasure to hear the speech from the gamekeeper turned poacher, John Home Robertson—the best poachers are those who have formerly been gamekeepers. It was most interesting to hear that, although he was a supporter of the bill, he did not actually support it. It was also interesting to hear from Dr Richard Simpson that the back-bench Labour shoals are not swimming in the right direction. There seems to be an emerging consensus—which, because of the business managers' intervention, may not surface—that the bill is insufficient to address the problem. Unless the Executive is willing to face that fact, ministers will come back at stages 2 and 3 to find more serious, robust, positive and constructive criticism from the SNP and from members of other parties.

Does Mike Rumbles agree that the powers under section 10A(3) of the bill would give Scottish ministers almost unfettered power, especially to implement the recommendation of the Scottish Fishermen's Federation that a seal commission should be established? If so, would the Liberal Democrats agree with that use of the power?

I am heartened to hear the First Minister say that he is concerned about the problems in rural Scotland. Does he accept the findings of the Automobile Association report that was released today? It said that, on average, the rural driver, who has to travel further and pay higher fuel costs, will suffer each year a surcharge of £300 on fuel and £160 on additional maintenance costs for his car. If he accepts that, what will he do about it? Does he agree that the pre-budget statement is bad not only for rural Scotland, but for the environment?

Does the minister agree that the real cost to the economy and the true cause of the recent transport disruption was not the legitimate protest against fuel prices, but the extortionate new Labour fuel taxation? Does she agree with the Minister of State at the Scotland Office, Brian Wilson, who finally admitted in the House of Commons this week that we have the highest fuel tax in Europe?

As Donald Gorrie has raised the topic of rural poverty, on which we agree with him, does he now condemn the Liberal policy of increasing in rural areas the level of excise duty on fuel by the rate of inflation for each of the next five years? How will that help those in rural areas who rely on the use of a motor car?

Given that the minister has accepted the need for such a scheme, why will it not be made retrospective for those who are suffering now? Can the minister confirm that the water authorities will be placed at the foot of the bonfire of quangos, which the First Minister assured us on Monday that he is about to light? Will the minister categorically deny rumours that are circulating that in internal documents the Labour-Liberal Executive is considering privatisation of the water authorities?

That may have been a long  sentence, Presiding Officer, but it never feels like a jail sentence when one is listening to John Young. I pay tribute to Sam Galbraith, who was a distinguished sportsman in his day as a climber and oarsman. I think that I may even have coxed him into the banks of the Clyde when I was slightly younger than I am now. It will not surprise members to learn that my skill in sport is non-existent, although I participate in running. I am able to unburden myself before members and say that I once came last, out of a team of 19, in the Cairngorm hill race. The following year, I increased my position substantially—to last-equal. Things would have improved drastically had the fixture not been abandoned before I could be allowed to move inexorably up the rankings. I want to talk today about a minority sport that is Scotland's truly national sport: shinty. This debate gives me a chance to put the case for shinty—a case that was put so eloquently last year by Duncan Cameron, president of the Camanachd Association, in front of a large and well-oiled audience of MSPs from all parties. Duncan's case that evening was that shinty contributes to every part of the agenda that is espoused by Jackie Baillie and Allan Wilson in respect of social inclusion. It encourages volunteering, economic development, developing citizenship and healthy living. From every point of view, shinty contributes to those values. I heard mention of whisky, and I will not use the term whisky Olympics; that has nothing to do with shinty. However, I know that shinty makes an active contribution to all the activities that the Executive wants to promote. At the moment, when Scotland plays Ireland at shinty, sportscotland does not even recognise the match as an international. The team players have to pay their own fares. They are not allowed even to keep their jerseys or to swap them with the opposing team. However, until this year they had an excellent record against Ireland. The shinty bodies do not have any representation on sportscotland. Allan Wilson may want to rectify the fact that, at board level, sportscotland has no representation from areas north of a line drawn from Aberdeen to the central belt. A senior sportscotland official led the shinty executives to believe that there would be a review group on minority and indigenous sport, but that seems to have been parked; perhaps the minister can tell us what happened to it. I am concerned that funding of sport takes place on a number of levels. How much is being wasted on bureaucracy? The minister will want to tackle that issue with zeal. There are many other problems, but the primary  concern relates to funding. The funding contribution that shinty, which is Scotland's national sport, receives from sportscotland has been fixed at a paltry £15,000.

Shinty is certainly played south of the border. Its Gaelic name is camanachd, which reveals its identity as the oldest organised team sport in Europe that is still played by its original rules. Shinty receives one third of 1 per cent of sportscotland's budget. I hope that Allan Wilson, in his closing speech, will say that the 20 per cent increase in funding that we heard about earlier will allow that shame and ignominy to be ended. This Parliament, and every party represented in it, should recognise the importance of Scotland's national sport, shinty, treat it with dignity and fund it adequately.

Will those legislative proposals require in future full planning control for masts that are erected on buildings? Is the minister aware that there have been no fewer than 104 applications for such masts during the past three months and that the issue is of great public concern, particularly with regard to the possible health risks that masts might cause?

rose—

I am grateful to both the minister and my wife for giving way. The minister has just said that it is not appropriate for the Scottish Executive to take a view on this matter, but it might be a helpful precedent were this Parliament  to express a view in public on such a matter. Does she agree with the views of Tony Blair, Donald Dewar, Alistair Darling and Jim Wallace, among others, in 1990, when the Labour party supported an amendment that would have given war pensions to nuclear test veterans with cancer?

The first political speech that I made was in 1985, at an SNP conference in Dunoon. This might not come as a surprise, but it was on business rates. I would not say that it was a poor speech, but if anybody has it on video, I will pay handsomely to get it back. Even if the delivery of the speech was not brilliant, the sentiment that I expressed in it was right. It was quite straightforward—that the SNP does not believe that Scotland and Scotland's businesses should be taxed more highly than businesses south of the border. It is not that we think that taxes should be identical in England and Scotland—

It is far too early, Bristow. I will see you in the Subordinate Legislation Committee. The principle is very simple; we do not think that Scottish businesses should be penalised. I have campaigned with others on the matter since 1985, when I campaigned to end the disparity that existed under the Conservatives. Credit should go to Gil Paterson—now a member of the Scottish Parliament—who took legal action on the matter to the European Court of Human Rights, on the basis that Scotland was being discriminated against. The case did not succeed—the court found that Scotland was a region and not a nation and that it was therefore unable to take action to protect itself. Credit should also go to business leaders such as Craig Campbell of the Scottish Council for Development and Industry, Bill Anderson—who is now of the Forum of Private Business—and Bill Mann, a leading Glasgow businessman. They have campaigned over a long period to secure fairness. What does a level playing field mean? With respect to Mr Peacock and Mr Lyon, they have failed to appreciate that a UBR has two components. The first is the rateable value and the second is the poundage. The victory of parity and fairness was secured by two battles. The first battle was won largely in 1990, when harmonisation of rateable values in respect of most properties was achieved. The second victory was in 1995, when the higher poundages that existed in Scotland were reduced and a common poundage was introduced throughout the UK. That was a hard-fought battle. We had 16 years of Tory rule with higher business rates—a fiscal apartheid that was directed against business in Scotland—before the victory was achieved. However, it was at least achieved. The Tories had 18 years in power; the Labour  party in the Scottish Parliament has had only 18 months, but in that time it has reimposed a higher business tax in Scotland. That higher business tax stands at 10.1 per cent—I want to put the position quite clearly to Mr Peacock so that he can understand it.

Not yet. If there is a shop in Inverness that has a rateable value of £20,000 and a shop in Colchester has the same rateable value—valued according to the same principles of valuation—the shop in Inverness will pay £840 more this year. I hope that Des McNulty will accept that computation. If not, he should tell me exactly which bit of it he does not understand.

Obviously Des McNulty has not been listening—I have not moved on to the separate question of a rates relief scheme for small business. I would like to read briefly from a letter dated 22 December 1999 by Mr Mann to The Herald . He said that Labour and Jack McConnell tried to justify the "higher poundage for Scotland on the grounds that Scottish rental values have increased by less than south of the Border over the past five years. In doing so he ignores the experience of the previous five years when values in England increased on average by only 5% whereas in Scotland they had increased by 33%. If there had not been a UBR for the UK this would have meant a materially lower rate poundage in Scotland than in England and Wales from April 1995 to date." That is the end of the argument. As I mentioned, the business organisations in Scotland are united around the simple argument that Scottish businesses should not be discriminated against by any tax regime. That is a simple principle, which Labour has breached.

I would like to move on to the text of the motion. The SNP has brought forward the proposal that there should be a rates relief scheme for small business. First, how do we measure small business? There are various criteria for measurement. One, as the Forum of Private Business has identified, is employment. The Federation of Small Businesses has referred to a rates relief scheme that relies on property. The SNP is minded to support the FSB scheme, but there are still unanswered questions of detail about it. For example, what would the cost of  computer programmes be for the implementation of the FSB scheme? The FPB scheme is imaginative, but it would require measures to be taken by Westminster. If the Executive was minded towards implementing the FPB scheme—which is unlikely because of the small business consultative group—that would be a test of whether action between Westminster and Holyrood would work. If the FSB scheme were to be implemented, I can announce to the chamber that a business that has a rateable value of £9,500 would save £1,600 a year on its rates bill. Is not that a prize that is worth achieving? Are we not right to bring forward a scheme that would grant small business the opportunity for growth and expansion, which the Executive—in terms of its target of creating 100,000 new businesses—is supposed to support?

The scheme would be self-financing. [Laughter.] It would be self-financing. That was the recommendation of the Local Government Committee. If Andy Kerr has not read its report, he should do so. I point out that that the Conservatives—Mr Harding is not in the chamber, but he is a member of the Local Government Committee—did not demur from the conclusions of the report. Why have the Conservatives withdrawn their support today? They have not said why and I am disappointed, as we usually hear from Annabel Goldie, nor have they denied that discrimination exists as an inherent characteristic of computing rateable values in accordance with the rules of assessment. However, we know that when the Tories were in power for 18 years they pursued anti-Scottish policies for 16 of those years. The Labour party has been in power in this Parliament for 18 months and in those months it has pursued anti-Scottish policies. I am delighted that the Labour party—bereft of ideas of its own—has stolen our policy on drugs courts. I am delighted that, bereft of ideas, it has copied our policy of having an external affairs minister. I urge it to copy our policy on business rates relief. I have no objection to the Executive being the political plagiarist of Scotland.

If the minister is right, why do the CBI, the Institute of Directors, Scottish Financial Enterprise, the Forum of Private Business and the Federation of Small Businesses all agree with me, but not with him?

Will Angus MacKay give way?

The minister says that the business community welcomed the decisions taken. Donald Turner of the Scottish Council for Development and Industry, a body that is known for its political impartiality, described the departure of a common poundage and the imposition of a poundage 10.1 per cent higher in Scotland than in England as "a retrograde step that will harm the Scottish corporate sector and undermine the benefits received from the harmonisation of cross-border business rates in the 1995 revaluation." Was Mr Turner wrong?

Which of them support Jack's tax?

rose—

At the beginning of August, school pupils who participated in the higher still examinations throughout Scotland expected to  receive their results, as students had done for many decades before. They did not receive them. Subsequently, many of those pupils received the wrong results. Some of them still have not had their appeals settled. Around Scotland, hundreds of thousands of people have been affected. It is axiomatic that all members of this Parliament must recognise that the inquiry into the exams fiasco is of the greatest public interest and concern. If anyone disagrees with that proposition, I would be happy to give way to them now. Since no Labour member disputes that the issue is of the greatest public concern, I argue that the Executive has broken its own code of practice. I raised this issue with the First Minister earlier in the debate, and the Official Report will show that the answer he gave was factually wrong. The "Code of Practice on Access to Scottish Executive Information" states: "The following categories of information are exempt from the commitment to provide information in this Code. In those categories which refer to harm or prejudice, the presumption remains that information should be disclosed unless the harm likely to arise from disclosure would outweigh the public interest in making the information available." If Jim Wallace and the First Minister accept that no issue is of greater public concern at present, surely they must accept that a decision has been made by the Executive to deny the Parliament and our constituents—the Scottish public—access to documents that are relevant to determine the outcome of the exams inquiry. How can we get at the truth if we do not have the facts?

I found that intervention rather hard to follow, but SNP members on the committees that Mr Rumbles referred to have demanded that the civil service documents be made public. That has not happened, because Liberal and Labour members clubbed together—occasionally with Conservative assistance—to deny the public access to internal documents. The wording of the code is clear. Mr Galbraith, in evidence to the committee, made it plain that the Executive had to abide by the code—it would be pretty odd if the Executive could just depart from  the code. The code refers to the public interest outweighing the harm and that leads us directly to the question of what harm there could be in disclosing civil service advice. Why is it right that SQA officials can be judged on their conduct, but we cannot judge civil service officials? The First Minister referred to New Zealand. A report that was published in October 1997 concluded: "Since 1982 there has been a fundamental change in attitudes to the availability of official information. Ministers and officials have learned to live with much greater openness. The assumption that policy advice will eventually be released under the Act has in our view improved the quality and transparency of that advice." This is an interesting document by the Campaign for Freedom of Information, one of whose co-chairmen is Archy Kirkwood MP, a gentleman whom I believe Mr Rumbles knows. In the motion, which I imagine Mr Rumbles will vote for, paragraph (iii) states that "where, exceptionally, Committees find it necessary to scrutinise exchanges between officials and Ministers on policy issues, arrangements should be made to ensure that the confidentiality of these exchanges is respected". Who elected me to keep secrets from my constituents about the greatest issue of public concern that has arisen since I was elected 18 months ago? Who elected Deloitte & Touche, who had access to all the documents? If Deloitte & Touche had stood for election, it might have pipped the Natural Law Party at the post, but it would not have done much better than that.

That is the first relevant intervention that has been made during my speech. The serious issue, which has not been addressed by any Liberal or Labour member, is what is the harm? If civil servants operated on the basis that their advice could be exposed to the legitimate process of public scrutiny—after the decisions had been taken, but not before—that would inform and in the long run would be likely to improve the process of government. If members disagree with that, what would they say about the conclusions of Lord Phillips's inquiry into the BSE fiasco? Do they think that that secrecy was good for government? I am astonished and appalled by the approach that the Executive has taken. I am amazed that anyone who calls themselves a Liberal Democrat could have adopted this approach of masonic secrecy. The only code that the Executive preserves is the old Sicilian code of omerta—silence unto death.

Given the revelation that Mr McLetchie has just made—that we are to get access only to factual statements from civil servants, and not advice—will the Conservatives reverse their position, which is the same as the Labour party's position: to deny the Scottish people access to the civil service advice in relation to the exams inquiry?

Does the First Minister accept that, in its inquiry on the exams crisis, the Parliament is doing its job in scrutinising an issue of great public concern? As part II of the "Code of Practice on Access to Scottish Executive Information" states, it would have been open to the Executive to disclose internal civil service documents on the basis that the public concern outweighed any notional harm that might thereby have resulted.

I congratulate Dennis Canavan on securing this debate. I became involved in the matter on behalf of Mr Alex Munro, one of my constituents, who for 36 years was a bus driver with Highland Omnibuses Ltd, a subsidiary of the Scottish Bus Group. He and his wife are now pensioners and are waiting for an outcome to this long-delayed matter. The delay has lasted 10 years, since the Scottish Bus Group was privatised. In 1993, a Mr Brian Wilson, who was then in opposition, pointed out that the delay was unacceptable and said that the Public Accounts Committee had started to reveal the rottenness of the affair. He condemned the secrecy that marked the approach of the then Conservative Government. If the people of Scotland expected one thing from devolution, it was that we could deliver more efficient government. My experience of devolution so far is that that is simply not happening. Because it is not happening, all of us are lessened. This affair must be brought to a conclusion and the minister must reveal in her response why nothing has been done by her department to resolve the matter, given that she has had well over a year so to do. Specific questions must be answered. Has the Executive identified the total number of potential beneficiaries? Is it 12,000? If it has done that, why has it not made a partial distribution, which could be an average payment of just over £10,000? How many people who were beneficiaries have died before they could receive payments from the scheme? What message has the minister given, or will she convey, to the families of those who have died before the matter has been resolved? It is completely inadequate for a minister to come to the chamber and give us no explanation whatsoever of what has been happening. The revelation that Mr Canavan received a reply to his letter shortly before this debate began speaks  volumes for everything that is wrong with the Lib-Lab Administration. Its approach to open government is quite deplorable and utterly appalling, and it must change. [Applause.]

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive will supply all of the papers that are being made available to Deloitte & Touche in connection with its inquiry into the handling of this year's exam results to the Parliament's Education, Culture and Sport Committee and Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee. (S1F-583)

Why has the Scottish Executive chosen to employ commercial consultants at a cost of £80,000 and to call private meetings to discuss secret documents behind closed doors? Is not it imperative for the future of this Parliament and its reputation that we have open inquiries, with all evidence made available, in order to get at the whole truth? Surely the Scottish people and their elected representatives deserve nothing less.

Do the Conservatives—who say that they want to be constructive today—agree that the people of Scotland want the same level of fuel tax as the average level in Europe? Every party in the chamber should agree to that aim.

Does Allan Wilson go along with Andy Kerr's denial of the officially stated Labour party and Treasury policy of increasing excise duty by at least the rate of inflation at the next budget?  Is it true that Labour's policy is founded on the idea that fuel tax is too low?

Members of all parties will agree that in rural Scotland the motor car is a necessity, not a luxury. However, Labour taxation policy on the use of the motor car in rural Scotland treats it as if it were a luxury, not a necessity. Despite the fractious tone of the debate, there lurks somewhere a consensus that the motor car is a necessity in rural Scotland, and that action must be taken. Characteristically, I will shed light rather than heat on that debate. We have heard nothing about what the Government will do to alleviate the crisis in rural Scotland; nothing, that is, except what we heard from Mr Brian Wilson, who toured various parts of the Highlands with Alasdair Morrison. He said that the answer is liquefied petroleum gas and that people can get grants of up to 75 per cent to convert their cars to LPG. The problem is that only two makes of car qualify for that scheme. In addition, the cars have to be less than one year old and the only garage that can do the conversion is based in Southampton. Active steps can be, and have been, taken by other countries. In France, there are 1,000 multi-service shops, selling petrol, which are supported by the Government. In Greece, there was the imposition in 1996 and 1997 of a maximum price outwith Athens and Salonica. In Portugal, there are lower excise rates for the Azores. Greece has lower rates for the Greek islands. In Italy, the rural populace is protected in places such as Gorízia. Every other European state with its own independent Government is taking action to protect its rural population. The British Government has taken no action and—even after the protests—proposes to take no action.

Mr MacAskill is on record as stating the case for the necessity of urgent action on rural prices. Were Mr Kerr to read our motion, he would find that it says exactly that. I hope that the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee's suggestions on specific measures to provide protection for rural motorists will be investigated. However, the Executive seems reluctant to impinge in any way on a subject that is reserved to Westminster, even when that subject has serious repercussions for our rural population in relation to farming, fishing and tourism, which have been mentioned by members of other parties. The sorry truth of the matter is that unless the Parliament is granted more powers, there will be no solution to the problem.

I will give way to Jamie Stone first, then to Robin Harper.

That approach is one possibility, but my own inkling is that a maximum price should be imposed, as has been imposed in Greece. I promised that I would give way to Robin Harper, given that I so churlishly did not do so during our previous debate on the issue.

I am happy to answer Robin Harper's question. The SNP policy is that we are committed to working towards a rate of excise duty on fuel that is in accordance with the European average. I believe that environmentalists should argue, as Robin Harper argues in relation to other environmental issues, that action should be taken on a European basis. What is the point of having 15 or 16 different rates of excise duty? Logic suggests that Scotland would benefit from the lower rate of European tax. That compelling logic is so powerful that not even the Labour Government will be able to ignore it.

I thank Andy Kerr for giving way. He seems somewhat coy about the Labour party's professed policy. Is it the case that the chancellor is committed to increasing excise duty at the next budget by at least the rate of inflation?

We have heard precious little about the Liberals' amendment, which says that they will impose "a cap on fuel taxes in real terms for five years". Does that mean that they are committed to increasing excise duty by the rate of inflation for the next five years, no matter what happens to world oil prices?

I thank the minister for the advance copy of his statement. As this is my first outing, as it were, in my capacity as rural affairs spokesman, I say to the minister and to colleagues in other parties that I look forward to working constructively with all of them for the good of rural Scotland, although I will be critical from time to time. I welcome the broad thrust of the proposals, which have been sought and campaigned for by members of all parties. The proposals are long overdue. Does the minister not believe that it would have been better if the statutory instrument had been laid in draft? That would have allowed us an opportunity to improve it. Does he agree that the inclusion of the scheme manager in the second stage of the appeal process not only offends against the first principle of natural justice—nemo judex in causa sua—but breaches the European convention on human rights? Will legal aid be available should applicants go to the Scottish Land Court, which is the third stage? One would hope so, given the level of agricultural incomes. Finally, I suggest to the minister that the main problem, which he recognises, is that many farmers and crofters believe that they are being punished and treated as criminals under a set of rules that do not allow for a punishment that fits the crime. In many cases, those rules lead to the loss of a whole year's livelihood as a result of a clerical error. In his response, will the minister state specifically whether he accepts the suggestion that I made in relation to a constituent's case? That suggestion is that the critical document is the European Commission's document "Obvious errors in aid applications submitted under the integrated system". The minister does not need to apply that document, and he could amend it. If he did so, many of the people involved in the hardest cases would not find themselves punished so disproportionately.

To ask the Scottish Executive, further to the answer by Sarah Boyack to question S1W-8819 on 25 August 2000, whether it intends to review the level of water authority chairmen's salary packages. (S1O-2306)

Is Mr McConnell aware that the salary of the boss of East of Scotland Water is £160,000? Does he believe that a quango boss is worth three times as much as a First Minister? Is he aware of section 116 of the Local Government etc (Scotland) Act 1994—what one might call the Galbraith section—which says that the Executive may give "directions of a general or specific character"  and that "it shall be the duty of the authority to comply with those directions"? Will the minister use that power of direction to rein in the salaries of quango bosses? If not, is that  because quango bosses get paid big bucks in exchange—

Because your lot did nothing about it.

I was shaking my head.

The Conservative motion states: "That the Parliament recognises the tremendous difficulties faced by Scottish tourism and calls upon the Scottish Executive to make an urgent statement, clearly stating its plans to deal with these difficulties and to improve efficiency in tourism support." In short, the Conservatives have come here today with a simple message: "Woe is me, tourism is doomed—something must be done." I waited to hear what that something was. I waited for the Conservative master plan on how tourism would be turned around. I waited to hear by how much the Conservatives would cut fuel tax, whether they would give up their love affair with the strong pound and whether they would apologise for Mrs Thatcher's increase in VAT—the bed tax—from 8 per cent to 17.5 per cent. Did we hear any of that? No. What is their master plan? It is that the Scottish Tourist Board should run the toilets.

Perhaps David Davidson will expand on the Conservatives' policy in his intervention.

It might come as a surprise to David Davidson, but I was going to mention the fuel tax. I am delighted to say that Kenny MacAskill and I reiterated the SNP policy of September 1999 at our conference last week—we restated the SNP's commitment that fuel tax in Scotland should move towards the average level  in Europe. I believe that that is a principled and fair commitment. Despite the fuel tax protests, we have not heard Labour's true policy in the past three weeks.

Not just yet, Phil. Haud yer wheesht for a wee minute. Labour's policy is that the fuel tax is too low—it is committed to increasing fuel tax by at least the rate of inflation at the next budget. Does any member from the Labour or Liberal Democrat parties agree that that is the right policy for Scotland? I am happy to take interventions, but there are no offers from Labour or the Liberal Democrats.

Phil Gallie's appearance on "Newsnight" the other night was better than that question. If someone will supply me with an interpreter, I will be happy to deal with it later. Phil Gallie is right about the silence of the Labour lambs. During the life of this Parliament, no Labour MSP has expressed a word of criticism about the fuel tax. Labour MSPs are the only people in Scotland who think it is a great thing—they even think that it is too low. I am happy to take an intervention from anyone who disagrees with Tony Blair.

Yesterday, Mr Mandelson said that spin was bad—today we hear complete fiction from Allan Wilson. All SNP MPs have always voted against the fuel tax escalator; it has never been part of our policy commitments and it never will be. To return to tourism, the SNP is, as our amendment indicates, not wholly negative in its response to the Executive's strategy. The strategy has some good parts; but it also has many failings. The amendment in my name concentrates on  some of those failings. A firm grip must be taken of the Ossian booking system, which is seriously defective. Area tourist boards are in need of reform—local economic forums are the way to deal with that. Landing charges are a serious problem for Scotland and Kenny MacAskill will expand on that matter. Local marketing initiatives, such as the one in Nairn, are the way ahead. Local consortiums in public-private partnerships are marketing themselves directly without the use of generic advertising. That has been done in Nairn, Lochaber, Aviemore and the Borders. That is a positive suggestion, and the SNP is, as ever, delighted to be able to make a positive contribution to the debate. I move amendment S1M-1216.1, to leave out from "recognises" to end and insert: "notes that tourism in Scotland faces considerable competitive disadvantages in comparison with countries such as Ireland in respect of the high pound, high levels of tax on fuel, high business rates and lower resourcing for generic and other promotion; believes that those involved in the tourism industry are to be congratulated for their work and the measure of success achieved despite these disadvantages; further believes that the tourism strategy launched by the Scottish Executive, whilst it has certain good elements, cannot in itself meet the needs of the sector, and calls for (a) an immediate assessment of the efficacy of the Ossian on-line booking system, (b) targeting of resources to permit locally based marketing, (c) a review of the level of landing charges in our airports and (d) a commitment that the area tourist board structure will be amended in the light of the conclusions of the local economic forums with the aim of finding the best solution for each area."

Will the minister give way?

David Davidson complains about inadequate and insufficient funding for ATBs. By what amount would the Tories increase such funding, if they were in charge?

I start by congratulating Jamie Stone on lodging this motion. This has been a joint party effort. The text of the motion invites Parliament to express our "deepest regret for the occurrence of the Highland Clearances". I know that there will be no vote, but I hope that at the end of this short debate the minister will say that he personally joins in the spirit of the motion. Why should this be done? In other countries, the genocide and ethnic cleansing that has taken place, against the Indians in America and the Aborigines in Australia, was acknowledged long ago. Today, the time to acknowledge what happened to those who were cleared from the Highlands has come. We can now acknowledge and regret what happened and perhaps then move on. The motion also asks us to extend our "hand in friendship and welcome to the descendants of the cleared people who reside outwith our shores." Although the descendants of cleared people in Scotland today may number only tens of hundreds, the Highland diaspora extends to tens of millions. With Margaret Ewing, I visited Ellis island, off New York, which commemorates the melting pot of America and where the citizens came from—the countries that they left. What a terrific idea Mr MacLeod has, with others, to show the country that people left and how they got to Canada, Australia and America. The centre will show the experiences that they had on the way—the hardships, suffering and atrocity that they endured, such as show trials and hangings. I join Jamie Stone in hoping that the Executive will support—in all ways—the fruition of that project. As Jamie Stone mentioned the future, I will mention the present. We had one of the most interesting times for reflection today, when George Thompson reminded us of the dangers of exaggerating what we may see as the wrongs and ills of today in comparison with acts of genocide,  war and suffering on a much larger scale. Although I would therefore not use the phrase "new clearances", I am concerned that voluntary bodies and Government agencies in the Highlands have too much power over the lives of those who live there. I hope that we can deal with the abuse of that power as well as commemorate the wrongs of the past.

Will Elaine Murray agree with the late John Smith, who argued that people on higher incomes should pay higher income tax?

Will the member give way?

In the Government's programme, I heard no reference to specific help for people on low incomes and pensioners in respect of the unrebated and extortionately high water charges. Would the member support such help if it were part of an SNP Government programme?

Will Mr Brown give way?

Although I am grateful to Robert Brown for giving way, I should point out to him that my name is Fergus. Stewart Ewing is my father, with whom he served on Glasgow District Council some years ago. Perhaps I am beginning to look older. As Robert Brown is giving us a non-diatribe, perhaps he could respond to a simple factual question. Are there any bills that the Liberal Democrats proposed for inclusion in this year's programme for government that are not in this year's programme for government?

I shall rephrase the question. Have the Liberals put forward to their coalition partners in the Labour party any bills that they feel should be included in this year's programme for government that have not been accepted by the Labour party for inclusion in the programme?

Does the First Minister agree that the overwhelming majority of people who have participated in or supported the protests have done so in a peaceful and orderly way? Does he agree that for anyone—including the Deputy First Minister—to characterise their behaviour as "mob rule" is purely inflammatory? Does the First Minister agree with the Chancellor of the Exchequer, who believes that the rate of fuel duty needs to be increased? The chancellor and the Labour party are committed to increase duty by at least the rate of inflation in the forthcoming budget.

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

This is not the first time that I have spoken about the fuel tax in Parliament and, no doubt, it will not be the last. When I spoke last week about the highest fuel tax in the world, Alasdair Morrison said that he felt inclined to yawn. Well, I am pleased to see that all the Labour ministers are wide awake this week. I am sorry that Alasdair Morrison is not here today, as he is a Gaelic linguist. I attended the Gaelic college in Skye, where someone told me what they thought about Labour's utterances on the fuel tax. In Gaelic, people say: "Tha na Laboraich làn ròlaistean", which means that Labour is prone to wildly exaggerated speeches that may not always have a factual content. That is a loose translation. This morning, I spoke to my constituents who are involved in haulage, fishing and farming. I spoke to the medical director of Raigmore hospital, who says that Raigmore is unaffected. I spoke to a fishermen's representative in Mallaig, who says that many fishermen are facing bankruptcy. I spoke to a haulier who said that many of his men may not be in a job next year, because Tony Blair will never act on fuel tax.

Robin Harper should sit down; we know his views. Tony Blair and Donald Dewar tell us that we are supposed to enter the democratic process. Today, the First Minister says that the arguments are well rehearsed. The problem is quite simple: nobody in the Labour party listens. That is why normally peaceable and respectable people in Scotland are driven to protest in a way that they do not enjoy. They are driven to such protest by a Prime Minister whose life's ambition is to resemble Margaret Thatcher.

I fear for the future of our small communities in the Highlands if action is not taken. Today, I have heard the Liberal Democrats and other members say that they want action to be taken. However, we know that no action will be taken under Tony Blair. Tony is not for turning. The laddie is not listening; he is following his heroine, Mrs Thatcher. History tells us that many figures—from Canute  to Marie Antoinette—lost touch with reality; the Prime Minister and the First Minister have joined them.

The Deputy First Minister's remarks on mob rule will be deeply resented by many people in Scotland.

It is not a unique ambition. We hope to see the Government go as quickly as possible. The Government is the problem: it is not listening and it is not acting. That is why we are seeing peaceful, civil protest on a scale unlike any we have seen before. That protest will continue. The argument has moved on. We no longer have to prove that fuel tax is too high: everyone in Scotland accepts that fuel tax must be cut. I remind members of the late John Smith's phrase, "settled will". The settled will of the Scottish people is that there must be a fuel tax cut. The Labour party in Scotland either listens to that and agrees with the Scottish people, or suffers the consequences.

Has Tavish Scott attended any demonstrations, as members of this party did yesterday? We met many employees, including some Transport and General Workers Union members. Does Mr Scott have evidence that he has attended any demonstrations, or is he making this up?

To ask the Scottish Executive how many grants have been paid to convert motor vehicles to use liquid petroleum gas and whether it has set or will set a target for the number of such grants which are to be paid in future. (S1O-2178)

Does the minister agree that liquid petroleum gas is a matter of complete irrelevance for the overwhelming majority of motorists in the Highlands and Islands, who pay the highest fuel tax in the world? Now that we are approaching the £4 gallon and the £1 billion millennium dome, can new Labour and its Liberal colleagues say whether they will take or promote any action to end the discrimination against motorists in the Highlands and Islands? If so, in which millennium?

Will the minister give way?

It was precisely because I realised that the minister was about to sum up that I thought that he might wish to take an intervention.

I am grateful. I wondered whether the minister was going to cover the other point of substance that I raised. Does he feel that the public, and all those with an interest in the UHI, can have confidence in the scope and extent of the review that was announced by Dr Donnie Munro and Sir Fraser Morrison into the complaints about which we have read in the press, but the substance of which we know little or nothing about? Is the minister confident in that process, or does he agree that there should be a more independent inquiry into those matters?

The SNP has always supported the concept of a university of the Highlands and Islands and will continue to do so. I would be surprised if any party in this chamber took a different view. This debate, which I welcome, gives us an opportunity before the recess to obtain from the Executive an idea of what the barriers are to the achievement of that goal. I hope that we will receive a candid and detailed reply from the minister. When he responds to the debate, will he indicate whether an alternative method of obtaining university status is open for consideration, namely that of seeking a royal  charter? If that route is open, would it, if followed, allow the more rapid achievement of university status? I echo George Lyon's comment that the review into the complaints to which he referred would have been better if it had been fully independent. I understand that the review that is being instituted will consider only the UHI processes—whatever that may mean—and not the substance of the complaints. If complaints are made, they should be investigated carefully, especially if they are complaints from staff. There is a stark contrast between the funding that has been made available to the university of the Highlands and Islands project of around £9.86 million, which includes just over £2 million on the project's executive office, and the underfunding—or deficits—that are faced by a number of colleges. For example, it is notable that Inverness College has a deficit of £5 million, as the staff of the college have regularly pointed out to me. While staff at that institution are facing job cuts as a result of problems that arose from previous management errors, the university of the Highlands and Islands project is extremely well funded. I hope that the minister will address that point in his reply. All parties hope that university status is achieved by UHI as quickly as possible and that any difficulties are resolved. I hope that the Executive is taking an active part in seeking to ensure that those difficulties are resolved as soon as possible.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will make representations to Her Majesty's Government that ceilings should be introduced on fuel prices in areas of Scotland where it believes that monopoly conditions exist. (S1O-2103)

Is the minister aware that the Government in the Republic of Greece has, on numerous occasions, introduced price ceilings—maximum prices—for petrol in rural areas outwith Athens and Salonica? I cordially invite the minister to tour the Highlands and Islands by car during the summer recess to discover for herself that the fuel prices there are the highest in the world. Does she accept that, if ceilings are good enough for Greece, surely they are good enough for Scotland?

By what date will the forums be established and who will serve on them? Will the business and voluntary organisation voice be in the majority? If not, how will the minister ensure that the forums deliver their intended purpose, which is to remove duplication and overlap? What, precisely, are the mechanisms for ensuring that rationalisation takes place? Having read the statement and the supplementary statement, and speaking as a confirmed carnivore, I am left feeling that the question today is, "Where's the beef?"

At the Drumochter pass, as some members may be aware, there are two hills: the southerly one is called the Sow of Atholl and the northerly one, which marks the boundary of my constituency, is called the Boar of Badenoch. Rather than be known as the bore of Badenoch, I am happy to accept the alternative sobriquet of the Wolf of Badenoch from my friend Robin Harper. I must confess that I did not understand Mr Tosh's remark that I enjoyed writing to myself, but if I ever write to him, I shall address the letter to "Utter Tosh".  It has been a long afternoon, and I pay tribute to all those who have been involved, not least the two ministers, who have undertaken a huge work load, and all the members who have pursued their arguments with sincerity, passion and conviction. However, the procedure has been seriously defective and that gives us a good deal of food for reflection. Sarah Boyack said that no one in a national park had ever asked for national park status to be removed. I remind her that it was not for nothing that 10,000 people signed a petition in the late 1980s calling for the abolition of the Brecon Beacons National Park, for some of the reasons that have been debated today. It is unfortunate that more was not done to address the concerns that were raised during this afternoon's business. Looking forward positively, I hope that some of the fears that I have expressed are never realised. However, I know that history repeats itself, and the problems of the past will be encountered in the future. I hope that, when it comes to ministerial appointments, membership of the park authorities will reflect the aspirations and needs of the local communities, and will not be dominated by bodies whose members' idea of assisting the environment is to spend their lives attending conferences on the environment, rather than working in overalls in the field to shape it. People in my constituency fear that this legislation has been shaped and driven by the needs of the proposed Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park area. To some extent those fears are justified, as the needs of that proposed park area have influenced the way in which the legislation has been framed. However, we must look forward and work together to ensure that the national parks are a success for Scotland. As we look forward to 2002 being the international year of mountains, we have a good opportunity to promote the Cairngorm national park as a world centre for tourism. That will allow us to promote and encourage tourism, as happens in national parks in many other parts of the world. I hope that the minister will agree that that is consistent with sustainable development, whatever that phrase may mean.

Amendment 18 seeks to provide balance and to make national parks work. The aims of the national parks are set out in section A1. It is important to begin by reflecting on the fact that there has been added to that section a word that completely alters the sense of what was in the original bill, which said that the first purpose of a national park would be "to conserve and enhance the natural and cultural heritage of the area." The original drafting also said that the fourth purpose of a park would be "to promote economic and social development of the area's communities." The significant word that has been added is "sustainable". The fourth purpose of the park as set out in the bill now reads: "to promote sustainable economic and social development of the area's communities." That word alters completely the sense of the original bill because any development that is pursued as an aim of the park must now be sustainable. I contend that the phrase "sustainable development" means development that does not harm the environment. If I am correct, it follows logically from the only ordinary interpretation of the words that there cannot be conflict between the aims in section A1(a) and section A1(d). The first says that we want to conserve the environment—everybody wants that. The second says that, none the less, we will pursue the aim of sustainable development. Sustainable development is development that does not detract from, harm or hamper conservation. That point was not made during stage 2. I want to emphasise it today, in the hope that members of all parties will find it possible to support my amendment, which is not being pursued in a party political way.  I have three further arguments that I will put briefly. First, what sort of message does it send if we fetter the decision-making power of the authority so that, if it appears that conflict exists, it must give greater weight to conservation considerations, even if the conflict is with sustainable development? As I say, I do not believe that, by definition, such conflict can possibly occur. Having appointed members of a park authority, we should surely trust them. We should trust the local people and the members who are on the authority to do the job and to take each decision on its merits. That is surely what sensible, intelligent people—people with vision, as the minister said—should do, will do, and will always seek to do. Devolution should not end in Edinburgh. Unless we accept this amendment, we are constraining the decision-making powers by the application of the Sandford principle, which I believe to be unnecessary. Secondly, there is no definition of what conflict means. The Sandford principle must be applied where it appears to the park authority that there is conflict. But what constitutes conflict? If two voluntary organisations object to a proposal, I submit that that could well be construed as conflict. If the park authority says that it is not conflict, will voluntary organisations seek a judicial review and go to the Court of Session? A similar thing has happened, in one instance, three times in three or four years. Will they then try to block the park authority, saying that it has exercised its discretion inappropriately by refusing to hold that there is conflict? I have raised at stage 1 and stage 2 the point that there is no definition of conflict; there has been no attempt to amend the bill to indicate what that word means. Without a definition of that word, I believe that we are in serious difficulty. Thirdly, there are existing designations of land—national scenic areas, of which there are more than 40 in Scotland; sites of special scientific interest; Ramsar sites; and sites designated under the habitat directive. All of those designations are in effect now; all of them will continue to be in effect the day after the national park is created. The purpose of the designation of a national park is not to confer further protection on land; it is to enable the management of areas of special importance from the point of view of conservation. In my constituency, there is growing concern about some aspects of the bill and especially about what will happen if the Sandford principle is to be applied in the way that is described. My constituents have seen many battles in the past between the people and powerful voluntary organisations; no one wants to see them again. It seems to me that those battles are as though  between David and Goliath. If we reject this amendment, we are taking the sling from David and handing it to Goliath.

All members would agree that they do not wish the park authority to become politicised, although I suspect that that wish may be difficult to fulfil. I support amendment 45, which is Mike Rumbles's principal amendment, although it seems to me to be rather arbitrary to elect only  20 per cent of an authority. Be that as it may, amendment 45 should be supported. I wish to raise some points that have been raised outside the chamber. I hope that the minister will be able to provide an assurance that the ministerial appointments to the authority will include a number of distinguished community councillors who have shown an interest and who have developed experience and expertise in the issues that are germane to the successful operation of national parks. Similarly, I hope that ministerial appointments will not be restricted to those who live outwith the area and who have no local connection. The minister indicated at stage 2 that such considerations were in her mind and that community councillors might be appointed by ministers rather than by local authorities. I suspect that local authorities will wish to select their own members to serve on the park authority. On the other ministerial appointments, there is particular concern that some bodies in Scotland seem to think that they have a natural right to serve on every board that considers the environment. People in my constituency are concerned that the authority may become dominated by some of those voluntary organisations. All parties expressed concerns on that point at stage 2. I say both to the minister and to the chamber that the royal society for the protection of people does not exist; if it did, it would be this Parliament. I hope that those members who represent urban constituencies appreciate and understand the fears that have been expressed by members such as Rhoda Grant, John Farquhar Munro and me. People have serious fears that decisions will be taken by powerful, well-funded groups that are not willing to compromise and, ultimately, that take their disputes to the jaws of the Court of Session, where they are usually thoroughly thrashed. I see one or two members on the Labour benches smiling in recognition of past battles, which the Government won. No one wants a repeat of those battles. The way in which to avoid them is for the minister to give an assurance that she will not appoint to the authority voluntary organisations that profess to be the conservationists in Scotland. I submit that the true conservationists in Scotland are the farmers and crofters who live on the land, as have their fathers and their fathers' fathers before them—generation unto generation. I hope that the minister will look to them when making ministerial appointments.

Can the minister confirm that ministers will use that power to prescribe maximum limits of expenditure for each candidate? That concern was expressed by the Highland Council and by others. It is felt that some wealthy voluntary organisations might be able to take advantage of the system if such expenditure limits are not in place.

Will the member give way?

We welcome all the steps that have been taken to ensure that consultation should be as wide as possible when we consider the designation orders and that that consultation should engage the public. However, it is most unfortunate that the Executive has not accepted the case for there to be the ultimate form of consultation, by asking the people who live and work in a national park area whether they agree that they see the benefits of a national park.

I will give way in a minute, minister. Members in this chamber may not realise that there are no fewer than 17,100 people in the Cairngorms Partnership area—that is a lot of people. I believe that the ultimate form of consultation is a referendum. Anyone who is a democrat—whether a Liberal Democrat or any other type—must welcome the possibility of holding a referendum to ask people whether they agree that they wish to be part of a national park. That is true consultation. I will be happy to give way to the minister, who will no doubt explain why he is not in favour of this aspect of democracy.

I must correct the minister: the vote was not as he said. I believe that there were two votes from my colleagues in favour of a referendum. I have since become aware that members of another party would have been minded to support the idea if it had been permitted for debate today. I accept the Presiding Officer's ruling, but I will say that it is unfortunate that we do not have the opportunity to debate matters of principle at stage 3. I do not want to dwell on the matter, as the point  has already been made. A referendum would have been a positive process and, if the Executive had taken advantage of it, the national park proposal would have started off with the opportunity of securing the endorsement of the people who must accept the benefits or otherwise of national park status.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I understand that amendments 17 and 18, which I lodged, have not been selected. Although I appreciate that the Presiding Officer has unfettered power over the selection of such items, the non-selection of the amendments about a local referendum does not comply with the guidance, as the amendments raise a matter of principle that it is important to debate.

I should start by declaring an interest, which might be shared by my colleague Michael Matheson. At the weekend, we participated in some recreation—the Corrieyairick challenge—in a proposed national park area. Unfortunately, I think that I was bringing up the rear, whereas Mr Matheson was towards the fore. I am pleased to support the Executive's amendment, which puts in context the importance of recreation in national parks. It was pleasing to see that, at stage 2, my amendment was accepted by the Executive. It is important that, in every national park that is envisaged, recreation is seen as something that is positive and that national park authorities should encourage, with particular regard to the needs of children and those with a disability.

Ten days ago, with two other members who are here today, I attended an NFU panel debate in Inverness at which many hill farmers were present. As members appreciate and as the minister understands, the average income of hill farmers is around £1,750 a year, which is impossible to cope with. In this debate, perhaps for the first time, there is a growing sense among all members of the crisis that faces the farming community. I would like to mention two matters of considerable importance. The first concerns the future of Claymore Dairies in Nairn. I imagine that the minister is aware of the background to the referral to the Office of Fair Trading last year, which led to a further referral to the Competition Commission. I hope that the minister is aware of the statement of potential remedies that was made just yesterday by Denise Kingswell of the Competition Commission. It indicated that Robert Wiseman and Sons dairies may be forced to sell off its milk-processing plants in Scotland and may be stopped from hiking its milk prices for three years. I take care to point out that that was merely a statement of potential remedies, rather than a finding in the case, and that no decision or report will be made until November. I raise this issue because concern in the Highlands about the future of the creamery is extreme. I hope that the minister will be aware of the very serious allegations that are circulating in the farming community in the Highlands concerning practices pursued by Robert Wiseman. I hope that he will agree that this is a matter in which the Executive must intervene now. I say that having chosen my words carefully. The second issue that I would like to raise was touched on by Alex Fergusson. It concerns the treatment of farmers who make mistakes when completing their forms under the integrated administration and control system. As I have said before, I believe that the approach the Scottish Executive has taken for a number of years is unnecessarily harsh. There occasionally appears to be undue zeal in the enforcement of penalties when they need not be imposed.  The effect of imposing a penalty is, in many cases, the confiscation of the whole year's income. It is possible under particular schemes—whether the beef suckler cow premium scheme, or whichever particular scheme the farmer applies for—to lose the whole year's income from making a simple mistake. In one case, the penalty was over £10,000. As a solicitor, I occasionally appeared in court representing clients accused of crimes. Somebody would have had to have committed a particularly heinous crime to be fined £10,000. I raise this question—not for the first time in this Parliament—in the hope that there will be a rethink. Having studied the relevant Commission regulation at great length, it is my view that the rules do not require the imposition of penalties. There is a series of guidelines, of which the minister is aware, headed "Obvious errors in aid applications submitted under the integrated system". The minister will be aware that when the member state is convinced that the farmer acted in good faith—that there was no risk of fraud—and that the mistake was made innocently, there is no need to impose penalties. I think that the rules are being interpreted in an unduly harsh way. In some of the individual cases that I have dealt with, it seems that the Scottish Executive's approach is to cast the blame on Europe and to imply—quite wrongly—that there is no discretion to the rural affairs department, to the Scottish Executive or to the Scottish agricultural officers at the top of the civil service. Quite plainly there is a discretion, and it should be exercised in many more cases. I urge the minister to rethink this extremely important issue.

I did not sneer at those companies.

It is fair to say that all parties in Scotland and all members of this Parliament have no difficulty whatever in supporting the aims and principles that the minister described. We must ensure that, in Scotland, skills are improved and education and training are provided. No one could disagree with that statement. Today we are considering whether those laudable aims will in fact be achieved by the Education and Training (Scotland) Bill, which we are to pass today, and by the programmes that will be implemented by the bill. As the Opposition, we are concerned that there are 10 reasons why the bill will not succeed or will not succeed to the extent that it should. I will cover five of those reasons and Fiona McLeod will cover the remaining five. First, we are concerned about the basic aim of reaching those who are on the lowest wages and  who have the lowest skills. We want the bill to reach the parts that other programmes have not reached. One witness, Bruce Armitage from Scottish Enterprise Grampian, described that as "the Heineken effect". The Parliament's decision not to support amendment 2, which would have provided an absolute guarantee that those on low pay and new learners would benefit from the scheme, means that the bill will fail the Heineken test. Secondly, many of the witnesses who appeared before the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee expressed a serious concern that the £23 million—or, more accurately, the £16.5 million to be used for grants—would simply be spent on providing training that would have been provided anyway, except this time at the state's expense. That serious, practical concern has not been addressed. Thirdly, there is the problem of bureaucracy, an issue that has not been raised or emphasised today. We understand that the total budget line is £23 million, but that only £16.5 million will go to grants—to the individuals who are to receive the education or training. That leaves £4 million that will go to the customer services provider and £2.5 million that will be spent on marketing. That means that 28 per cent of the money will be spent on bureaucracy. In comparison, the costs of running the Scottish Parliament run to 0.2 per cent of the Scottish block, so there are concerns that the money will not be going towards meeting its intended purposes. Fourthly, there are practical problems that we have not addressed. Will the database be ready? Frank Pignatelli has recognised that it will not be fully ready. What about the arrangements for the private sector training provider? Will they be too bureaucratic? That was discussed in committee, but I do not think that it was fully addressed. We now know that the scheme will be launched in August. That means that we have to take it on faith that all the arrangements will be in place. My feeling and my guess is that they will not be and that the scheme will start without the necessary database and arrangements. There will be serious teething problems, which may be inevitable at the outset. That is unfortunate, because we do not want the ILAs to be viewed with the same contempt as the youth training scheme that the Conservatives introduced some years ago. Finally, much has been said about the fast pace of the bill's passage through the Parliament. It was introduced on 28 April and it will have gone through all its stages in two months. I am concerned that there has not been a proper opportunity for scrutiny. More than that, my main concern is that the timetable of the bill has been entirely determined by two bills proceeding  through Westminster. That is entirely wrong. Today, this Parliament will be passing a bill that is simply a Holyrood train running to a Westminster timetable.

I am pleased that the minister has made a partial concession and welcome it in the spirit in which it was given. However, I believe that it is important, for the reasons John Swinney gave, for the principle contained in amendment 1 not to be in regulations that we have not seen, but to be on the face of the bill before us today. It is an important principle. Unless I misheard the minister, the concession did not apply to subsistence costs, so I am not sure if that aspect of the amendment will be covered in the regulations. The amendment contains an enabling provision and does not, as Elaine Murray suggested, presuppose anything. Quite the opposite—it confers on ministers the power to ensure that people in rural Scotland are not discriminated against.

It is getting better and better; perhaps we should keep going. We have not seen the regulations and we look forward to seeing them. It is important for bills to contain principles—that is what they are for. The principle in question is that people in rural Scotland should not be discriminated against, and that principle should be contained in the bill.

Will the minister give way?

The fact remains that 25 per cent is so small a threshold as not to create inflexibility. I understand that those who are administering the scheme would always have to have regard to that threshold and—as we heard in response to Dr Simpson's earlier intervention—that that would occur anyway. Given Frank Pignatelli's evidence to the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee and his obvious enthusiasm for our shared aim of ensuring that those who are least skilled and least well off benefit from the scheme, I suspect that much effort will be applied to that. Alex Neil's point was not party political, but a commonsense point by somebody who has experience in the matter. He said that the people who will come forward to apply will be those who would have done so anyway. In many cases, the training that will be provided by excellent companies such as Scottish Power in 50 learning centres throughout the UK would have been provided by those companies anyway. The difference is that they will be paid by the state to provide the training. There is risk that the intended beneficiaries of the legislation will lose out. In supporting Fiona McLeod's amendment 2, I suggest to members that—after they examine their whips' notices—they should, by agreeing to the amendment, decide to give a chance to those who have no chance.

Will Allan Wilson give way?

rose—

I am curious about the radical changes that Allan Wilson says have taken place. I might have been asleep when those changes were made in committee, but unfortunately—as members know—I tend to stay awake in committees; I know that that is not popular, but it is the case. There have been four changes, which have all been purely technical. Where are the radical amendments that Allan Wilson talks about?

The bill is about providing grants to help people to obtain skills, education and training. Amendment 1 seeks to ensure that we do not discriminate against people who live in parts of rural Scotland. How might those people be discriminated against? Well, let us consider how the system will operate. It is proposed that there should be a basic grant of £150 that the individual can use to cover the costs of obtaining skills, education or training. The individual contributes £25 towards the cost. Those figures are not huge—£150 does not buy a very long course or a complicated piece of training. Given that those figures are low, what happens if that individual has to spend £50 or £100 on travelling to the place where the training or education is provided? Plainly, a person in that situation is meeting costs and liabilities that do not have to be met by someone who can travel on foot or by bus to the local college, learning centre, in-house training centre at work, or other place where learning might be received.  I accept fully that there are many different types of establishment where learning will be received. My constituency covers an area five times as big as greater London, which has 90 members of Parliament. People who live in places such as Inverie and want to get to the nearest college have to take a ferry to Mallaig and then some vehicular transport—not public transport—to Fort William, along the only single-track trunk route in Britain. A person making that journey will incur substantial costs, for which the bill makes no provision. Amendment 1 would give ministers the power to make such provision. I could have lodged an amendment that spelled out exactly what assistance should be received, but I accept that the matter is not straightforward. None the less, unless provision is made to help those who live in many parts of rural Scotland, they will be discriminated against. There is no doubt about that.  I understand that the minister is sympathetic to the problem. Originally, his response was that there would be no provision for transport costs. However, after hearing debate, he indicated that the Executive would consider matters further. That is appreciated. I also understand that there has been a pilot scheme in Lochaber, where a fund has been made available to the local enterprise company to deal with matters as they arise in practice. That is all well and good, but if the minister recognises that a pilot scheme is necessary, he must recognise that there should be provision in the programme itself. Henry McLeish has announced that £8 million will be made available for child care; I believe that Fiona McLeod will say more about that shortly. I hope that the Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning will indicate in his response whether we are correct in understanding that not one penny of that £8 million can be used for ILAs, but that it is all to be used for further education. If that is the case, the announcement appears to be a red herring. I hope that the minister will take that on board. In the debates that we have had so far on this issue, the Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning has said that a scheme to cover travel costs would be too complicated to administer. However, I do not see that the scheme that covers the travel costs of MSPs or civil servants is too expensive to administer. It is unlikely that the minister's argument will find favour with the many people in rural Scotland who will, I believe, be discriminated against unless amendment 1 is agreed to. I move amendment 1.

The original purpose of creating individual learning accounts was to provide skills, education and training to those who lacked them and who were on low incomes. That was the provenance of the ILA concept. The Moser report, which examined the situation in England and Wales, found that some 7 million adults in England—one in five adults—if given the alphabetical index to the "Yellow Pages", could not locate the page reference for plumbers. I would not argue that the picture is any less bleak, and frankly appalling, in Scotland. Members of all parties recognise the scale of the problem. Given that the problem that is to be addressed relates to those who are least skilled and least well off, surely the bill must propose specific measures to tackle that. That was its original purpose. At stage 2, members of all parties were supportive of that principle; what we lack is any specific measure by which that worthy and essential aim is to be achieved. I shall now address some of the arguments that have been advanced by other members against accepting the excellent amendment that has been lodged by Fiona McLeod. First, the quota that is being proposed by the amendment is not 80 per cent, nor 60 per cent, nor even 50 per cent. It is not even half: it is one quarter—25 per cent. That is all. Nevertheless, that was described by the minister as limiting. How is that a limit? Secondly, I wondered whether the minister was going to say, in response to the intelligent intervention by Dr Simpson, whether there would be monitoring. If there was no monitoring, that would reduce the bureaucracy and the costs, as such a scheme would not have to be administered. However, the minister said that there will be a monitoring scheme. The costs will be there, but we will see none of the benefits. Thirdly, Annabel Goldie mentioned inflexibility. With great respect, I do not feel that the case has been made that a threshold of 25 per cent would  create inflexibility. I do not think that that will happen.

My question also is about regional policy. The document places much emphasis on regional policy or, to use the new term used on page 64, "peripheral sub-national economies"—new Labour, new jargon. On Tuesday of this week, Dr John Reid indicated in an answer to David Stewart that the map showing the UK's proposals to the European Commission for those parts of Scotland and Britain that should continue to receive assisted area status has been resubmitted. Why has the map not been published? I presume that it will be published, given that the map submitted last July was. Does the minister accept that businesses in the Highlands are more concerned about funding than about framework documents and that they have a right to know what parts of Scotland, in  particular in the Highlands and Islands, have received the backing of the Governments at Westminster and Holyrood?

I should start by declaring a potential interest in that if I was, by any mischance, to cease to be a member of the Parliament, in theory I would be eligible for appointment as a sheriff.

I am bound to reflect that my becoming a sheriff is about as likely as the Prime Minister being made patron of the women's institute. What we are seeing today is the Government following the Westminster Government and reaping what has been sown over a period of 30 years. As has been pointed out, the position of temporary sheriff was introduced to deal with the death or illness of a permanent sheriff, annual vacations or a declinature of jurisdiction. There has been a gradual growth in the use of temporary sheriffs to the point where there are 134 of them. That is because temporary sheriffs were not entitled to pensions and did not get the same amount of remuneration. We had temps because governments tried to get justice on the peace—on the cheap rather. [Laughter.] I see that members are all still awake. This is not so much a case of virtue being rewarded as it is of parsimony being punished. The matter is serious. I have spent many happy hours in sheriff courts before various sheriffs and I can say that temps are not the real thing. Members might consider appearing in the chamber a nerve-racking experience, but anyone who has not appeared before Sheriff David Smith does not know that they are alive. I hope that section 11A will achieve its intended aims. There should be regulations, not discretionary powers. The regulations must deal with unfairness to solicitors from places such as Glasgow, who have been excluded from the bench. They must deal with unfairness to people from ethnic minorities, who are hardly represented on the bench. The regulations must also deal with unfairness to female solicitors. That sort of unfairness has been going on for decades. We should deal with it now. The main point that I want to address is on chapter 2. I participated in the deliberations on the matter in the Subordinate Legislation Committee. I  say to the minister that it seems to me that chapter 2 is lazy and callous. The Executive is removing at a stroke 88 justices of the peace because they are councillors. As the civil servants who appeared before the Subordinate Legislation Committee admitted, there are many other solutions available, but the Executive has chosen the easy option. They will wield the axe and get rid of the lot of them, just in case there is a distant prospect that there might be—in the perception of an unspecified person—a possible risk of non-compliance with the ECHR. The committee considered the bill in some technical detail. The civil servant's first response to being asked why the provision in chapter 2 was necessary was: "Our concern is with the financial link local authorities have with district courts". When asked what the financial link was, another civil servant said: "A reasonable person might reasonably perceive a possibility of bias."—[ Official Report , Subordinate Legislation Committee , 6 June 2000; c 228 and 230.] Why? It is because JPs impose fines and fines go to local authorities. According to that civil servant, JPs might benefit. JPs do not benefit, however. The councils benefit from fines—JPs do not get a penny whether they impose a fine of £50 or £100. It makes no difference to them. One might as well say that any member of a community benefits if a fine is set at £100 rather than £50, and that no member of the community can, therefore, be a JP, because they might benefit if the council gets another 50 quid. I ask members—

In a second. I was about to ask myself a rhetorical question of the sort with which Gordon Jackson is familiar. Is it really the case that a reasonable person will say that a JP, usually of many years' experience, will be influenced in the way described? I think not. That is a flawed argument. The Subordinate Legislation Committee did not pursue this issue in a political way. Objections were made by other members, some of whom are in the chamber. Jettisoning 88 respected, respectable and long-serving judges who have done a difficult and thankless job in our courts is an act of callousness and laziness. I hope that the Executive will reconsider that.

I was about to sit down, but if Gordon Jackson really wants to ask me a question, I am happy to respond.

I accept that that argument can be made. However, under the existing system no successful challenge has been made to JPs on those grounds. I remind Gordon Jackson of the arguments that were put previously: namely, that one way of dealing with the problem, without axing 88 JPs, would be to require them to decline any case in which the local authority was directly involved. Surely that would be sufficient to protect those 88 JPs against any threat of non-compliance with the ECHR.

As the minister will be aware, that issue was considered in some detail in the Subordinate Legislation Committee. The civil servants to whom we spoke said that the appointment of councillors as justices of the peace was compliant with the ECHR. Why, therefore, is the minister including the exclusion of councillors in this bill?

Every day since I was elected to Parliament, I have received representations from constituents and other people throughout Scotland about the iniquity of the level of fuel tax. There has been recognition, in this somewhat tetchy and ill-tempered debate, that severe problems follow directly from that. I will begin with a few facts, which I think illustrate the extent of the problem. First, the fuel duty tax per litre in the UK is at present 48.82p, or £2.22 per gallon, which is the highest rate in Europe. Denmark and Norway have tax rates of 33p per litre, and Greece has a tax rate of around 20p. Scotland is Europe's major oil producer; as far as I am aware, the only type of oil that is produced in Greece is olive oil. The bitter irony that is faced daily by my constituents in the Highlands and, increasingly, by motorists in every part of Scotland, is that Scotland—and Britain—has been singled out, of all the nations in the world, to have the highest tax and the highest fuel costs. For me, the interesting thing about this debate is that not one Labour MSP has said that there is anything wrong with that, just as at Westminster not one Labour MP from Scotland has had the guts to rebel on this issue and to speak up for Scotland, instead of following orders from Tony Blair.

Yes. on the basis that Murray Tosh might make a better defence of the Labour party than have members on the Labour benches.

Murray Tosh might not know this, but I am pleased to say that when the matter was debated in Westminster, the SNP group voted against fuel tax increases in Scotland, while the Labour group voted for them. One of the most iniquitous effects of having the highest fuel tax in the world is the impact on low-income families. According to one study, the total cost of motoring to a family in the Highlands and Islands is £50 a week. I remember well how the Labour party complained about the poll tax. The cost of the poll tax was about £10 a week, but Labour's fuel tax is about £50 a week for a  family—that is five times worse. Why cannot we hear a single Labour member speaking out about the fuel tax, which is Labour's poll tax? I am doing my best to attract interventions from the Labour benches, Presiding Officer, but no Labour members are rising. The Labour benches are static.

Here is a Labour defender.

Not for the first time in the debate, fiction seems to be creeping in. Janis Hughes contended that the SNP is a member of the European Federation of Green Parties. That is untrue, as is Allan Wilson's allegation. I will answer the major point that was raised by Alasdair Morrison. He asked how we would raise the money. Alasdair Morrison—although he did not say this explicitly—argued that if our fuel duty were not the highest in the world, that would somehow result in a loss of revenue. I remind Alasdair that a couple of weeks before the election, a major haulier in my constituency went out of business. I had a two-hour meeting with the haulier to find out why and he said, "I cannot pay the fuel tax and the Labour Government is driving me out of business." The result is that the Exchequer lost all the income tax from that business, all the pay-as-you-earn contributions, all the corporation tax, all the fuel tax and all the vehicle excise duty. If the Executive does not believe me, it should listen to the Road Haulage Association (Scotland) Ltd. That organisation told me this morning that lorries that travel from mainland Europe to the UK do not buy fuel in the UK. I say to Alasdair Morrison that it is not exactly rocket science—those hauliers do not buy fuel in the UK because the Government has made it too expensive. The hauliers can carry enough fuel to travel 2,000 miles. They do not spend a penny piece on fuel in the UK. It is about time that the minister started to listen to the Road Haulage Association. I will take another unionist intervention.

I know that it is a novel idea to some Conservative members, but I am responding to the debate and I am addressing all the red herrings that were introduced by David Davidson's unionist colleagues. I turn to Rhoda Grant's point about the Office of Fair Trading and the general issue of fuel prices in the Highlands and Islands. For decades, fuel prices in the Highlands have been higher than they are elsewhere. Mary Scanlon fairly pointed out that that now also applies in other parts of rural Scotland. What has been done about that issue? Nothing. Over the years, the matter has been referred to various so-called regulatory bodies, which have done nothing. The Office of Fair Trading is dealing with the most recent referral, which was made in January 1999. Its report was supposed to be out by Christmas; it is not yet out, but is now supposed to be out by this month. What will happen then? Will a refund be paid to the Highland motorists who have been fleeced by the Labour party? No chance. Will there be any action? There can be no action for a further 10 months, according to a letter that I have received from John Bridgeman, because even if there is a finding of profiteering and unfair trading, the issue must be considered by the Competition Commission. Once the commission concludes its investigation, perhaps some time next April or May—who knows, it may take much longer than that—it must take some sort of action. I repeat the question that Kenny MacAskill asked—if we can take action to reduce the price of cars, why cannot we take action by legislating to bring down the price of fuel? I would take any answers now, but apparently there is none. I am trying to stimulate a debate, but it is difficult. Earlier in the debate someone mentioned a lawnmower. It seems to me that there is a strong resemblance between the Executive and a lawnmower—it moves very slowly, and there are lots and lots of cuts. In the budget, Gordon Brown said: "Today inflation is 2.2 per cent."—[ Official Report , House of Commons , 21 March 2000; Vol 346, c 858.] He then put up fuel duty by 3.3 per cent and put up pensions by 1.1 per cent. Can somebody lend that man an abacus? What did Gordon Brown say when his Treasury department wrote to a constituent of mine to try to explain what he had done? Did he say that he had put up fuel taxes, or that he had hiked fuel taxes for the fourth time in three years—quite a feat even for Labour? No—apparently, there has not been a rise in fuel tax. We have been labouring under a misapprehension. It was not a rise—it was an automatic revalorisation. I thought I should give Labour members the script, as this is what they will have to try to sell at the Westminster elections:  Labour did not put taxes up—we had an automatic revalorisation. Sometimes in life, things become suddenly clear. What has become suddenly clear to Scots is that if they want somebody to fight for Scotland, to stand up to Gordon Brown and Tony Blair, and to stand up for what the people believe, they should not vote Labour, but should vote SNP. I think that we will do well at the coming elections.

Will the member give way?

I was interested to hear Mike Rumbles say that fuel tax is far too high. In that case, why does Charles Kennedy want to add 5p a litre in tax to make it even higher?

Will the member give way?

Will Mr Wilson give way?

I am sure that in the SNP we all agree that the fuel duty should not have been increased, as John Munro has argued. Why, then, did Charles Kennedy on 16 March in a press release state that fuel duty should be increased by 5p a litre? Would John Munro support his colleague, who represents the same constituency, on this matter, or vote against him?

Murray Tosh seems to have forgotten that Kenny MacAskill plainly stated at the end of his speech that we must end the disparity that is associated with rural petrol prices in Scotland. Does Murray Tosh accept that the fuel duty escalator is a policy that was initiated by the Tories? Is Murray Tosh's case now je ne regrette rien?

Does the minister also agree that the only transport choice for many, if not most, people in rural Scotland is the car, and that the car is a necessity, not a luxury? Will she now accept what everybody in the Highlands and Islands knows to be true, that we have the highest fuel costs and fuel tax in the world? Is the ultimate purpose of new Labour policy to make pedestrian transport the only choice—to paraphrase George Orwell, two legs good, four wheels bad?

Mr Rumbles's colleague George Lyon says that it is essential that the economic strategy comes out in favour of Scotland joining the euro. How could that Liberal Democrat policy be achieved in the context of the devolved settlement?

The SNP very much welcomes the report. I wish to echo the remarks of my two colleagues on the committee: the way in which the committee worked to produce the report perhaps provides a model of how the Scottish Parliament can work well in taking on a very serious topic. Our report is considered and detailed, and suggests a workable approach to solving a widely acknowledged problem. The committee considered evidence from a great many witnesses, as can be seen from the substantial tome of evidence that was produced. The evidence volume does not include the written submissions, which were even more substantial. We listened to all the voices in Scotland: the business organisations; the trade unions; the higher education institutes and further education bodies; and the consumers, who—as has been pointed out—are the most important people. The  committee had the pleasure of visiting Inverness and I was delighted that the committee was the first to sit outwith this fine city. Duncan McNeil and I had the pleasure of visiting Tayside and the excellent business shops there. Every committee member took the trouble to consider the issues on their merits, not in a party political sense; that was the keynote of the committee's work. I will depart from that spirit of consensus for a moment to say that the workings of the committee go to prove that if a little home rule is good, it follows that full home rule would be much better. That is a fairly simple example of impeccable logic. I see, from the reactions of members, that I have struck a controversial note. The business in the chamber event was another objective indicator of the success of the committee's proceedings. I believe that 77 per cent of the 129 people from a wide range of businesses who attended the event said that they found the experience useful. They became involved in the process, which serves as a marker for how any serious piece of work can be dealt with by putting interim conclusions to the test. Perhaps the event was only a straw poll, but it created a structured way for business people to report back. We secured their support for the interim conclusions before we went on to consider whether to make those conclusions final. I imagine that we would have had a harder time if the women's institute had formed the audience.

My comment was not an attack on Miss Goldie's sex, but a compliment. I have been told that I must watch my back as I am speaking, but I am sure that robust argument is always welcomed, no matter who the speaker might be. The committee's conclusion was that there is a great degree of overlap, duplication and congestion in local economic development. I will explain the approach that the committee decided to adopt. As was stated in an SNP Saltire paper, we must use public money to best effect and yield savings from administration and bureaucracy that we can use for the benefit of the public. We must create more entrepreneurs and achieve the target of creating 100,000 new small businesses. We all subscribe to the desirability of those aims and we must devise structures that allow us to deliver them; we cannot waste money on duplication, overlap and bureaucracy.

Yes. I will turn to that later, although we are debating structures, not red tape. I have said many times that red tape is a serious problem. Michael Forsyth made a notable speech about that problem many years ago, at a Tory conference, subsequent to which the Conservative Government produced reams and reams of more red tape, thereby exacerbating, rather than solving, the problem that it had identified.

No. We have had a good innings so far. The committee could have suggested that one layer or more be scrapped. We could have taken a crude approach and said that the LECs should be taken out of the system, or that the local authorities have no place in it. We could have said that the various additional bodies should be removed, so that one body would fit all. However, we reached the correct conclusion that such a crude analysis was inappropriate for several reasons. The circumstances throughout Scotland vary considerably. In fact, there is hardly commonality between any areas of Scotland—Western Isles, Lanarkshire, Lothian, Fife and the Highlands have extremely different mechanisms for the delivery of local economic development. In the Highlands, there is one council and six enterprise companies, whereas in Fife there is one enterprise company and one council. There is no single model; one size does not fit all. The committee became increasingly aware of the diversity of the delivery of economic development as its inquiry proceeded, so we concluded that it would be wrong to wield an axe. Instead, we should hand a scalpel to the local business community and allow it to decide whether that scalpel needs to be used to make minor incisions. That is the correct conclusion. Surely, if we believed in any devolution of power, we would not want to impose on Scotland a centralised solution that would apply everywhere. I was delighted that the Scottish Council for Development and Industry's recommendation, for an ombudsman for economic development, was included among the committee's recommendations. On page 482 of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee's report, the specific recommendation is: "The ombudsman would investigate client complaints including perceived duplication of services or inconsistencies in approach or delivery." That means that ordinary people in business will have the opportunity, if that particular form of  ombudsman's powers is adopted, to make a complaint to the ombudsman about a specific situation that has arisen, identifying any duplication that they have encountered in their daily business lives. That is a terrific opportunity, which will be extremely useful in helping the forums to perform their functions. One area of controversy is the composition of the forums that are to be set up. We have heard from the convener of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee that they should include all the agencies. Nevertheless, it is essential for the consumer voice to be heard, perhaps in the majority. By consumer voice, I mean business people and the voluntary sector, which is highly reliant on assistance from local enterprise companies. Their voice and place in the enterprise of Scotland must never be neglected. The committee recommended that the chambers of commerce should be the prime movers, but we should also listen to other representative bodies. We should be willing to include business people who are not members of any specific business organisation, and should be mindful of the danger, in some small areas, of the big fish in the pool being seen to influence the result in an inappropriate way. That is a difficult practical problem, but if we adopt the principle that the consumer should be in the majority, we will deliver the correct result. It is difficult to conceive that, if the agencies are in the majority, there will be any exercise of the scalpel at all. I hope, therefore, that the Executive will take that recommendation on board. I am pleased that several policies from the SNP manifesto have been adopted in the report. However, I did not point out to the committee that, in its deliberations and work, it was incorporating and implementing SNP policy. I chose not to mention that fact, in case it diverted the committee from reaching its conclusions. I am also pleased to associate the SNP with the findings of this report. Today we are more concerned with the structures than the substance. When implementing the conclusions, we should always be mindful that we are dealing with people's lives and livelihoods. I believe that we have produced an historic report. It has not hit the front pages of the tabloid newspapers, but it is an example of the solid work of the Parliament. It goes to show that Hubert Humphrey's comment of many years ago is not always right. He said that to forgive is human, to blame someone else is politics. On this occasion, we have eschewed the politics of blame, and struggled to grasp the politics of responsibility. In running our own affairs, we have found a workable solution for the business community that will ultimately be for the good of Scotland and for the good of business.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will support proposals for a Highlands and Islands transport authority to have the ability to purchase petrol and diesel for resale to motor vehicle users in the area. (S1O-1863)

Is the minister aware of the anger in the north of Scotland, where fuel tax and fuel costs are the highest in the world? Is that the real tartan tax in Scotland—a tartan that was spun by the Tories and woven by new Labour? Is it not the case that the last thing that we need in the north of Scotland is another false promise— [Interruption.]

It is okay. They will behave themselves in a minute. The last thing that we need in the north of Scotland is another false promise of action tomorrow. We need a reduction in fuel tax today.

The SNP supports the general aim—and I use that word advisedly—of the bill. The aim is to make provision for the payment of grants in respect of the education and training of certain individuals. That seems to be the clear aim of the bill, as set out in the preamble, and I think that all members would subscribe to it. As MSPs, some of us have tried to upskill by learning how to use e-mail and computers. We have received assistance from the excellent staff,  who have helped us to become more technologically adept—with greater or lesser success. I hope that, in the Scottish work force as a whole, people are recognising the need to upskill, whether or not they are ex-boilermakers like Duncan McNeil—I know that it is going to be a long, sleepy afternoon, Duncan, but I will try to keep things going. We can all agree that we all need to upskill, especially when the role of technology, particularly computers and e-mail, becomes ever more important and apparent in life. The committees, especially the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, have played an important role in the deliberations so far. I record our thanks to the clerks: Simon Watkins and David McLaren, who are here today, and Mark MacPherson, who I presume is somewhere working away. I also thank Alasdair Rankin of the Subordinate Legislation Committee. They have done an excellent task in a very short space of time. The bill is a slim volume indeed. It is the shortest bill that I have ever seen—the definition of shellfish poisoning was probably longer.

I think that Tavish may give us an advertorial for his bill.

I commend Tavish Scott to parliamentary draftsmen throughout Scotland. We support the aims of his bill. Section 1 of the Education and Training (Scotland) Bill says: "Scottish Ministers may make regulations authorising grants to be paid". It also says that regulations under section 1 may provide "that grants may not be paid". Section 2 says: "Arrangements qualify under this section if they satisfy such conditions as the Scottish Ministers may make by regulations". Section 3 says that regulations may be made. That is all that the bill says. With respect to the minister, whose good faith and intention to adopt a positive approach to achieve the aims to which we subscribe I recognise, let me say that the approach of this bill  is wholly inappropriate and sets a thoroughly bad precedent for the Parliament to follow. What are we debating today? We do not know. We do not know what the proposals are because the Executive has not said. We are having a debate in a vacuum. We do not know who will qualify for assistance. We are not sure whether the scheme is only for people who are employed. We do not know if it will include the self-employed. If it does not, the bill is flawed. I invite the minister to intervene—are the self-employed going to be eligible?

I am delighted to hear that. When I was a lawyer, people used to say, "Never ask a question unless the answer is known." Unfortunately, what the minister says is not what the illustrative statutory instrument, which is supposed to help, says. It says that one must be employed. I accept that the minister is acknowledging that the illustrative guidelines are flawed—they have been countermanded by what he has said. That is welcome, because it would be wrong to exclude the self-employed, as it would be wrong to exclude others, but it illustrates the point that I made in my point of order—that we do not know what we are debating. Mr Swinney will talk later about the evidence taken by the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee. Other members will speak about the problems identified by the committee. There are disadvantages for rural communities, for those who need child care to be able to take up learning, for those who are extremely disadvantaged, perhaps unemployed and bereft of skills, and for the disabled who may not be able to participate without additional support—we do not know whether they will be able to get support or, if they can, from which source. Moreover, we do not know how much of the £23 million is going to subsidise training that is already being done. Mr McKelvie of Scottish Power and Grahame Smith, the deputy general secretary of the Scottish Trades Union Congress, dealt with those points very well as witnesses to the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning committee. The plethora of schemes is very confusing for employers. I believe that the LECs should have local discretion, but the bill does not say whether they will. The evidence that we had was valuable, but it was insufficient. It was useful, but the witnesses could not address the Executive's proposals, because we did not have those proposals. I am reminded of the novel by Franz Kafka called "The Trial", in which an individual faced unspecified charges in an uncertain world where nothing was ever made clear. Perhaps he could have written a book called "The Parliament" or  "The Bill". I hope that in future such a bill will not be brought before the Parliament for a non-debate on principles that have not been set out in any clear fashion.

I appreciate that the minister's approach seems to be to listen to reasoned argument and to make concessions. He has stated that, in the light of the Grampian experience, the requirement of opening what he referred to as a special bank account has been dropped. Does that mean that it will not be necessary for the qualifying person to have a bank account at all?

On a point of order.

My point of order is about this debate. We are about to debate stage 1 of the Education and Training (Scotland) Bill, which is concerned with the principles of the bill. However, the bill contains no principles; it contains only a list of sections that enable statutory instruments to be brought in so that money can be spent. Although the bill has been accorded legislative competence, a number of issues arise from having a debate on the principles of a bill that contains no statement of any principles of any kind. Perhaps the matter should be taken to the Procedures Committee so that it can consider carefully and in time whether we are setting a very undesirable precedent by allowing this debate to take place.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will review the extent to which any public funding should be provided for the National Trust for Scotland's plans for the Glencoe visitor centre and Glencoe itself, and in particular for the trust's planned 66-seat restaurant and shops, and what assessment has been made of any effect that initiative might have on existing businesses in Glencoe and Ballachulish. (S1O-1778)

I give a guarded welcome to  that answer. Does the minister share my surprise this week on reading the remarks of the new chairman of the National Trust for Scotland, Roger Wheater, who chose to compare the effect that the new commercial centre at Glencoe would have on local businesses to that of a Safeway on the pre-existing small shops in an area—which, presumably, go out of business? Does he agree that such a comparison is inappropriate, not least because Safeway does not receive grants of up to £400,000 when creating a new supermarket? Does he share my concern that people in the Highlands and Islands are worried that bodies such as the National Trust for Scotland, while performing many good works, seem on occasion to be treated in a preferential fashion?

rose—

We are here to debate this interesting document, "Rural Scotland: A New Approach". I was interested to see that the minister states on page 3: "I wanted to see rural Scotland for myself and hear from the people who live and work in rural areas what issues concerned them most." Perhaps it would be a new approach to try to hear, if not to listen to, what people in rural Scotland have to say. I mean no disrespect to the minister, whom I am sure we all view with personal fondness and respect, but there is no doubt in my mind that the issue that concerns people most—and that concerns most people—in rural Scotland and especially in the Highlands and Islands is the cost of fuel. The issue does not concern people in rural areas alone. A taxi driver told me today in quite vehement terms—I shall not give an exact quote—that, when the coalition partners came to power, petrol cost 61.9p in Glasgow, but it now costs 81.9p.

No. I am fond of Robin Harper, but I utterly disagree with him. I found it difficult to understand his computation; it is a long time since my limited maths qualifications were attained. However, I have the benefit of being able to read the figures in front of me, which suggest that the ones that he has quoted are totally wrong. According to the April EC petroleum bulletin, the cost of fuel in the Highlands and Islands was 22.6p per litre, whereas the retail price a couple of weeks ago in Glenborrodale was 90p. Robin Harper's calculation of 30 per cent is completely wrong. The actual take to the Government is, broadly speaking, four fifths of the price that is paid at the pump. I would like to help out the Liberal Democrats, who do not seem to be aware of their own policy—we want to be helpful in this chamber, as we all get on with one another. To be fair to them, their policy is that vehicle excise duty should be abolished for some cars. However, Charles Kennedy said on 16 March 2000 that that would be compensated for by a 5p rise in fuel duty. It gets worse—or better, depending on which view one takes. That 5p rise in duty is described as small. So much for the Liberal policy.  We have the highest fuel tax and fuel costs in the world. I shall devote the rest of my speech to asking why that should be. Is it because of the oil companies? Ian Wells told the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee in January that the oil companies are charging the lowest prices in Europe. I disagree with him, because I have other figures that suggest that that is not entirely true. The actual cost of fuel does not vary hugely in the European countries. The situation in the Highlands and Islands is slightly different. I am not here to defend or attack the oil companies, because they provide valuable appointments throughout Scotland. The Office of Fair Trading is conducting an inquiry into fuel pricing, but its inquiry is an exercise in utter futility. It has been going on for what seems like centuries and there is no indication of when the report will arrive. It is about as reliable as the old British Rail timetables—or perhaps Richard Branson's, if we want to move into the 21 st century. If the problem is not with the oil companies, is it with the atmosphere problems in the Highlands? Is it smog lying over Strontian or gridlock in Golspie? No. The problem is not with the environment. The problem is not green; the problem is Brown. Brown is the problem and Brown is the name. Brown—the man who does not know how much it costs to buy petrol, the man who is in charge of our country. With the other parties in this chamber, the penny is beginning to drop that the argument will not go away. The SNP takes the view that it is only with independence that we can end the nonsense and the discrimination against people throughout Scotland, and especially in rural parts of Scotland, who are being treated unfairly.

I am pleased that Cathy Jamieson has recognised the problems that road hauliers face. Does she accept that many road hauliers, such as Donald Watt in my constituency, have already had to close down because of the high burden of fuel tax and vehicle registration duty on lorries imposed by her Government? How can she defend the appalling record of Gordon Brown in his anti-Scottish fuel tax and vehicle registration duty, which have been imposed since the document that she referred to a few moments ago was produced?

Does John Munro agree that the recent permission by John Reid to allow his face to be shown on the side of milk cartons of Wiseman Dairies is seen in the Highlands, where some companies are possibly facing difficulties, as a singularly inappropriate and ill-advised move?

I ask the member to give way—although I am being prompted to do so by the Liberals.

Will the member give way?

Will the minister give way?

I am sure that we all subscribe to the general aims and principles that the minister has set out as demonstrably desirable. Does he accept that the greatest threat to Scotland's rural economy is the fact that we have the highest fuel costs and fuel tax in the world? Will he support or oppose the Liberal Democrat policy, announced by Charles Kennedy on 16 March, to increase fuel tax by 5p a litre?

I would like to begin by declaring a potential interest; with my wife, I have owned a matrimonial home in Drymen for the past 16 years.

Time flies as one enjoys oneself. We all recognise that for national parks to succeed, they must have the support of those in local communities who live and work in the area, who must be able to earn a livelihood. We should all be concerned to find the right legislation as the precursor to successful national parks in Scotland. I would like to address some specific concerns of my constituents about the proposed Cairngorms national park. They are concerned that the proposals are flawed and do not answer several important questions. I think that every community council in Badenoch and Strathspey responded to the consultation paper and I understand that every community council said the same thing: unless they are guaranteed representation, they will not feel part of, or have ownership of, the national park. I was delighted to hear Sylvia Jackson address that point and recognise that there is a third way—characteristically for a Labour member. Having said that, I hope that when she replies, Sarah Boyack will give more detail than Nicol Stephen did when he opened. He did not say in what way the views of the consultees will be reflected in the Executive's response. The proposal that 50 per cent of national park board members should be appointees of the minister will not find favour in Cairngorm. If one went on a whistle-stop tour of the history of political patronage of the Labour party, one would find that it is indubitably the case that it is littered with examples of appointments that were chosen for political affiliation. One thinks of Ken Collins of the Scottish Environment Protection Agency, Lord Gordon—friend of Labour—of the Scottish Tourist Board, and Colin Rennie of the North of Scotland Water Authority. What guarantee does anybody  have that Labour will not appoint its cronies and supporters to national park boards? None whatsoever. I would be happy to accept an assurance from the minister now that she will not appoint a Labour sympathiser or ex-Labour politician to the board.

Indeed, Presiding Officer. There are yes and no answers, and a variety in between. My constituents are concerned about the Sandford principle. This bill does not give any idea of how conflicts will be defined. There is no hint whatsoever. I ask the minister, if the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds objected to a proposed development, would that create conflict? If the board supported the development, there would be a considerable loss of support in the Badenoch and Strathspey area, as the sad and unnecessarily protracted example of the funicular railway demonstrates. Many of my constituents feel that the balance between the rights of the local people and existing quangos such as SNH is skewed in favour of the latter, and should be addressed. I am concerned that if the minister decides that SNH, the RSPB, the World Wide Fund for Nature, the John Muir Trust, and the Ramblers Association have, as of right, a position on the board—and I say this in all seriousness and sincerity—that would be the cause of loss of support in the Cairngorm area.  The fundamental question that my constituents ask is, "How will national parks affect me?" They do not know the answer to that, because the minister has not told them in all her proposals, in the lengthy consultation period, or in the glossy bumf. We do not know the answer to that question, because she has not defined the Sandford principle. In conclusion, I support Mr Raffan's proposal that recreation should be specifically recognised. That would let people see that there is a benefit to be derived from national parks, as well as its promoting the local tourism industry. I suggest that the rights of the disabled should be enshrined in the bill at the outset, so that they are recognised from the beginning and not tacked on later. I hope that the minister will address the fear that the national park set-up in Scotland might just become another quango. If she does not, I fear that they  will not succeed, as we wish they should.

Does the member agree that the definition of the Sandford principle set out in section 8 of the bill is opaque and virtually meaningless? Given that, if there is a conflict between economic development and the needs of the environment, the latter will take precedence, how does the member feel that the Labour national parks model will meet the needs of people who live and work in national parks?

Does the minister accept that, for national parks to succeed, it is essential that they enjoy the backing and support of the communities that live and work inside the parks? As Alasdair Morrison will recognise—when he is listening—the only definitive way in which to determine whether that is the case is to hold a local referendum of people who will be in the proposed designated national park areas. That is how to answer the question that the minister has identified as absolutely essential.

Jamie McGrigor raised the plight of the owners of the salmon farming companies. I wish to raise the concerns of the work forces and former work forces. First, will the payments from the £9 million restructuring package be made on condition that the work forces of the recipients of the payments will continue to remain employed and, if the answer is yes, over what period? My second point concerns the 170 or more people in the most remote parts of the Highlands and Islands who already have lost their jobs and those, it is feared, who are to follow. I know that the minister is aware of those concerns. Does not he accept that given that landowners are paid, in some cases, six-figure sums not to plant trees, and that the New Millennium Experience Company Ltd can write its own cheques for £29 million, it would not be unreasonable for a Labour Administration to grant some form of compensation to people in remote parts of the Highlands and Islands who have lost their jobs through no fault of their own in the interests of public health, as the minister mentioned? Should not they also receive compensation?

Will Mr McGrigor give way?

I congratulate John Farquhar on securing the debate. Ben Nevis was sold recently and now the Black Cuillins, including many Munros, are on the market. I am sure John Farquhar is one Munro that is not for sale. The professed owner of the Black Cuillins is a man called Mr Wolrige-Gordon who, possibly because he is related to a former Conservative MP, changed his name to MacLeod of MacLeod. It is unclear whether he has a legal title to the Black Cuillins, as John Farquhar Munro and Rhoda Grant have said. For that reason, more than a month ago—in a written question on 7 April—I  asked the Executive to investigate the ownership issue and obtain copies of all the relevant title deeds. The question has not yet been answered. I presume that Angus MacKay, with his characteristic candour, will reveal all at the end of this debate. I also ask the Presiding Officer whether it is possible to go further than that and instruct the district valuer to carry out a valuation of the Black Cuillins. Either they are priceless or they are worthless. It is not possible to make a living out of the Cuillins. Access cannot be restricted; it is not possible to develop the land or build a factory on it. If the normal principles of commercial valuation apply I suggest that the Black Cuillins could be bought for around a tenner—we could have a whip round in the chamber now.

A capitalist as ever! Alasdair Morrison described the Cuillins as a gift from God. It is risible—ridiculous—that any individual could own the Black Cuillins. That is something to which we would all subscribe, even those who want to enter into an impromptu auction for the Cuillins. Tomorrow, Christine Grahame and I will introduce a member's bill to deal with the problem of who owns Scotland and answer the call made by Andy Wightman, John McEwan, Robin Callendar and Auslan Cramb to make it compulsory not just to register land on the course of sale, but to register land full stop so that we know who owns Scotland and so that MacLeod of MacLeod—or Wolrige-Gordon or whatever he will be called next week—will have to register his title as of law. The land reform movement in Scotland has waited a long time for this moment. That bill, which is reasonable, practicable and sensible, can become law. It would grant and meet all the aspirations of the people of the Highlands and the people of Scotland.

rose—

An issue that concerns Scottish people, especially in the Highlands and Islands, is the highest fuel tax and fuel costs in the world, despite the fact that Scotland is Europe's major oil producing nation. Does David McLetchie think that it is in Scotland's interests to continue to have our fuel tax set by Westminster? He has condemned the tax as bad so why does he not support us in repatriating that tax power to Scotland so we can end that iniquity?

I appreciate that the minister finds himself in a difficult position, but Nora Radcliffe said that the local authority concerned has apparently refused to co-operate with a committee of the Parliament. I understand that the minister is bound by statutory procedures brought in before the Parliament was established, but people voted for the Parliament and for the right to have their case put in its committees and other bodies. That must be taken into account. Would it be possible for the papers to be returned to Moray Council with the direction that it should co-operate with the elected Parliament, so that the parents of Glenrinnes and other schools in rural Scotland that are facing closure have the opportunity for the reporter on the matter, Jamie Stone, to consider it before the statutory process is taken further?

Will the minister give way?

I am sure that all members agree with everything the minister has said. The minister took the trouble, as did many other members, to hear the case that was presented yesterday evening by the Camanachd Association. I know that the association was grateful for that. Does she accept that the case that the Camanachd Association presented meets all the criteria that she has outlined? Will she support the case that the association has made for an enhancement of its modest funding of £15,000 a year, which has been frozen at that level for the past six years?

There seems to have been an outbreak of consensus this afternoon, which I suppose is to be welcomed, but I might shortly bring it to an end. I congratulate the minister, the committee and all the people who played a lead role in the passage of the bill. They have done a power of work. The bill is good and makes progress, but there are problems, as the minister had the courtesy to recognise, especially in relation to part 4. Twenty-six years ago, most of Scotland thought that feuduty had been abolished. It was not. Today, people in Scotland will think that the feudal system has been abolished. It has not; it has been renamed. Feudal superiors are dead; long live the owners of the dominant tenement. As that reality percolates through, there will be feelings of disappointment, which will temper the progress that has been made. However, I was gratified that the minister said that some of the problems that were raised today will be re-examined before part 4 comes into force. It would be churlish of me not to accept that assurance at face value. I am sure that the minister will redeem it in due course. Finally, I look forward to further legislation to improve and protect the position of tenant farmers throughout Scotland, to tackle the problems of those whose long residential leases are coming to an end and who may face eviction and to end the obscenity that Scotland is the only country in Europe where there is a free market in land and where land is a commodity. I welcome the fact that, thanks to John Farquhar Munro, we will be debating that in Parliament shortly.

I have listened to what the minister said with great care, but I am not sure that he provided a full explanation of the possible interpretation of my amendment. I am not persuaded that the bill meets my concern and I suggest to the minister that former vassals will continue to be in a weak position. They will also continue to have to ask their former superior—as future owner of the dominant tenement—to waive conditions and they will have to deal with tests of substantial loss or disadvantage. I ask Parliament to make it clear that, when that test is being applied to superiors, they should not be able to argue that they were formerly in receipt of £500 or £1,000 but now have lost that advantage. We are trying to remove such advantage. That is what the amendment would do—let me say, with respect to the minister, that that is why I moved it.

I should begin with a declaration of interest as a solicitor. However, if amendment 32 is agreed to, it will reduce the work for solicitors, as well as make their lives a bit simpler. Amendment 32 seeks to clarify that, under section 19, it would not be possible for a superior who applies to the Lands Tribunal for Scotland to argue that there has been a substantial loss or disadvantage, or that that loss or disadvantage has been constituted by the loss of the capacity to receive a payment under the existing system. Payment is frequently made as a matter of custom by feuars, who are often advised by lawyers that it would cost a great deal of money—£500 or £1,000—to apply to the Lands Tribunal. The person concerned is routinely advised not to go to the Lands Tribunal, but instead to make the payment to the superior to get a minute of waiver.  That saves hassle and doubt and removes the problem of homeowners having to take on often wealthy superiors at the Lands Tribunal. I can give one example that might make the position clear, although this is a technical debate. There are often conditions of title that prevent a homeowner from selling off a third or half an acre, perhaps to allow another house to be built. Farmers or even suburban homeowners may want to sell off part of their plot. They are often advised by their solicitor that there is a condition that prevents them from doing so without permission of the feudal superior. Not infrequently, the superior asks for payment of a substantial amount of money for that purpose. That is the sort of situation that I think we all wish to discourage.

I am not sure that David McLetchie could find such examples relating to the one that I am talking about. I am bound to reflect, as I did earlier when Mr Gallie said that the Tories started the process of abolishing the feudal system in 1974, that, thereafter, the Tories seemed to be rather slow starters. In the ensuing years, nothing whatever happened. If Mr McLetchie is now arguing that the Tories accept that amendment 32 should be supported, I would of course welcome that support and that change of heart. With this amendment, I am suggesting that the artificial rights of property that superiors have enjoyed should come to an end. It should be explicit in the bill that the custom that has developed of superiors' being able to extract payments—often substantial payments—should not be used before the Lands Tribunal as an argument that the test of substantial loss and disadvantage has been met. I move amendment 32.

I think that it is feu duties that have been removed, not feudal burdens. That is the point.

I am very pleased, in the spirit of the new consensual politics, to receive support from Mr Gallie and his colleagues.

Is not the point of principle that gives rise to the difficulty here that section 17 allows feudal superiors, by a mechanism of a notice, to preserve in force conditions and the right to enforce those conditions in certain circumstances? As I heard the Minister for Justice discuss on the radio this morning, that leads to the problem that a homeowner, while selling his or her property, may suddenly find that he or she is being asked to pay for a minute of waiver. Sometimes they are asked for a few hundred pounds; sometimes they are asked for a lot more. That  person will be in a slightly stronger, but none the less very similar, position and therefore vulnerable to—admittedly only a few—rapacious superiors who demand £500,000 because that would be the cost of going to the Lands Tribunal for Scotland. Is the Minister suggesting that that problem will be revisited in further legislation?

I will not support the amendments lodged by Mr Monteith. SNP members sympathise with and advance some of the arguments that Maureen Macmillan has mentioned, and regard them as important. However, the purpose of section 17 is to set out those circumstances in which a superior can continue to enforce title conditions, although he will become a former superior. The legal phrase is that he will be the owner of a dominant tenement. The effect of Mr Monteith's amendment would be to extend the 100 m rule to 1 km. A former superior would therefore be able to apply, using the notice procedure, to continue the condition in force if he had a habitation or place of resort within 1 km rather than within 100 m. That would extend the power of the former feudal superior, but the purpose of the bill is to try to remove and abolish the feudal system. For that reason, we oppose in  principle Mr Monteith's last-ditch attempt to preserve the vestigial rights of the phantom lairds throughout Scotland, something that the SNP does not support.

Is the First Minister aware that, in the Highlands of Scotland, the average wealth per head is some £6,000 less than in the Republic of Ireland? Can he therefore explain why every part of Ireland has and will continue to have over the next five years the benefits of assisted area status, whereas Inverness, Nairn, Moray and Badenoch and Strathspey will all be cut from the map? Has independence in Europe been bad for Ireland?

On a point of order. After the earlier vote on the motion without notice, I received information on the voting, which seems to have been incorrect. I would like to record the fact that I understand that Maureen Macmillan, John Munro and Rhoda Grant all voted for the motion—the information that I received previously was that that was not the case. Secondly, I would like to record that I voted for the motion, whereas I am recorded as having not voted. I thought that it was appropriate to put that on the record.

I am most grateful for the opportunity to move, under rule 8.2.6, that motion S1M-778, on the assisted areas map, be taken at 4.15 pm without notice. I am indebted to the Presiding Officer for indicating that it is accepted that the matter meets the stringent criteria that govern such motions without notice.

I am obliged, Presiding Officer. There are four reasons why the motion should be moved without notice—as is customary—and I apologise for any lack of courtesy and for any inconvenience that members have suffered in giving up other commitments to come here today. First, I make no apology for arguing that the future lives and livelihoods of thousands of people in the Highlands and Islands will be at stake if the areas that were removed from the initial map—as submitted to the European Commission—are not reinstated. This comes at a time when more than 2,500 people are about to be made redundant at BARMAC. In proportionate terms, that is the biggest redundancy in the United Kingdom—the matter is vital to the Highlands and Islands. Secondly, I was delighted yesterday to be able to secure all-party support for the motion. I was pleased to receive support from Mary Scanlon of the Conservatives, John Farquhar Munro of the Liberal Democrats and Maureen Macmillan of the Labour party. I believe that that cross-party approach—which I also pursued with the Westminster MP, David Stewart, in a joint press statement last week—is not only expected of all elected representatives in the Highlands, but is the approach that we were elected to pursue when that is appropriate. We were elected to pursue a common approach—albeit with robust arguments—but, none the less, in pursuit of a shared aim. Thirdly, it has not been possible to introduce the matter before today. The announcement of the exclusion of Inverness, Nairn, Moray, and Badenoch and Strathspey from the assisted areas map as proposed to the European Commission,  was made during the recess. Fourthly, this is an emergency in the sense that the consultation period, although it was announced during the recess, will conclude next Tuesday, on 2 May. Today, therefore, is the only opportunity for members of our Parliament to influence the consultation process. If the Parliament means anything, it means that members from all parties, who have expressed support for the motion, should have an opportunity to debate the subject, which is detailed and complicated, but which is, however, absolutely crucial to the lives and livelihoods of thousands of people throughout the Highlands and Islands. I move, That motion S1M-778 be taken at this meeting of the Parliament.

I, too, congratulate Kenny Gibson on securing the debate. I support the remarks made by Mary Scanlon, as I am particularly concerned about the higher incidence of suicide in the Highlands, in comparison with the rest of Scotland. One can speculate why that should be but, as Richard Simpson and Kenny Gibson said, it is difficult to isolate with any certainty a definite causal connection. Therefore, I am sure that everyone is concerned to do what can be done. I wanted to speak in the debate because of my experiences as a lawyer dealing with people who have serious debt problems and who have been sequestrated. My experience is that sequestration results in significant and most severe social problems, such as the loss of esteem, often the loss of a job and sometimes the loss of one's home. Sometimes, the attitude of banks and building societies can be described as obdurate and unhelpful at best. Another social problem that  can result from sequestration is the loss of a partner and the breakdown of a marriage. Therefore, while sequestration is a small part of life—only a few thousand people are sequestrated every year in Scotland—I thought it worth mentioning so that the minister, when he leaves to consider what should be done in response to the debate, is able to raise with the Minister for Justice the issue of reform, so that the stigma can be removed from the law of sequestration. We are close to that position, but the Parliament could remove it explicitly, which might begin to help those who, in future, suffer that multiple loss that can be the consequence of misfortune in business.

Annexe C of "A Forward Strategy for Scottish Agriculture" mentions "Reviews of Red Tape in respect of IACS" and other matters. Does the minister acknowledge that the way in which the rural affairs department interprets the European regulations governing the implementation of the various schemes can only be described as overzealous? The mode of interpretation that the department has adopted treats honest mistakes as though they were crimes. At any agricultural show or farmers market one will hear farmers say that they feel as if they are being treated worse than criminals. If the review creates an appeal mechanism, it is to be welcomed, although it will not alter the problem of the overzealous method of interpretation that the minister has adopted, no doubt on the advice of his civil servants.

Is the minister aware that opinion in Kinlochleven is at best divided on the question of whether the millions of pounds that have already been expended in Kinlochleven have been wisely spent? Does he accept that it is essential that the local people in Kinlochleven are fully involved in any regeneration proposals, which are otherwise likely to be imperfect at best? Does he accept that Kinlochleven needs and deserves a major employer to be brought in? That should have been the Government's focus for the past three years, and that must be the focus from now on.

rose—

rose—

If the price that farmers are paid for milk has fallen, why has the retail price not fallen? Is it not the case that there may be profiteering by the supermarkets? If so, why has the Labour party not referred the supermarkets to the Office of Fair Trading or ordered an investigation into the conduct of the supermarkets in respect of pricing? Is it relevant that some supermarkets have given the Labour party financial support?

Will the member give way?

Does George Lyon think that it is in the interests of his constituents in Argyll that Westminster has increased fuel duty four times since 1997? Has that been good for Scotland?

Will the First Minister give way?

I am obliged to Des McNulty for giving way. There has been much talk about MSPs and our needs, and passing reference has been made to the needs of the people—in particular, members of the public who are able to attend debates in the chamber. I understand that 520 members of the public have attended today's debate—the capacity of the gallery is 456. Is Des aware that the proposed capacity of the gallery in the Holyrood chamber is 170? Is not that inadequate and  undemocratic?

To ask the Scottish Executive what representations it has made to Her Majesty's Government on the need to conclude and agree the assisted area status map so that public sector agencies across the United Kingdom will be permitted to invest more than the paltry minimum €100,000, or £63,000. (S1O-1456)

Does the minister agree that any further delay in resolving the issue will seriously jeopardise any major new employment creation initiatives in Scotland and the UK, especially in places such as Inverness, Nairn and Kinlochleven, where thousands of people are about to be made redundant? What precise links does the Executive have with the DTI? Will the minister make a specific and detailed report to the Parliament and to the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee on the precise barriers that prevent the issue from being resolved?

I am pleased to support the SNP motion, which calls for an independent review of local government finance. My clear impression is that if Labour members were to vote with their hearts and for what they believe in, they would vote for our amendment, but I suspect that that will not happen. We are all engaged in the search for fairness. I agree with Johann Lamont that there is much unfairness in the current system for folk in Glasgow who are on low incomes. Would it not help, however, if a system of rebates was introduced in respect of water charges? There is no rebate on water charges for people on low incomes despite the fact that the Labour party has said that there should be one. They have had three years in power in which they could have introduced such a rebate, but they have done nothing about it.

Not yet. People on low incomes in the Highlands must pay water charges that have increased by a staggering 43 per cent. Band D households will pay £300 in water charges because Labour thinks that that is a fair policy. I say that it is completely ridiculous. It is deeply resented and it is a source of great anger in the Highlands. The Executive will find that out during the coming months, as people realise how unfair the system is. I was surprised that Mr Harding made no reference to the poll tax—perhaps that was because of natural shyness—or to the fact that Tories brought in the council tax. He would not take an intervention from me: I was going to ask him to explain why, when the Tories brought in the council tax, they decided that the regime in Scotland would be different from that in England. There are two banding structures—a house that is worth £60,000 in Scotland is in band E and a house worth the same in England is in band C.  Mr Harding admitted that council tax bills in Scotland are higher than in England, but he put forward the puzzling argument that that is perfectly acceptable. It is not acceptable. I thought that the Tories were the party of the union and the party that argued against unfair taxes on Scottish householders. It seems that Mr Harding thinks that it is perfectly in order for people in Scotland—some of whom vote, perhaps, for his party—to have higher bills that people in England. Mr Harding mentioned the position in London. Parliament might be interested in some research that I have done on the council tax liability of a gentleman called Gordon Brown. The Chancellor of the Exchequer has a property in Great Smith Street in London that was valued at about £160,000—band G—in 1991. We do not know exactly what the flat is worth now, but it might be between £300,000 and £400,000; it is in one of the poshest parts of London's west end. What is Mr Brown's council tax liability? His headline liability this year is £583. We understand, however, that he also has a property in Dunfermline, so he is able to nominate the Westminster flat as his second home. If he were to do that, as he is entitled to do, Gordon Brown's council tax this year would be £292.

I will be happy to take any intervention, but I would prefer to take one from a minister who is prepared to argue whether Gordon Brown's council tax bill of £292 is fair.

If that is the best the Wendy Alexander can do, she should try again. She has admitted that the council tax system is grossly unfair, but she supports it. Her Government will not even amend it for the low paid in Inverness, who are having to pay £300 this year for their water, with no rebate, when the Chancellor of the Exchequer will be paying about £8 less for his luxury flat in London. It is hardly surprising, because the worst piece of scaremongering in political history was Gordon Brown's prediction at the Scottish general election that a 1p difference in income tax would cost 250,000 jobs in Scotland, which was complete and utter nonsense. I am pleased today to have been able to introduce the facts about Gordon Brown's council tax into this debate.

Loch Mhor is in my constituency.

I congratulate George Lyon on introducing this debate, which is about how the boundaries of national parks, if we are to have them in Scotland, are to be determined. That question has vexed the minds of many people—in most cases the proponents of national parks—for many decades. The topic will always be controversial and difficult. It cannot be otherwise, because so many parts of Scotland are of outstanding beauty and great conservation value. I feel that the approach that was suggested by my friend Duncan Hamilton is correct. We want to be inclusive and draw the boundaries on a wide focus, rather than on a narrow one. The boundary should not be Ben Lomond—it should include the communities that live in, work in and know the area. If the people of the Cowal peninsula wish to be included in a national park, that wish must be taken seriously. I am concerned about the structure and several aspects of the National Parks (Scotland) Bill. Without going into the detail—today is not the appropriate time to do so—I would say that the most serious message that I wish to convey to the minister is that, for national parks to succeed, they must have the support of the people who live within their boundaries. My concern is that the bill, as drafted, does not anticipate the difficulties that I believe are foreseeable, especially the need to promote the interests of the economy and of the social communities of the people within the park. Section 8(5) contains the Sandford principle, which prefers the conservation interests over the social and economic ones. How do we define conflict? Is it when the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds puts in an objection to a proposal? If so, in Cairngorm, which is to be the second designated national park, we would not have had a funicular railway. That would have disgruntled the 95 per cent of the local people who supported it in a local referendum in the Strathspey & Badenoch Herald . Much more work must be done if local support is not to be jeopardised. If the social and economic  needs of the local people are promoted and recognised, I think that there will be support for national parks both within Loch Lomond and the Trossachs and Cowal, if it be so renamed, and within Cairngorm. The jury is still out. As a member who has made a submission in the consultation process, I know that there is concern in my constituency that the consultation may not take seriously the criticisms that have been made. For local support to exist, the membership of the national park authority must be different from what is proposed. There are grave concerns about the fact that, under schedule 1 to the bill, the Government has the power to nominate or to veto nominations. The authority should be locally controlled and nationally advised. The bill provides for no role for community councils, although the consultation paper seems to. That has caused great concern among community councils in my constituency and I would be surprised if that were not also the case in Argyll and Stirling. I must inject one note of conflict into the debate. I cannot agree with Jamie McGrigor that Argyll is the most beautiful place in Scotland. Without doubt my constituency far exceeds Argyll, estimable though its qualities are. As Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber has the highest mountain, the deepest loch and the friendliest people, that cannot be a controversial proposition.

To ask the Scottish Executive what impact it expects the Chancellor of the Exchequer's budget to have on the economy of the Highlands and Islands. (S1O-1409)

The minister, I notice, did not mention the chancellor's rise in fuel duty, his fourth. Can the minister name any one country in the world that has a higher level of fuel duty on petrol and diesel than Scotland?

Try me.

On a point of order.

Is it in accordance with the standing orders for a member not to respond in any way to members who are seeking to intervene? Is not it a contravention of the standing orders simply to ignore those who would intervene?

rose—

Now that the minister has stopped mumbling down Scotland's prospects, let me say that he clearly does not trust the people of Scotland to run their own economy. When he attends the Highlands and Islands Convention on Monday—from which elected members in the chamber are excluded—what will he take with him from the Executive? Will he take the outlines of capital programmes for the local economy? Will he offer money or will he offer only platitudes?

So it should be.

rose—

Do John Farquhar Munro and the Liberal Democrat party support David Green, convener of Highland Council, in his call for a capital works project that would allow the council to upgrade the roads to which the member has just referred? Do they agree that about £20 million should be devoted to that?

As Allan Wilson is an extremely clever chap, does he agree that the main objection that we have to PFI is that, as a way of financing projects, it is more expensive by 5 per cent than Government borrowing? It costs more and Labour is wasting public money.

The policies that the Liberal-Labour Executive has described are among the most short-sighted, misconceived and erroneous that I have ever heard. The attitude of the Executive is based on a false premise, which is that PFI-PPP is less expensive than Government borrowing. That is simply not true. I question whether the Executive is aware of the anger about the lack of public investment. In the Highlands, the state of the roads and schools is of grave concern to almost everyone I meet. The A95, for example—the road along which most of Scotland's whisky travels from Moray to be exported to the rest of the world—barely merits the description "goat track". However, thousands of billions of pounds in tax have emanated from that part of the world. David Green of Highland Council has called for a capital works project in the Highlands and Islands. I hope that the Executive will adopt that plan, bearing in mind the fact that thousands of workers at BARMAC are about to be made redundant. David Green has suggested the capital works project in the context of extremely alarming statistics that show that the capital funding received by Highland Council has fallen from £17.74 million in 1994 to £5 million in 1999. Highland Council has said that, at the current rate of revenue spending on road maintenance, road surfacing would take place every 108 years. According to Mr Shimmin, the director of roads and transport at Highland Council, road surfacing needs to be undertaken every 35 years. If we do not accept the advice of the director of roads and transport, the bill that other administrations will have to meet in years to come will far outweigh the money that should have been spent at this time. A serious barrier to the creation of jobs and investment in infrastructure is the failure of the Department of Trade and Industry to agree the assisted area status map with the European Commission. As the DTI has not agreed that map—despite having had 18 months to do so—no  public sector agency can give more than €100,000 over three years to any inward investor, business or infrastructure project. That is total incompetence. The letters DTI stand for the department of total inertia. The DTI is bungling on a monumental scale. There have been excellent investments in the Highlands, bringing many jobs, such as Inverness Medical, White Electronics and the Cairngorm funicular railway. None of that would have happened if the €100,000 limit had applied. Unless the Labour party sorts that out, tens of thousands of jobs will be lost, not only in the Highlands, but throughout Scotland and the rest of the UK. There is much that should be done in relation to investment in our water supply and sewerage system. However, I must question whether every project submitted by North of Scotland Water Authority should be conducted over the next three years. I am surprised that that has not been questioned. I am astonished that the Labour party supports the increase in NOSWA's charges this year of 42 per cent. That is unsustainable and it is creating an anger in the Highlands in which ministers do not seem to be interested. They would be well advised to take the advice of Ian Davidson MP to get out a little more.

Will the minister give way?

Is not the central point of the debate that financing under PFI is much more expensive than Government borrowing? As the minister wants to hear from London experts, does not she agree with John Hawksworth, head of economics at PricewaterhouseCoopers, who said that there is no reason why public investment could not be financed by public Government borrowing?

To ask the First Minister whether the amounts set by local authorities for council tax bills for the financial year 2000-01 are on average higher than those in England for houses of equal value. (S1F-199)

Will the First Minister concede that it is simply inevitable that council tax bills for houses of identical value will be higher in Scotland than in England because we have differing banding systems? Does he agree that a house that is worth £60,000 is in band E in Scotland, but is in band C in England? In consequence, and according to the Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy, the expected bill for a house worth £60,000 in England will be £744 next year, but that for a house worth exactly the same in Scotland will be £1,041. That is a 40 per cent surcharge—

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I thank you for that ruling, which will be greeted with approval throughout the chamber. I hope that I speak for all members when I say that we were elected not to be a boorach but to conduct ourselves with dignity and decorum. Your ruling will help to achieve that objective.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is practicable for Inverness College to repay a capital deficit in excess of £4 million from revenue. (S1O-1301)

Does not the minister accept that it is totally impossible for Inverness College to pay from its modest revenue a capital deficit of more than £4 million, and that the existence of that debt is seriously damaging the morale of the staff, including that of support staff whom I met recently? Does not the minister agree that it is shameful that staff cuts in Scotland should be the cost of failed Tory and Labour policies and of past mismanagement?

I came to the chamber this morning with low expectations of our having an interesting debate. However, I have been pleasantly surprised, as the tone of the debate has been largely constructive and, if I may say so, good humoured. I am rarely accused of having a lively imagination, but even if I were so accused—or even if I were in possession of such imagination—I do not think that I could conceive of Annabel Goldie lolling in indolence at the weekend or at any other time. However, she and members of all parties made interesting and intelligent speeches on the wide-ranging nature of the manufacturing sector. That good humour was interrupted only by the ritualistic attacks and side-sniping on the Scottish National party. [MEMBERS: "Shame."] I do not like to point out that behaviour, but I feel duty-bound so to do. The attacks and side-sniping varied in tone from the incoherent and splenetic attack from Mr Lyon at the beginning of the debate to the rather Neanderthal attack from Allan Wilson. I say this in the kindest possible way—I thought that Allan's speech was firmly rooted in the past century. Perhaps we should all listen and learn.  I want to start on a positive note, which may not continue for long. I welcome many parts of the "Created in Scotland" document. I welcome the commitments in the document, although I question whether those commitments will ever be implemented. In particular, I welcome the commitment on page 29 to make the planning system more proactive and positive. I cannot help but feel that the document may be a hostage to fortune when we come to review the performance of the Lib-Lab Government in years to come. I hope that I will be proved wrong. I also welcome the commitment on page 5 to "take steps to ensure that the regulatory burden is kept to a sensible minimum". Like Annabel Goldie, I am afraid that the reality is that we are being bombarded with red tape and more regulations. She said that 2,600 regulations had been implemented while only 20 had been repealed. When the Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning sums up, will he set a target for repealing regulations? We have targets for just about everything else and it would be an interesting concept to have targets for repealing regulation in the pig industry, the whisky industry—

As always, I am happy to give way to Duncan McNeil.

No, not at all. In my opinion, the primary purpose of regulation is to ensure health and safety, which is a serious matter. I do not think that anyone in this chamber would advocate for one moment doing anything to remove the protection that regulations are intended to provide in relation to the health and safety of employees. However, we should examine far more closely many of those directives that emanate from Westminster or Europe in which the Parliament has a say. I look forward to the time when the Executive takes steps to deal with that. Brian Ashcroft pointed out in an article that "Scottish manufacturing productivity has grown more quickly than the UK's during the past decade". However, one point that has yet to be made is that that is not necessarily the case in the indigenous manufacturing sector, as foreign-owned inward investment contributes much to the total figure. When the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning opened the debate, he was quite correct to say that we need an attitudinal change. I hope  that the Executive will take up the suggestion made by the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee to incorporate in the Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Bill provisions to enable business to participate directly in schools, as that is where participation is required. I also suggest that, for the same purpose, the minister may wish to revisit page 46 of the document "Pathfinders to the Parliament", on which three proposals are made. The first is to "cross-rotate civil servants into manufacturing on a secondment basis". The second is to implement "programmes for managers from industry to spend time in classrooms". The third is to "encourage practice of open days for communities to visit manufacturing sites". Those measures will not cost money, but they will change children's opinions of manufacturing as a career. That is important and I do not hesitate to endorse the minister's approach. I would like to make a serious point regarding Malcolm Chisholm's speech. I have spoken previously about the effect of business rates on Scotland's business community. Mr McConnell's decision to set the business rate for Scotland at 10.1 per cent higher than that of England may be the most significant decision affecting businesses that has been taken in Parliament—it is certainly the most damaging. The business rate in Scotland has been set at 45.6p in the pound, as opposed to 41.4p in the pound in England. That means that a Scottish business with a property pays 10.1 per cent more than is paid by a business that owns a property of identical value in England. If two businesses in Inverness and Colchester have properties that are valued at £20,000, the business in Inverness will pay £840 more in the year 2000-01. That is a fact and I am willing to take an intervention from any member who will deny it.

It is not the case that there is a level playing field. The calculation of rateable value is the same north and south of the border—it  has been harmonised. If a business rate of 45.6 per cent is applied in Scotland and a rate of 41.4 per cent is applied in England, the bill in Scotland will be 10.1 per cent higher than for a property of identical value in England. If Mr Chisholm does not agree with me, he might want to consult the Scottish Council Development and Industry, which wrote to Mr McConnell suggesting that his policy would place Scottish business at a competitive disadvantage. The document that we are debating says that the prime concern of manufacturing industry is for a level playing field in business rates, but we do not have that—Scottish businesses are playing uphill. I would like to introduce a fact about business rates that has not yet reached the public domain. Mr McConnell's justification for discriminating against Scottish businesses by imposing on them a 10.1 per cent surcharge has been that the total yield of non-domestic rates income must not decrease. I understand from COSLA figures that the total yield of non-domestic rates income will increase from £1,441 million to £1,663 million—an increase of £222 million raised from the business community. Mr McConnell said that he could not afford to give Scottish businesses a level playing field. I've got news for you—he can. The £222 million is available; Malcolm Chisholm will, no doubt, accept those figures from COSLA.

Mr Chisholm had his chance and he blew it—there is nothing personal in that. I have tried to make a serious point and I am grateful for having had the opportunity to spell it out at more length than a humble back bencher such as I might normally be able to do. We will come back to this issue—Jack's tax is a phrase that we will remember and that the Executive will not be allowed to forget.

Will Malcolm Chisholm give way?

Does not Malcolm Chisholm recognise that the chancellor has created at least one distinction in Scotland in that we have the highest fuel tax and the highest fuel costs in the whole world?

Does Elaine Thomson agree that the announcement made by the chancellor shortly after the Labour party won the 1997 general election, of a review of the oil tax regime, was deeply damaging to the oil fabrication industry and to investment in Scotland? The fact that the review lasted for more than a year probably resulted in the loss of orders that could have provided valuable work for oil fabrication yards.

He is a Liberal.

The minister referred to the pathfinders document. Does he regret the fact that the Lib-Lab Executive has breached the recommendations in the manufacturing section of "Pathfinders to the Parliament", which stated that there should be a "Level playing field across UK for business rates and taxes", given the decision by the Minister for Finance, Mr McConnell, to impose a business rate poundage that is 10.1 per cent higher for properties in Scotland than for properties in England that are of identical value?

rose—

rose—

Will the minister give way?

On a point of order. In the speech that the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning has just delivered, he repeatedly accused the SNP—and presumably those who have spoken for the SNP—of lying. Is that in order under standing orders? If it is in order, is it not incumbent on the person who is making such a very serious, factual allegation to offer members the opportunity to challenge the statement by giving way—which the minister, on this occasion, declined to do?

It is always a pleasure to watch Murray Tosh speak, because he does so very elegantly—the SNP has a problem only with the substance of what he says. What has not yet been said in this debate is that the first responsibility of the Administration when trying to ensure fair water charges—or other forms of charges—is to look for savings within the Scottish block. During Tavish Scott's speech, I suggested that the office of water commissioner did not appear to provide any demonstrable service to the public. Does the commissioner provide technical advice? That is already provided by the water authorities. He offered advice to the minister on the level of charges. She said that that advice was moderated—in other words, rejected. If the role of the commissioner is to offer advice on what the charges should be, his role has been ignored—the increases that he suggested, which, I believe, were higher than those that the Government wanted, have not been accepted. The first question that we must ask is why the Lib-Lab Administration has spent £1 million on setting up another quango. I have been asked that question when visiting places such as Ayr—to pick a constituency at random. People in Scotland are desperately concerned about the amount of money that is wasted on quangos, yet one of the first things that this Administration did was to set up another quango, whose purpose we do not know but whose cost we do—£1 million. In the spirit of being helpful, I draw members' attention to another saving that could be made. I know that the Executive is aware of the possibility, because Donald Dewar informed me, on 6 March, that the cost of employing eight special advisers in the Scottish Executive was £527,207. I challenge the Executive to find one voter in Ayr who thinks that we should be spending one penny of that money in that way.

Of course the figures that I have mentioned are not significant in this context. However, if they are added to the cost of consultancy, the cost of the quangos, which have  not been subjected to real scrutiny, and the cost of bureaucracy in Scotland, they form part of a large potential annual saving. Local government has been subjected to a great deal of democratic scrutiny, but quangos have not. I am convinced that the public agree with that statement and believe that significant savings can be found from the Scottish block of £16 billion. Instead of trying to make those savings, the Scottish Administration adopts the same policy as the Tories did—there should be no savings at all. The Tories and Labour are pursuing Jeffrey Archer's economic policy—not a penny more, not a penny less. Why are consumers—especially those in the west of Scotland, as Duncan Hamilton eloquently pointed out—facing a 43 per cent rise in their water charges this year? The band D bill in the north of Scotland will be £300 and there will be no rebate scheme, although there will be one for council tax. Given that, and as there is no real linkage to ability to pay, I put it to the chamber that water charges are new Labour's poll tax. The difference is that there will be no back-bench rebellion when new Labour introduces its poll tax.

I am astonished that Brian Monteith believes what is spun by the special advisers. It is not the questions but the evasive answers that cost money. The answer that I mentioned was the fifth one that I received; why did the Executive not give the answer on the first occasion? That would save £400 by Mr Monteith's calculations, which, incidentally, I do not believe for a second. I will move on to some aspects that have not been discussed. First, there will be a lot of investment. Will work go to Scottish businesses? What efforts have been made thereanent? Secondly, the improved water supply involves a lot of chlorination. Is there not concern that, in some cases, chlorination leads to trihalomethanes? There is certainly concern about that in parts of my constituency. Thirdly, does the Lib-Lab Administration accept that what it is foisting on Scotland is a form of mortgage? It is repayable not over 25 or 30 years, as one would expect if one were buying a house, but over three years. That is what is proposed and what the consumer will have to pay. Not one penny of the Scottish block of £16,000 million is being injected by the Lib-Lab Administration to abate the charges for consumers around Scotland.

No. I am truly astonished that the Labour party, which is supposed to stand up for ordinary working people, should foist such charges on consumers in Scotland, where, many people believe, we have the best water in the world.

Richard Simpson is interjecting from a sedentary position. I was pleased that he conceded in his speech that he would be interested in exploring the efficacy of the use of bonds to raise funds. He conceded that, but why have the ministers not done so? During the debate, although the minister did not answer Mr Salmond's question, we heard that the water authorities had suggested that bonds should be used. Why, then, has the Executive said no? I will share this truth, which I believe to be self-evident, with the chamber. Although Richard Simpson and the Labour party now adore the private finance initiative—it is funny how things change—any PFI contract that I have encountered, whether it be for the Royal infirmary, the Skye bridge or Craig Dunain hospital in Inverness, has cost a fortune and has been a complete waste of money. Such contracts lead to massive interest payments for years and years. That truth will become more and more evident. Unfortunately, the people of Scotland will ultimately pay the bill. In conclusion, Labour members have said that they resent Mr Russell's suggestion that they are laughing at the people of Ayr. I would not repeat that suggestion, but I say that Labour will be very worried about the verdict that is passed on these policies a week on Thursday.

Dr Simpson calls the bond solution "magical". Will he account for the fact that that solution was proposed by the water authorities? Why would they make such a proposal if it was not cheaper than PFI?

rose—

Tavish Scott referred to the Water Industry Commissioner for Scotland, which costs around £1 million a year. Do the Liberal Democrats agree that there is a strong case for considering whether the role of the water commissioner is necessary and whether we should be passing on that £1 million, to reduce some of the swingeing increases that the Executive has sought to impose?

Remind me not to accept a glass of water from you. Are the Conservatives happy with the rises that are proposed by the Liberal-Labour Government? If so, could the member say which budgets were cut to provide the £1 billion injection into the English water industry at the time of privatisation and the £4.4 billion debt write-off that was made?

Will the minister give way?

Does the First Minister agree that this is an extremely sensitive matter? In the formulation of new duties incumbent on local authorities, it is essential that the wording is clear and precise. If it is not, the duties will be impossible for local authorities to implement or observe. Will he consider including a definition of the phrase "stable family life"—in the same way as  definitions of the words "children" and "council" are included—so that parents can be granted the reassurance that many of us believe they seek?

On a point of order. Will the assessment and the independent experts report consider and inform members of the role of Historic Scotland in this matter, specifically the way in which matters discussed with Historic Scotland have impacted on, and perhaps increased the costs of, the project?

The late Nicky Fairbairn once said that Scotland was fortunate not to have a Government. Sometimes, in the depths of poorly attended debates such as this, I begin to see his point. I find it difficult to see the purpose of having a debate when we are unable to discuss the spending of the £25 million to which the Minister for Finance referred at the outset because we have no idea how it will be spent. No details were made available and our only information comes from a Scottish Executive source who was quoted in Scotland on Sunday  and the Scottish edition of  The Sunday Times . I endorse Donald Gorrie's view that ministers, rather than anonymous Executive spokespeople, should make statements to newspapers. Would life not be a bit more simple for our ministers if that practice were pursued? The last phrase in today's anodyne motion says that the Government's initiatives "put citizens at the centre of government in 21st century Scotland." I have dealt with the cases of a number of citizens whose lives have been ruined by government in many of its forms. Not many people find their lives affected by government in that way, but when people run into trouble with a quango, a department of the Government or a cross-border authority, they know all about it. Two of my constituents, Alasdair Stoddart and his partner Birgit de Foort, have for several years run a business in the constituency of my friend John Farquhar Munro. Their business is in Fort Augustus, but they are my constituents, which is why I have taken up their case over the past few months. Alasdair put in an offer to buy his premises from  the head landlords, the Fort Augustus monks. His was the only offer, and it was a good one, but the British Waterways Board sabotaged it. It would not withdraw a clause of pre-emption that entitled it to buy the property for the nugatory figure of £3,000. It sabotaged the offer because Alasdair needed that clause to be removed in order to proceed. Alasdair's offer was then gazumped by the British Waterways Board. Nothing illegal took place, nor would I suggest that it had, but given that BWB is a cross-border authority, I wonder whether that is the way in which we expect Government bodies, which are publicly funded, to act. Is that what we mean by putting citizens at the centre of government? Is that what we mean by modernising government? If it is, I want nothing to do with it. I mention that particular case, but I have taken up many such cases. In writing to the bodies concerned—and, I am afraid to say, the ministers concerned—I have found that the response is uniform. There is a doctrine of ministerial and civil service infallibility. I made mistakes in my previous life as a lawyer. That probably does not come as a great surprise to members, but when I made a mistake I had to do two things: first, I had to say I was sorry I made that mistake; secondly, I had to put it right at my expense. When a mistake is made by the Government, a quango, a local enterprise company, Historic Scotland or BWB, what happens? Who pays for the mistake? Not the Government, but the individual. Persuading the civil service that Sir Humphrey can make mistakes seems an impossible task. Nevertheless, one sometimes tries the tack of saying that further information has come to light that would allow the Government to review its decision, in order to save face. Will that happen? Not a chance. Try that approach with the department of rural affairs, arguing the case of farmers who have lost a whole year's payment because they have made a mistake when filling in a form—a mistake that Ross Finnie has admitted is often of a clerical nature. Result: fined £10,000. Someone has to commit a pretty serious crime to be fined £10,000, but have I been able to persuade Ross Finnie, whom I respect as an individual, or his civil servants, even to agree a meeting to discuss any of those cases? I would mention names, but I have been asked not to do so and respect the privacy of the individuals involved. I believe that it has been useful for me to air this point, on which I have strong feelings. If the Executive really wanted to modernise government, it would introduce clear procedure that allow such decisions—which ruin individuals' lives—to be reassessed by an independent person, by another method, by a fair means, to allow the citizens of  our country justice so that they feel that they really are at the centre of this Government.

Does Donald Gorrie share my surprise that when, at the outset of the debate, the minister said that £25 million would be devoted to modernising government, he gave no detail on how that money would be spent? I ask that because Donald raised the issue of the lack of funding for the voluntary sector and local government. Does he agree that we should have had a full statement of how that £25 million will be broken down so that we could have had a proper debate? In the absence of that, would not it have been better if some of that money was devoted to local government and the voluntary sector?

I was caught by John McAllion's suggestion that there are only two choices in Britain—Labour or the Tories. Does that mean that he would prefer an independent Scotland, where the electorate would not face that choice?

Ben Wallace mentioned the enemy over the hill. Is not the devotion of his party's UK leader to retaining the pound sterling the enemy over the hill for the Scottish tourist industry?

I am loth to interrupt an excellent travelogue, and I agree about the importance of technology, in particular Ossian, but does the member agree that the cost of access to Ossian by small bed-and-breakfast establishments, such as those mentioned by Maureen Macmillan, is a serious problem? Is there a danger that such establishments may well be priced out of the market and, if so, what should be done?

I am surprised to hear George Lyon say that Scotland faces the same challenges as the rest of the UK. As a fellow member representing a Highland constituency, does he not recognise that the higher cost of fuel means that the Highlands face additional challenges?

I welcome much of what Alasdair Morrison has said this morning. I hope that this will be a lively and controversial debate, but we should accept that there are many aspects of the consultation paper that all of us can welcome. I would like to start by identifying some of the proposals to which we can extend a welcome. They include the extension of niche marketing—Rhona Brankin mentioned this in her speech on 22 September—in areas such as golf, walking, sailing, and perhaps also culture. I believe that Celtic Connections should receive more help. We also welcome the setting of targets. That is useful, but it is easier to set a target than to achieve it. I emphasise that it is disappointing that the headline target is that our tourism industry should achieve a growth rate that is less than what the rest of the world will achieve. That is especially disappointing because, as the paper recognises, Scotland has strength and depth in the areas in which greatest growth can be expected, such as eco-tourism—green tourism—and tourism for those seeking something different from a break in the sun. Surely Scotland should aim for a higher target than the rest of the world expects to achieve. It is disappointing that we have curtailed our ambition. I welcome the approach that has been taken by John Swinney and the other members of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee in  working with the Executive on the matter. I also welcome the telephone line, although I am puzzled as to why it will not be available this year. I know that British Telecommunications can sometimes be criticised for the time that it takes to obtain a telephone line, but to take more than 12 months is slow by any standards.

I am grateful for that helpful information. I am sure that we can call on a telephone man in every country in Europe to help us with the translation that is required. We agree with the vision that is set out in the document. It states: "Scotland has the assets to be a world class tourism destination. It has magnificent scenery; a pristine natural environment; cultural and historical richness; world famous sporting attractions; and beautiful and vibrant cities. These assets have helped to make Scotland an important tourist destination already, and to make tourism an important industry for Scotland." Our amendment recognises that vision, but differs on the ways that are set out in the paper to achieve it. I will offer a positive suggestion, which is not meant to be frivolous. We have set targets for Scotland and for the industry. The Parliament could set targets for itself. We should not ignore the fact that this Parliament has been reconvened after a rather long absence. The proceedings of this Parliament might just be of interest to visitors. I hope that organisations will consider including the Scottish Parliament in their lists of places to visit for people coming from throughout the world—perhaps many from the diaspora returning to see Scotland. Even when I am at the lectern, there might be passing interest—I hope that that is an inducement and not a deterrent.

Far be it from me to criticise Lord Russell-Johnston, but I recall that he was described in that way—I say that in all fondness. Perhaps some people already think that I am an ancient monument, although that might just be my idea.

I suggest that we apply these targets to ourselves. Important business  conferences are held in Scotland all the time. Ministers attend such functions regularly, and members might volunteer to attend them to welcome visitors coming to this country for international conferences. Why not? We can agree a code of conduct so that we are relatively impartial and non-political on such occasions. I make those suggestions seriously because everyone in Scotland has a part to play in tourism in Scotland, which is wide ranging, disparate and unlike any other industry. We all have our part to play. Litter in the streets, for example, is a major problem that puts off visitors. If everyone who throws away rubbish decided to stop doing that, it would help to change the image of Scotland. The approach that we adopt towards visitors should be friendly, and largely is so. In my experience, underneath a sometimes forbidding Presbyterian surface there lurk friendly and welcoming personalities. We welcome the consultation, but have a number of criticisms. It should have included the structure of bodies in the industry; although the remit did not include that, it did not deter the 556 people who responded in writing from commenting on that structure. I read over 160 of the responses and there was a great deal of concern about the roles of the bodies involved. I say that not because I wish to make specific criticisms of them but because that must be recognised as a problem which should not be ignored and is partly related to the difficulties of ATBs as membership organisations. That is a source of controversy and has not been grasped in the initiative. Non-members will not be entitled to access to Ossian, even on payment of a fee. That is a serious problem; many hoteliers feel that they know better than any bureaucrat from any organisation how to run their business, and who are we to tell them differently? The consultation attracted a very large response, but have we really listened to what was said? Having read some of the contributions made, I do not think so. I will give some examples of contributions by individuals who responded, putting forward ideas that they hope the Parliament will take seriously. Mr Fallows from Newtonmore pointed out that Ireland already has a digital channel to advertise tourism, called Tara. Why cannot we have something similar for Scottish tourism? That seems a sensible idea, especially as digital TV will soon be upon us—although not, perhaps, in the Highlands, where we might have blank screens. Highland Airways suggested that there is considerable growth in the market for private pilots—a niche market that did not find its way into the paper. Perhaps the Executive is considering it. I will conclude with a suggestion from Mr Baldwin  of Wigtown, although I have 20 or 30 other examples of interesting ideas. He suggests that we should stock waters in the south of Scotland with fish, as is done in England. He gives detailed attention to the idea, and his comment at the end of the letter says a great deal. He says that "despondency creeps in here. No doubt I will get an acknowledgement which in effect is a brush off as usual. Never mind, it's always worth a stamp. No need for further elaboration at the moment. I doubt you will ever consider it. It is too simple and cheap for Scottish bureaucracy to grasp and latch on to." That is one individual out of hundreds who contributed. In our amendment, we focus on the need to listen to the widest-ranging consultation that there has ever been, as Henry McLeish said on the radio yesterday morning. Where is the analysis of the contributions, prepared by the civil servants? I have not seen it; all I have seen is a list of respondents' names, which is not even in alphabetical order. On page 13 of the strategy document—unhelpfully, page 13 is not numbered—there is a first for this Parliament, a strengths and weaknesses analysis. One of the weaknesses is "Price compared to competitors". I think that I am known in this Parliament for commenting on facts, such as that Scotland has the highest fuel tax and fuel costs in the world, the second highest VAT rate in Europe and higher business rates than England; it is also being damaged by the strong pound.

I am receiving help—I say sincerely that our mothers are always there when we want them. I am pleased, with familial help, to acknowledge for the first time that the Executive has recognised the serious problem of the effect of London policies on Scottish industry. The document identifies as a weakness of the Scottish tourism industry our prices compared with those of our competitors. I thought that there might have been some market resistance from the Liberal-Labour Government benches—I do not say the Executive, Sir David, as it is the Liberal-Labour Government that we are describing. However, there is a recognition that the policies of London are not helping tourism. I would like to comment on some of the submissions that have been made. The Scottish Council Development and Industry points out that, in the 18-month period between September 1996 and February 1998, the value of sterling rose against the European currency unit by 21 per cent. Since that submission, there has been a rise of 31  per cent. That puts Scotland at a serious competitive disadvantage.

I thought that Phil might have got that point in somewhere, and I was not disappointed. The Scottish Tourist Forum points out that price competitiveness of alternative destinations combined with the strength of the pound make purchases of Scottish holidays increasingly uncompetitive. That point is underscored more fully by the British Hospitality Association, which points out that Scotland is in danger of acquiring a global reputation as an expensive destination. I mention that because not to do so in the face of 10 or 15 business submissions to the consultation exercise would be a dereliction of duty. I hope that during the rest of the debate, those remarks are not taken as talking Scotland down in any way. There is a problem, which has been recognised by the business organisations that have contributed to the debate. I am pleased that the Executive has acknowledged that for the first time in its own document, and I hope that it will take action to deal with it. The Scottish National party amendment states that we should be willing to listen to and learn from not only the industry and the Scottish people, but our friends and competitors abroad, especially in Ireland. My colleagues will expand on that argument in more detail. I welcome the Executive's approach and its willingness to listen, but it must do more to show that that approach is more than a form of words. I hope that, in the coming months, a serious and wide-ranging debate will begin about all that must be done to allow the Scottish tourism industry to achieve the huge potential that we all believe it has. I move amendment S1M-550.2, to leave out from "publication" to end and insert: "vision for Scottish tourism set out in the New Strategy for Scottish Tourism, but believes that this vision will not be achieved unless effective action is taken by the Scottish Executive and Her Majesty's Government to tackle the problem facing the industry in Scotland of relative competitive disadvantage; calls upon the Scottish Executive to give further careful consideration to the responses to the consultation paper and to provide, as a focus for a wide ranging public debate, an analysis of the responses, thereby demonstrating that it takes seriously the submissions made by the industry, and further believes that Scotland should be ready and willing to learn from its competitors, such as Ireland, in order to promote best practice in the home tourist industry."

rose—

Will the minister give way?

The Scottish National party supports the setting of those targets but recognises that the anticipated growth in global tourism is 4 per cent, as the minister's paper states. If Scotland achieves only a 3 per cent rise in income from tourism, which is the minister's target, the loss of revenue will amount to £549 million between now and 2005. Does the minister acknowledge that the target that the Executive has set is lower than the percentage for international growth that is predicted for global tourism?

Has Mr Morrison or his colleague, the Minister for Health and Community Care, recently met representatives of Highland health unions? If so, is the Minister for Health and  Community Care concerned about the fact that 40 per cent of workers at Raigmore hospital have not yet received their pay award for last year, never mind this year? If she is concerned, what will she do to deal with that situation?

I cannot go quite as far back as Baldrick, but I want to refer to a curious auction that took place in 1865 in Cleveland, Ohio between two partners in an oil refinery. One, Mr Maurice Clark, wanted to dissolve the firm and the other agreed. They decided to have an auction between themselves. Mr Clark started the bidding at $500 and lost at $72,500 when he said: "I can go no higher. The business is yours, John." That is how John D Rockefeller became the sole owner of Standard Oil, the biggest company that the world has known, at least until Microsoft. I mention that because whether we are talking about the knowledge economy or not, solutions and progress will come from the efforts of individuals in Scotland. I am thinking not only of leading entrepreneurs such as Brian Souter, Michelle Mone and Vera and Gerald Weisfeld, or the hundreds and thousands of other leading entrepreneurs, but about everyone who plays a part in the knowledge economy in Scotland, especially those who have a less substantial return. I offer a positive suggestion to Mr McLeish—who seems to be leaving but will no doubt soon return. Because those at the cutting edge of e-commerce tend to be of like mind it would be sensible to house new developments under the one roof. They can exchange ideas; they have the same mental approach, skills and knowledge-driven approach. I know of one or two potential developments on that line in the north of Scotland. I agree with George Lyon and Maureen Macmillan that the potential of the knowledge economy for the Highlands and Islands may be greater than anywhere else. Let us not forget that not all knowledge economies can operate divorced from the impact of high transport costs and high fuel costs, and the difficulty of getting from the islands, in particular, to, for example, London. I hope that in his summing-up the minister will address some of those issues. In the Highlands and Islands, we want to hear an announcement, albeit a belated one, about what has happened to the campaign to restore a London Heathrow link. Nicol Stephen referred to social inclusion. I would like to quote from an Executive press release of 4 February, because it affects people directly. Talking about the number of households that have computers, it said that "only 12 per cent of households in 'families in council flats' do, compared with 50 per cent of households in 'high income' areas." When it came to the internet, only 4 per cent—only one in 25—of households in council flats in Scotland had access to the internet. I mention that  because I know that everybody in this chamber will be concerned about that information from the Lib-Lab Government. If we are to include everybody, as Nicol Stephen suggested—and we all agree with that—such statistics must be taken on board. It is impossible to learn the piano unless one has access to a piano, and it is impossible to get involved with e-commerce unless one can develop computer skills and one has access to the internet. I take those matters to be self-evident, and not of a party political nature. Moving on to the knowledge economy and the new deal, I fear that once again, as far as social inclusion is concerned, there is difficulty in extending the benefits of the knowledge economy to those who do not have employment. A research report by the University of Edinburgh indicated that 75 per cent of young people in Scotland leave the jobs found for them by the new deal within six months. Only 6.7 per cent of Scottish businesses have signed up to the new deal. Young people do not receive the minimum wage on the new deal. From January 1998 to July 1999, only 24 per cent of people on the new deal found jobs, which is 17,000 short of the target of 25,000. Much more needs to be done. With regard to the knowledge economy and exports, in my constituency one of the leading companies is A I Welders Ltd. The strength of sterling affects it severely, as it affects every other exporting business, and puts it at a competitive disadvantage. Our amendment focuses on the need to ensure that, as for all other businesses, businesses in the knowledge economy do not suffer a competitive disadvantage. Of course, businesses in the knowledge economy will, by and large, operate from business premises. Curiously, those that do not do not contribute to local government finance; only the individuals who work for them do. That anomaly should be looked at, although an immediate solution is not apparent, other than to point out that the business rate is an antiquated form of tax in a knowledge economy. All businesses in the Highlands, and throughout Scotland, will face a severe competitive disadvantage over the coming five years, because of the Minister for Finance's decision on 8 December that the business rate in Scotland should be 10.1 per cent higher than that for business properties of identical value south of the border. I notice that the author of that tax, Jack McConnell, is with us, and I welcome him. I put it to him that in a letter that I have seen, dated 22 December, the Scottish Council Development and Industry described that tax as a retrograde step, and something that places Scotland at a competitive disadvantage.  In conclusion, I suggest, as was argued by John Swinney, that there is a danger of a lack of cohesion. Perhaps we should have had this debate after the knowledge economy task force's report is released in April, rather than in February, just after it has been appointed. I hope that Inverness, through the use of skills such as those used yesterday evening, has given a lead in the knowledge economy, as Maureen Macmillan mentioned. Incidentally, I was happy to sign Maureen's motion, as I was to sign Mary Scanlon and Jamie Stone's motions. I hope that Maureen will sign mine, which invites us all to encourage Inverness to achieve further success by gaining city status befitting of a premier location for Scottish football.

rose—

On Saturday, a constituent came to ask me why the criteria for the guidelines for selection to serve on the water industry consultative committee exclude him, as somebody who was recently working in the industry. His point was that he has substantial knowledge to offer, at a time when the minister is aware of grave concern in the north of Scotland about increases in water charges of 51 per cent over the next two years. Would the minister extend the scope of the inquiry to include the criteria that govern public appointments as well as the appointments themselves?

I am sure that the First Minister  agrees that people in the Highlands and Islands want politicians to work together. That is impossible if we are not at the table together. A man of his intelligence would surely find it easy to devise a model that allows all elected parliamentarians—from this place, Westminster and Europe—to be represented. We could operate on a rota basis—we do not expect everybody to be able to be there on every occasion. Has the First Minister abandoned consensus? Has he abandoned the slogan, "working together"? If he has, I would ask him, "Donald, where is your democracy now?"

Does Rhoda Grant agree that  we should urge the Executive to use money from the 2000-05 European funding programme for road improvements in exceptional circumstances? Does she agree that it would be appropriate to urge the Executive to obtain European funding for such purposes?

Does Maureen Macmillan agree that, when debates take place on such issues, it would be extremely useful for us to meet in the reconvened Highlands and Islands Convention, together with members of the Westminster Parliament and local government, to find a solution?

I congratulate David Mundell on introducing the motion, on which I believe there is strong unanimity among political parties. In my constituency, I have either 64 or 67 sub-post offices—I have two different lists. Sub-post offices are an essential institution for rural Scotland. They are under threat for one reason and one reason only, which is this insidious and misguided proposal that will become law—unless we hear tonight that the Scottish  Executive will speak out strongly against it. The proposal is that payment of benefits will effectively be taken away from post offices. That accounts for 35 to 40 per cent of the business of most post offices. If that business goes, the sub-post offices will go; it is as simple as that. This evening, I bring a strong message from Highland Council, which is pursuing that line. This is not a party political argument and I am not advancing it as such. During the holiday period, I heard Brian Wilson say that people would be allowed a referendum. If the sub-post office cannot survive because there is not enough income, a referendum will not make any difference, except for the massive extra bureaucracy and expense of holding it. What is required is quite simple—the proposal must be cancelled and we should have an honest and open debate about the impact of the modern system on sub-post offices. If the proposal goes ahead, they will close. I regret the new argument, which we hear more and more, that it is scaremongering for someone to speak out and say what they think is right. That is an argument that will rebound on its proponents. I regret making a speech tonight that might be interpreted as party political. Sub-post offices are essential, as they are a lifeline; it is often an old person's only daily contact. What will happen if they close? How will we know if old people are still alive? Earlier in the short lifetime of this Parliament, I asked whether the Executive would speak out against this insidious move; the Executive's answer was that it was in regular contact with Her Majesty's Government. It will not be enough to duck the question in this Parliament. I invite the minister to say publicly to the people of Scotland, and to sub-postmasters and mistresses, what he will say to Westminster about the issue. He should not tell us that he will have private talks with ministers at Westminster; he should tell us what he will say to them. The public expect no less.

rose—

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

rose—

Will the member give way?

rose—

Thank you. Speaking as a humble lawyer, I feel that a debt renamed is still a debt, and that a debt deferred is a debt preserved. To illustrate the logic that has been employed by the Liberal Democrats, I ask George Lyon whether he thinks that to defer capital punishment is the same as to abolish capital punishment. Would the answer be different if capital punishment were renamed as involuntary discontinuance of respiration? [Laughter.]

rose—

Given that, next year, the hike in the water charges in the north of Scotland is to be three times as high as it will be in the rest of Scotland, I ask the minister whether she has seen the BBC programme "Castaway 2000". If so, is new Labour policy similar to the BBC's version of social experimentation on the isle of Taransay? Is Labour trying to see how difficult it is for people to survive and support their families? If that is not the case, why do the Highlands and Islands, the hydro capital of Scotland, have the highest hike in water charges, on top of the highest fuel tax in western Europe and the highest fuel costs in the world? Will the minister finally give me an answer to the question that I asked on 23 November? Will she hold a public inquiry in Inverness to explain to the people of the north of Scotland why they are being treated to this form of social experimentation?

The problem is that, under the rules, people still lose all the money, even when the errors made are honest. In every single case that I have raised, the Minister for Rural Affairs has signed letters—presumably prepared by civil servants—rejecting any argument that constituents should have their grants paid to them, despite the fact that the errors were of an innocent clerical nature. What does the minister propose should be done to address this very serious problem, which exists not only in the Highlands and Islands, but, I suspect, throughout Scotland?

I commend Jamie Stone for initiating this debate and addressing this issue with his characteristic fluency. I also commend Rhoda Grant for her speech this evening. This is not a party political matter. I am sure that there is cross-party support for the general principle that jobs should be dispersed out of Edinburgh. I hope that the minister, when replying to the debate, will take the opportunity to scotch the rumours that have arisen today, and that when another body in which a non-political approach has been taken—the Highlands and Islands  Convention—is reconvened, as we hope it will be, it will be reconvened with representatives of this chamber and, indeed, of Westminster. I hope that the rumours I have heard today, that it is proposed that MPs and MSPs will be excluded from the convention, are false and scurrilous. The reasons for the dispersal of civil service jobs are twofold. The first, and perhaps lesser, reason is to ensure that areas throughout Scotland receive the economic benefit. From an answer that I was given by Jack McConnell on 23 August, I understand that there are 13,545—or rather 13,544.9—civil servants in Scotland, 6,299 of who are based in Edinburgh. Why has civil service job dispersal not proceeded apace? In answer to a question by my colleague Richard Lochhead, on 7 December, Donald Dewar stated that there would be "a presumption against an Edinburgh location." — [ Official Report, Written Answers, 7 December 1999; Vol 3, p 221.] However, from the answer to another question we understand that little progress has been made. Like Jamie Stone, I am not suggesting that certain ministries should be located in particular places. The general argument has been made. Bodies such as Scottish Natural Heritage should be located outwith Edinburgh. The Scottish Executive rural affairs department should be located in Inverness. SERAD already has a substantial office in Inverness. I have had the pleasure of meeting civil servants there and I believe that they do an excellent job. The second reason for job dispersal is more important—it is about the mindset and the approach that civil servants take. My worry is that civil servants based in Edinburgh are not exposed to the real problems faced by farmers and others. I am very concerned that my constituents have been penalised for clerical errors in the completion of forms for schemes such as the suckler cow premium scheme, thereby losing a year's livelihood. I suspect that that has not been addressed by the minister because of advice from civil servants. I make no criticism of individual civil servants, but I believe that there is a mindset in the civil service that the rule book is king, rather than that the people are sovereign. If I sound vehement about this, it is because I feel very strongly that the Scottish Parliament is failing in its duty to respond to requests to consider the important cases that have arisen. Part of the problem is that the top civil servants, who take the decisions and draft the ministers' letters, do not appreciate the real problems faced by ordinary people in Scotland. During the summer, some people told me that the experience of losing thousands of pounds because of clerical errors has left them feeling that  they are being treated worse than criminals. That cannot be right. I hope that the minister will understand the force with which I make this point: those people are not getting a fair deal. If the people who made the decisions were based in Inverness, or other parts of Scotland, the outcome of their decisions would be far more likely to be just and fair.

Is it not true that the situation arises because, in many parts of the Highlands—not least in Badenoch and Strathspey in my constituency—there are no council houses left? They have all been bought. In many areas, there are more holiday homes than council homes. If new Labour is going to create any more homes in the Highlands, those Wendy homes will be holiday homes.

On municipal authorities, is the Liberal Democrats' position the same as that of the SNP, which is that we are concerned that in the Highlands and in rural Scotland the effect of the proposals will be to reduce an already inadequate stock of affordable housing? Is that the Liberal Democrats' position, or will they support the Labour proposals that will further diminish the stock of affordable rented rural housing?

Is the minister aware that the view of Highland Council and of the housing associations that are visiting the Parliament today is that the policies that the minister proposes will not increase the availability of affordable rented accommodation, but reduce it substantially? Is the minister right and it is they who are wrong? Does the minister resemble Mrs Thatcher, who was always right and everyone else was always wrong?

As a lawyer, I look back with some nostalgia to the days when I represented one person at a time rather than 70,000. That is a different challenge. I support the eloquent speeches that have been made in the debate. It would be wrong to close the sheriff courts. My points are more generally addressed to problems of court administration. There must be more scope for making effective cost reductions without compromising justice, through streamlining procedures rather than amending structures. I say that as someone who has spent many hours in sheriff courts paid by legal aid for waiting time—chatting all the while to members of the police who were spending all day, every day sitting waiting in the courts. There are no easy answers, but a challenge facing our Parliament is to benefit from the direct experience of practitioners and to ensure that courts are arranged not for the benefit entirely of the sheriffs, but with a mind to the public purse. I am concerned that the Scottish Courts Administration faces an even more difficult task than hospitals—at least they have inalienability in the way in which matters are arranged. In courts, there is far less predictability because timetables are daily blown off course by changes of plea and other decisions made by clients. The particular problem faced in the Highlands and Islands, as  well as in Lothian and Borders, is that civil servants of executive officer grade and above are required to be mobile. In the Highlands, that means that an experienced sheriff clerk can be told that he or she has to go and work in another court that might be up to an hour and a quarter's drive away. Although I recognise that it is difficult for the Scottish Courts Administration to organise things so that sufficient experienced staff are available, I am concerned that that rule potentially discriminates against sheriff clerks in the Highlands and Islands. I became aware of that peculiarity of the system only recently. I mention it, although I appreciate that it is not directly relevant to what we are discussing. However, I submit that it is relevant to the general issue of how we run the courts system in a cost-effective manner, without compromising the interests of justice.

On a point of order.

Mr Rumbles would not allow me to intervene. Could I continue?

I thank Mr McCabe for giving way. Is he aware that a member of the Labour party supports the motion? Rhoda Grant, during a meeting of the Rural Affairs Committee, said to Ross Finnie: "I am suggesting that you could ask the Treasury to underwrite this scheme."—[ Official Report, Rural Affairs Committee, 3 December 1999; c 278.] I sincerely hope that Ms Grant will support this motion today as she did on 3 December.

rose—

I should declare an interest, as I am a practising solicitor. I say practising, as few people have accused solicitors of being perfect—certainly not in my case. It is the Parliament's extremely difficult task to make this legislation perfect. I have found several imperfections, which I will address in the hope that we might gain some answers from the Executive—I very much look forward to that. The Minister for Justice described the 100 m rule as arbitrary, but it is more than arbitrary—there is a danger that we will set up a form of legal apartheid between urban and rural Scotland. As Lyndsay McIntosh and others pointed out, almost all rural Scotland lies within 100 m of feudal estates. Excluding Inverness, Nairn and Fort William, most of my constituency, and most of rural Scotland, will fall within that 100 m line. From where does one measure the 100 m? It is  measured not from the laird's castle, but from any habitation or permanent building that is owned by the feudal superior. The effect of this bill might be, "The feudal system is dead; long live the feudal system in rural Scotland." I hope that all of us—with one or two exceptions—believe that that is not what we want to achieve. Therefore, I hope that the 100 m rule will be greatly restricted, as I do not know what continuing interest a feudal superior would have to enforce restrictions in an area within which he or she does not live. That would be unfair. The essence of what we are trying to do is not to remove nomenclature—to get rid of the feudal names "vassal" and "superior", odious though they may be—but to remove the dead hand of unnecessary control. Brian Monteith is quite wrong—the feudal system has been entirely replaced by town and country planning. I am not an unqualified fan of that system, but it is absurd none the less to have two systems, and town and country planning provides a much more modern model. Section 20 goes to the heart of the matter—the circumstances in which an owner can go to the Lands Tribunal to ask for a variation or discharge of land obligations. Such are the conditions that one has to ask permission to install a toilet in one's house or to build a conservatory or extension, and pay between £1,000 and £1,500 for the privilege. Allan Wilson highlighted that problem well in his comments about the odious Charles Fforde. If the systems of making payments in exchange for minutes of waiver are perpetuated, as I believe this bill will allow, the bill will fail Scotland. I serve on the Subordinate Legislation Committee. Service on that committee has been compared to watching paint dry as an exciting diversion, but committee members have pointed out that section 20 is a Henry VIII clause—it will allow the amendment of primary legislation by subordinate legislation. I am pleased that, at stage 2, the Executive will address the circumstances in which section 20 will apply. If the Executive does not do that, we will be doing Scotland a grave disservice. I am sorry that the Executive has not taken the opportunity to get rid of feuduty once and for all. It is an entirely artificial property right. Believe it or not, there are four things that one can do to a feuduty: pay it, redeem it, allocate it or apportion it.

I know that lawyers have wasted hundreds of thousands of hours charging unnecessary money to clients for doing all those entirely useless things to feuduties.  In that spirit—and to avoid the Presiding Officer's black book—I urge the Executive to consider those criticisms.

In his statement last week, the Minister for Finance mentioned that the provisional business rate in Scotland would be 45.8p. However, for some reason—perhaps natural coyness—he did not mention that the provisional rate for England and Wales would be 41.6p. If my arithmetic is correct, that means that, for most businesses in Scotland, business rates will be 10.1 per cent higher than those south of the border. For small businesses, the figure will be around 8p higher than it is south of the border. Labour is now copying a Tory policy of imposing higher business rates in Scotland than in England. Does Andrew Wilson believe that Mr McConnell should get the credit for this new tax on Scotland's businesses and that it should be called Jack's tax? It is Jack's tax on business, which will cost Scotland many jobs.

On a point of order. The Local Government Committee has spent many meetings considering in detail the substance of today's statement, in particular business rates and the need to provide a special package of relief for small business. The Local Government Committee convener sent a letter to the minister asking whether such a package could be introduced. Instead of responding to the Local Government Committee, and showing respect for the committee system, the minister has announced a paltry package today and small business will continue to be hammered throughout Scotland. Is that in order?

rose—

I wish to ask who is on the steering group.

I commend and support Robin's comments. The Scottish National party has a long record of supporting the use of renewable energy. Does Robin accept that the development of wind power would provide an opportunity to deal with the jobs crisis at  BARMAC's yards at Nigg and Ardersier, where 3,000 men have lost or are about to lose their jobs?

Will the member give way?

Does Alex agree that it is astonishing that not one Labour member has  sought to intervene to defend their party's appalling record on pensions?

Does the minister agree that, for all of us, public health is paramount? However, does she accept that even now there is no clear-cut, unequivocal scientific evidence of a causal connection between consumption of material infected with BSE and contraction of CJD?

With regard to the impact of high petrol prices in extreme rural areas, Ian Robertson suggested that the revenue that has been raised from those areas in fuel duty should be invested in those areas. Does the Liberal party support that suggestion?

Is the First Minister aware that an announcement of major job losses is widely expected to be made tomorrow by BARMAC, the management of the oil fabrication yards at Nigg and Ardersier? Is he also aware that the chief executive of Highlands and Islands Enterprise estimated that those job losses—direct and indirect—would number 3,156 and that that constitutes a major crisis in the Highlands? Given that the devastation has been widely predicted, will the First Minister say what steps have been taken to combat the crisis? In particular, will he appoint a task force? Finally, given that the oil price is $26 a barrel and that oil companies have received tax breaks, will he meet or has he met—[MEMBERS: "Come on."]. The question of 3,156 jobs is very serious. Has the First Minister, or the Secretary of State for Scotland, met the directors of the oil companies, who could have been asked to provide jobs to protect the highly skilled work force at the yards?

I congratulate Irene Oldfather on raising this issue in debate. I imagine that it is not one on which there is any party political divide. All members are gravely concerned about the damage that tobacco causes, particularly to young children. I confess that I began smoking as a teenager. I am aware that teenagers are contrasuggestible. You may believe, Presiding Officer, that some adults, such as me, remain contrasuggestible, but that is another matter. I know that if one tells teenagers not to do something, that is almost a guarantee that they will do that very thing. Warm words, pious statements and good intentions are therefore not the currency of success in what I imagine is a common aim. It is up to us to take concrete steps; Irene Oldfather's proposal seems to be a small, sensible and practical step. Although there are difficulties, which she set out clearly and factually, she is to be congratulated on raising the issue. I was very concerned to learn from press reports that the related issue of the ban on tobacco advertising is apparently being thwarted by the threat of action by tobacco companies against the Government south of the border. That is quite disgraceful and I hope that the Government south of the border and the Executive north of the border will stand up to the tobacco barons. Regardless of whether they have links with Margaret Thatcher, they should be taken on and soundly thrashed. It is outrageous that tobacco barons should seek to thwart the legitimate aims of the Government. I am quite convinced that if we were to ban tobacco advertising we would deglamorise smoking, which is what we need to do.

To ask the Scottish Executive what measures it proposes to assist the rural economy. (S1O-596)

Is the minister aware of the anger felt by many hundreds of farmers throughout the Highlands and Islands who were led to expect that they would receive financial assistance under the agricultural business improvement scheme? Is he aware of the specific, unequivocal written assurance that was made on 18 February 1999 in a letter to Jim Wallace by Lord Sewel, the then agriculture minister, that any upsurge in applications under the scheme would be met? Is he aware that there is a deep sense of betrayal among farmers who have spent thousands of pounds expecting to receive the money and who will now be let down by the Executive?

None of us in this chamber wishes to be churlish about the Executive's approach or to do less than congratulate all those who have been involved in protecting public safety in regard to the Y2K problem. However, I recall that someone once said that there were only two certainties in life: death and taxation. To those I would add a third: human error and fallibility. My experience of life so far, for what it is worth,  is that human error is difficult to avoid, and that when it arises, it is usually followed by further human error. When something goes wrong, it is very often followed by something else going wrong, perhaps as a logical consequence of the first error. As a technophobe among technophiles, it seems to me that technology is intermittently useful, but that when it malfunctions, all sorts of undesirable consequences arise. The concerns that have been expressed in this debate relate more to human error than to the lack of technological skill of those who have carried out the excellent work to prepare us for the millennium. It is ironic that the minister referred to the reports that were issued on 23 July, 5 October and 29 October to members of this Parliament on the progress of millennium readiness, because on 29 October we saw human error at play in Glasgow City Council—not for the first time in that august body, one might reflect. None the less, it was a very serious error that has led to many people becoming dissatisfied—dissatisfied, on this occasion, at not receiving a football ticket. The error was one of lack of preparation. I imagine that the Executive will say that there have been the fullest of preparations for the millennium. As Mr Gallie pointed out, Mr McLeish has stated openly that the buck stops with him. Rather a dangerous statement to make, but one that we have all noted. We appreciate that, in a spirit of candour, he has accepted responsibly, and I praise him for it. We have seen human error at play in a number of delays that have been highlighted by contributors to this debate. Sandra White has referred to the problems of staffing at the Ministry of Defence. Duncan Hamilton drew attention to the issue of the delay in securing system compliance from January to December. Elaine Smith talked about the preparedness of the fire service in relation to resources that were placed in the hands of the police. We have heard from Nicola Sturgeon about the preparedness of school computers. Each of those speakers made valid points, as did other members of all parties. To delay in the accomplishment of something is a human failing. We are trying to guard against human error, which is an impossible task. Some organisations have been anxious to declare that they are millennium compliant and that they are at code blue when they are not. We heard today that one organisation that claimed to be at code blue was at code amber. Who among us is ready to issue confessions at any moment? Confession does not appear to be an instinctive human characteristic. I wonder how many of the organisations that claim to be code blue actually are. None of us in this debate undervalues the efforts  of those who have played a part in ensuring that public safety is preserved, especially in the health service. I am sure that John Swinney, Mrs Scanlon and Miss Goldie value those efforts. It is relevant to point out, however, that there are many issues that we all considered to be more pressing and more worthy of debate than the Y2K problem. I am grateful that I have been allowed 10 minutes for this closing speech. That is twice as long as I have been allowed in this Parliament before. I do not know whether my material is up to the Herculean challenge of filling in all the time that I have. I am happy to take interventions, incidentally.

I was worried for a moment that I might have to agree with Mr Monteith, which I would not normally do. I accept, however, that he has raised a legitimate problem. Another problem was raised by the speech which showed most technical knowledge, that of Fiona McLeod, who has had to leave the chamber to go to a librarians conference. She noted that the problem will not end on 1 January but will continue for decades. I must confess that I did not understand the reasons for that but I hope that the minister will enlighten me about the matter and reassure the public. My habitual lack of confidence in the Executive's protestations was reinforced by something that I read this morning in that fount of all wisdom, the Daily Record . The story is headed "Don't be late dome" and refers to the fact that the grandest and most expensive project in the history of construction in the UK—the millennium dome—might have been infected by the millennium bug. It will not be ready by the deadline of 1 January 2000 that Mr Blair set. Construction should have been finished by the end of this month but five out of the 14 main exhibits will not be ready. The SNP is not overcome with grief at the prospect that we may be unable to visit the millennium dome on 1 January. I can say with great confidence that such a visit on that date, or on any date in future, did not feature among the plans of any member of the 35-strong SNP group. We believe that the millennium dome could be the greatest waste of money that anyone could imagine. I am pleased to see the Scottish Conservatives nodding furiously, as I recall that a certain Mr Michael Heseltine dreamed up the idea in the first place. It is lovely to see devolution infect the ranks of the Conservatives in the Scottish Parliament and that they are taking a stoutly  different line to their erstwhile London masters. In all seriousness, there is grave concern in Scotland about money being wasted, especially on white elephants such as the millennium dome, which apparently will cost £57 a ticket. My constituents in Inverness have first to travel to London—a difficult enough task in itself, especially since the cancellation of the London to Heathrow link that is so important to them. They will have to spend a small fortune to visit—

Thank you, Jamie. I am ready to accept other interventions, but only from Labour members who think that the millennium dome is a good use of public funds.

I am delighted that we are now having a real debate. We are stirring up some controversy. Those are serious points that, as we are having a serious debate, I will answer. The millennium dome is the major project in Great Britain, and if Tony Blair cannot accomplish that, can we have confidence in our readiness for Y2K? I think not. Its lack of readiness is what makes my point about the millennium dome relevant. I had expected Richard Simpson's point to be raised. The Financial Times —a source that may not be as authoritative as the Daily Record —described a survey of whether newsagents in Scotland have yet sold any tickets for the millennium dome. I may be wrong, but I understood that no such tickets have been sold in Scottish newsagents. While I am happy to be an optimist like Richard, I fear that the project is suffering.

Perhaps the newsagents believe that there is no demand. I am sure that Mr Harding would know more about that than me.

Brian has produced even more helpful suggestions in this debate. I raise this matter for two reasons: first, it shows that human error is here with us; secondly, we  have spent three hours on the matter, when there are far more serious issues that we could have debated. There is no need for me to list those issues. We all recognise that this is a serious issue and have said as much, while poking a little fun at the Executive, which I hope that it can take. Mr McLeish, in particular, is able to take a joke better than others whom I will not mention.

No, I am too much of a gentleman to do that—at least not in such a public forum. We support the efforts of all those who have helped to prepare for public safety in Y2K. We remain unconvinced that this debate has been a useful expenditure of time in the chamber, and hope that the minister, Mr MacKay, will answer the serious points that have been raised by members of all parties.

If Mr Stone is going to make points of that nature—and I am not here to defend Annabel Goldie—could he advise Parliament on how many occasions the Liberal Democrat representative on the Parliamentary Bureau has voted against, or disagreed with, the Labour representative.

Although I endorse the member's sentiments of approval and appreciation of the efforts made by those involved in ensuring millennium compliance and public safety, I am at a loss to understand what difference the debate will make in any practical sense. What will it achieve to ensure additional compliance?

If I were prepared to believe anything that the Executive told me, it would certainly be statements from Mr McLeish. [Interruption.] That was a compliment, Presiding Officer. Can we be confident about the state of readiness when we learn that the Government leaflet to which the minister referred has been produced, at a cost of £9.4 million, in English, Bengali, Greek, Turkish, Chinese, Hindi, Urdu, Punjabi, Vietnamese, Arabic, Gujarati, Somali and Welsh, but not in Gaelic? Can the minister say whether the Scottish Executive was even consulted about that metropolitan omission? Even if Gaels can, by and large, read the leaflet in English, none the less the omission of even considering the Gaelic community is a millennium snub.

Pursuant to that point, and taking up Mr McLetchie's suggestion, have the minister's legal advisers considered the possibility of petitioning the powers of the Court of Session under the nobile officium? In that petition, the Electoral Reform Society might be invited to supervise a recount of the votes. Perhaps some other mechanism could be used to remove this stain from the first Scottish parliamentary general election.

Does the minister agree that her statement that the Arisiag to Kinsadel section of the Mallaig road is "the last piece of single trunk road in Britain" is incorrect? The last piece will be the section from Arisaig to Loch Nan Uamh. What is the cost of the Arisaig to Kinsadel section? When is the estimated completion date for that section?

Will Rhoda Grant give way? Will she engage in debate?

rose—

I have a copy of the speech here.

The Highlands and Islands of Scotland cover a land mass that is larger than either Belgium or Denmark. Despite making Herculean efforts, some of us in that area are unable to forget Margaret Thatcher. She decided on one occasion to canvass in the Highlands and Islands during a political campaign. After the experience, she said that she had visited the whole of the Highlands, and had had a marvellous day. If I may be so bold, she did not have an acutely developed sense of irony. But the point is made that the problems of the Highlands and Islands were not appreciated during those wilderness years; nor are they appreciated in the years of her successor—and, indeed, her new hero—Mr Blair. The gravest problem facing the Highlands and Islands today is, in my view, the fuel duty escalator. I was pleased to hear that that has been recognised by Ross Finnie. After having made numerous points about the damaging effect of the fuel duty escalator, which is having such a grievous effect on Scotland's economy and jobs, Ross Finnie said that he recognised the deep sense of feeling that exists. I agree with that. I was also pleased to note that Sarah Boyack stated recently that she recognises that public transport is not available in many parts of rural Scotland and that the car is the only way to travel. The car is, of course, a necessity, not a luxury, especially in the Highlands and Islands. The effect of the fuel duty escalator covers virtually every walk of life, for individuals and  businesses alike. Earlier I mentioned Tom Buncle, who is the chief executive of the Scottish Tourist Board. He spoke out against the escalator. In Inverness, when the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee visited, Iain Robertson of Highlands and Islands Enterprise said that the fuel duty escalator was prejudicing the economy of the Highlands and Islands. I hope that John Home Robertson, from whom we might hear later, will say whether he accepts Iain Robertson's suggestion that the fuel duty tax that is raised in extreme rural areas in the Highlands and Islands could be paid back and invested in public transport provision. That was a specific proposal, which I am offering the Executive. I see George Lyon nodding, which is unusual for him, so presumably the Liberal Democrats agree, but does the Labour party agree that that idea should be taken forward? I hope that the minister will address that. My constituent Donald Watt's business was sacrificed by Mr Blair's fuel duty policy, and we lost his jobs in Aviemore. I have spoken to many hauliers throughout the Highlands and Islands who have told me that, if the escalator is applied next spring, their businesses will fold. I have spoken to many people, including a couple from the Cabrach who are both on low incomes and require two cars to travel to and from work. Those people told me that Mrs Thatcher imposed a poll tax on Scotland and that the poll tax was the same for millionaires and crofters; however, in the Highlands and Islands, we have to pay higher petrol prices than Tony Blair's chums, the Confederation of British Industry bosses. Furthermore, we have to pay higher petrol tax, which means that the fuel duty escalator is simply Labour's Highland poll tax. Scotland does not want just quango bosses such as Tom Buncle and Iain Robertson, who are constrained from speaking out in public as they are not allowed to hold party political views, to object to the fuel duty escalator; the country wants the Labour party to vote against the policy. We are all fed up with the spectacle of Labour MSPs looking down at their desks when the SNP tells the truth about Scotland. The fuel duty escalator is a ligature that is strangling Scotland's economy, and the Highlands will be the first part of the country to die of asphyxiation.

I am obliged to the minister for giving way. Does he agree with the remarks made by Tom Buncle, chief executive of the Scottish Tourist Board, at a major tourism conference a week or so ago? He said that the fuel duty escalator was damaging tourism because it increased the costs of transport and that it was especially damaging tourism in the Highlands and Islands.

On a point of order. Rule 13.2 of the standing orders provides for ministerial statements. In the light of what we read in the press this morning, do the standing orders provide for ministerial retractions?

I congratulate Allan Wilson on initiating the debate and on his motion. Regional selective assistance is a useful tool to have in one's toolbox to deal with high unemployment. Although I do not represent a constituency in the central belt of Scotland, I can assure everyone that there is high unemployment in many parts of my constituency of Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber. One such area is Kinlochleven, which has been the home of the aluminium company, British Alcan, for many years. Next spring, the British Alcan operation will close down. Kinlochleven was based on the aluminium industry, so its departure will have grave consequences. To be fair to the Government agencies involved, particularly the local enterprise company, and the local councillor, great efforts have been made. My concern about regional selective assistance is that in attracting new employment—whether through inward investors or indigenous businesses—to areas of high unemployment, we find that there are many other barriers to overcome. Generally, locations where there is high unemployment are not seen as the optimum or preferred locations. My plea is that RSA should be applied with the maximum flexibility. I am reminded of a story about an unnamed official of Locate in Scotland whom I met some years ago, who told me that when Scotland and Holland competed to attract inward investment, Scotland lost out. That was because the Dutch equivalent to Locate in Scotland took the rule book, put it to one side, and said to the prospective employer, "The rule book is over there. Tell us what you want." I have a suspicion that that modus operandi might operate in other European countries, too. I hope that the Executive will consider my plea for flexibility in applying RSA. It is a useful tool, but it is by no means the only one that can be used  when tackling the serious problem of unemployment.

When I glanced at the document rather late last night after a long and heavy dinner, I thought at first that it was not a Government publication at all but, because of the striking good looks of all the individuals involved, the portfolio of a local model agency. After I realised that my first perceptions were incorrect, I struggled through the night to work out exactly  what the document is all about. We all welcome the idea and the concept but, as T S Eliot once said: "Between the idea And the reality" falls the problem. As Mr McNulty said, there has already been unacceptable delay and we have little more than an idea, a concept. It is the Government's duty to come forward with workable, thought-out schemes that are capable of being implemented to meet their own purposes. Just yesterday, the document described the proposed body as the Scottish university for industry. Today, we learn from Nicol Stephen that it is not going to be called the university for industry. In the history of the world of tertiary education, surely there has never been a university of such short duration—just 24 hours. I appreciate that I am a man of modest imagination, but perhaps the new name will be the new university for industry. [Laughter.]  To be serious, there is a worthy aim here. People need to develop skills and businesses need to find people to perform the work required for the future. However, if the role of the body is to matchmake, we are not talking about a university for industry at all, but about a dating agency. I have nothing whatever against that concept; in fact, I rather welcome it. I wonder, however—again being serious for a moment—what is the reaction of the existing universities in Scotland to this new, proposed body, which has changed its name after 24 hours, and has unfortunately not yet got a new name on its birth certificate. What is the reaction of the further education colleges to this new kid on the quadrangle? I think that we should be told. I think that we should also be told the answers to questions that have been asked by members on all sides of the chamber. Being part of a debate that is relatively free of political point scoring—in which I do not indulge myself, but which I have noticed goes on here from time to time—is a welcome experience. I am bound to ask the following five questions. First, what will be different about the new body? Secondly, what that is different can the new institution do that others—such as the University of the Highlands and Islands learning resource centre, which, as Elaine Murray mentioned, the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee visited last week—cannot? Did I notice Alasdair getting off that posterior of his, which was referred to earlier in the debate, or is it just my imagination?

Pass, Deputy Presiding Officer. Why cannot existing institutions provide the worthwhile functions the Government has set out and with which we concur? Thirdly, and specifically on funding, we understand that of the £16.3 million, £12 million will come from the capital modernisation fund. That leaves a shortfall of £4.3 million. Am I right to draw the conclusion that that £4.3 million will come from existing tertiary education institutions? Where will it come from? I am happy to give way to the deputy minister now, if he has any answers.

Okay. Fourthly, what will the operating costs be? Half a million pounds seems far lower than what I would expect, given what I have heard. Fifthly, what happened to the marketing campaign that Kim Howells referred to last year in the House of Commons? As George Lyon said, small businesses have needs that require to be met, but they know absolutely nothing about this project at the moment and they have no means of knowing how to avail themselves of the advantages that it might provide. I am delighted that, for the second day running, the Executive has had the good sense to support an SNP amendment. It is a trend that, sadly, I think will be short lived. The amendment contains vital ideas. One is that before there can be a university for industry—a brokerage if that is what it is—two conditions must be met: value added and performance measurement. I would say, as a solicitor in my old days, that that is a condition precedent. Those two criteria must be fulfilled before the new body can be launched, exist or go anywhere. In this debate, as in life, there have been more questions than answers. I think that it is the duty of the Government to provide answers. I hope that we will hear some.

rose—

Does Mr Wallace think that Mr Hague's particular style of diplomacy in stating to the French that their beef should be banned from the UK would be helpful in arguing the Scottish case in Europe?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

rose—

On a point of order. Mr Henry said that the SNP had spent this morning attacking the English people. Is it in order for him to say that when the SNP has not done that this morning or at any time? I believe that a ruling should be made on this matter as it goes to the heart of this issue and many others.

On Friday, in my constituency surgery in Fort William, I was consulted by a 35-year-old woman who is suffering from breast cancer. She is brave woman, not only because of her fight against cancer, but because she has gone public in a campaign in the Highlands to raise awareness of breast cancer and the problems associated with it. She has been supported in that campaign by her Westminster MP, David Stewart. Her campaign, which I take the opportunity to raise today, is that she feels that it is unfair that cancer sufferers have to pay the full prescription charge—assuming that they are not on income support. I was interested to hear Elaine Smith's remarks, which relate to similar issues. The lady is called Carolyn Stewart. I spoke to her this afternoon, to ask whether she had any objections to her name being mentioned. She said that she wanted her name to be mentioned because she wants awareness of the issue to be raised. She has campaigned for two years and she asked me to raise her case today, so that the Minister for Health and Community Care, Susan Deacon, can give her view. Does the minister—like David Stewart—feel that there is a strong case for reviewing the full prescription charge for cancer sufferers? Perhaps, as my constituent believes, there is a strong case for extending the exemption from the prescription  charge that applies to diabetics and those who suffer from epilepsy or thyroid problems to all cancer sufferers who are on expensive treatments for long periods. There must be a strong case to review the current practice. I hope that the minister will consider that in her reply to the debate.

I am grateful for the opportunity to raise this important issue in the chamber today. The Mallaig road—the A830 from Fort William to Mallaig—is unique in Scotland. It is the only single-track trunk route in the whole of Scotland and, I believe, the whole of the UK. It is appropriate that this first debate involving a trunk road should concern the only single-track trunk road. Members' debates give us the opportunity to raise matters of important constituency interest. We are restricted to two of those debates per member per year and one must therefore choose carefully which subjects to raise. I had no hesitation in deciding that this was the most pressing constituency issue to raise, and I am pleased to see present members of all the other parties. I hope that they will all have a chance to contribute. I will try to keep my remarks to a length that will enable that. The Fort William to Mallaig road stretches for 57 miles. It is the only access to Mallaig—and also to Morar and Arisaig, which are sometimes forgotten. Mallaig is a designated fishing port and, in terms of the value of fish landed, the sixth largest in Scotland, a fact that is not widely known. In 1997, the value of fish landed—largely shellfish—was £17 million or £18 million. I understand from Andy Race, a fish processor, and Jackie Milligan, a haulier, that in one 24-hour period this summer, no fewer than 60 articulated lorries used the Mallaig road. I see that the Deputy Minister for Rural Affairs, John Home Robertson, is here today. His visit to Mallaig during the summer was welcome, and I know that other ministers have visited Mallaig and are aware of the problem. It is a statement of the obvious, but on a single-track road, drivers must stop to give way to oncoming traffic. It is not just twice as difficult to drive on a single-track road as on a normal road with two lanes; it involves tenacity and driving skill that are not required on any other roads. I  understand from Hugh Allan of the Mallaig and North-West Fisheries Association that there was not a day last summer when there was not an accident of some kind on that road. The cost of using the road for motorists and hauliers is substantially in excess of that of driving on other roads because of the time spent in low gear, which leads to higher petrol consumption and—according to Mr Milligan—a cost three times higher for tyres and spare parts. The road is known as the road to the isles. It is not so long ago that the Highland clearances took place, so there is a lingering memory of what happened in the past that holds a hint of interest for tourists. There is also the romantic ferry crossing. The ferry's capacity to carry coaches has increased recently, and there has been a massive increase in the number of coaches using the road. Also, 60 to 80 cars come off the Armadale ferry at a time. I pay tribute to the people in Mallaig—to Councillor Charlie King, to Robert MacMillan of the harbour authority, to Andrew Simpson of the chamber of commerce, and to Alistair Gillies of the community council. Other members know those people and how hard they have fought their campaign in a totally united and non-political way. I also pay tribute to the efforts of Lord Russell-Johnston and of David Stewart MP who have, for their part, lobbied hard on the campaign. It is a campaign that is not years but decades old, and it now deserves to be recognised through an announcement in the strategic roads review that both remaining single-track sections will be upgraded. The two remaining sections are known as the Arisaig bypass and the Arisaig to Loch Nan Uamh section. I understand from parliamentary answers from the Minister for Transport and the Environment, Sarah Boyack, that both sections would cost around £9 million to upgrade. So that other members can speak in the debate, I have kept my remarks relatively brief. They have lasted perhaps five or six minutes—I think that that is a new record for members' business. I urge the minister, with his new and onerous responsibilities, to include the case of the Mallaig to Fort William road in the programme to improve the roads of Scotland. It is a compelling and overwhelming case; I believe that it is also unique.

To ask the Scottish Executive what representations, if any, it has made to Her Majesty's Government regarding the publication date of the Office of Fair Trading report on petrol pricing in the Highlands and Islands. (S1O-385)

Is the minister aware that in many parts of the Highlands and Islands the price of fuel is the highest in Europe, if not the world? Is he aware that even if the Office of Fair Trading makes a finding of profiteering, the regulatory mechanisms that Westminster has dictated—which include a reference to the Competition Commission, a reference to the OFT and a reference to the Department of Trade and Industry—mean that no progress can be made on the issue until the end of 2000? I received that date from the OFT this morning. Is the minister aware that that means nothing will happen to benefit motorists in the Highlands and Islands until the end of next year, at the earliest?

I congratulate everyone who has contributed to this debate. I particularly  enjoyed the minister's contributions and I was pleased that we are all learning lessons from the United States of America about the knowledge economy. I hope that when the minister was in the United States he noticed the price of petrol there—it is a minute fraction of the price here. That is one reason why they are doing well while many of our manufacturing businesses are not. I found Annabel Goldie's horticultural metaphor absolutely fascinating, although as I reflect on the high tax and business rates that the Conservatives gave us in Scotland I cannot help thinking that she was viewing the garden from a conservatory. [MEMBERS: "Oh."]  It gets worse.

Not just yet—later on. Contain yourself, Phil. The motion states: "That the Parliament believes that a vibrant manufacturing sector will continue to play an important part in Scotland's knowledge driven economy." Who could disagree with that? It would be rather like deciding that one should boycott Mothering Sunday—not something that I would ever dream of advocating. [Laughter.]  I am puzzled about two matters. First, why has the minister announced today that he is convening a group of business leaders that will produce a manufacturing strategy, although there is already a manufacturing strategy in the "Pathfinders to the Parliament" document? That strategy was produced in March, and was welcomed. The document contains a picture of Gus Macdonald, who used to be the Scottish Business and Industry Minister, and it comes up with a number of recommendations that I presume the Government may support, although it will not say so. Will the minister, in his summing-up speech, say why some of the excellent ideas in that strategy have not been included in a bill? Why is there not a bill that includes some of those measures—and they are micro-measures, because the minister will not talk to Gordon Brown about the real problems—which could help business in Scotland? Those measures include allowing security to be created over movable property, so that businesses can borrow over the strength of their movable property, both corporeal and incorporeal. It is absolutely essential that the knowledge industry is able to borrow, create capital and invest. Secondly, Cadence said that it came to Scotland partly because of the effectiveness and the speed with which it could obtain interim interdict in the Court of Session to protect intellectual property rights. I have asked about reform of the Court of Session, which would remove from the Court of  Session all the remedies that should be in the sheriff courts. The purpose of that suggestion is to make the Court of Session, our supreme court, even more efficient, so that the reason that Cadence came here can be built on and strengthened, and so that our courts can offer the very best attractions to inward investors. Finally, why are we not reforming business rates now, before the revaluation? There are many recommendations to do so in "Pathfinders to the Parliament". On many occasions, representations of a serious and considered nature have been made to the minister. We have not heard the Executive's response to those. We have heard many interesting contributions from speakers of all parties about problems in their constituencies. My constituency is no exception in experiencing many problems. One of the most successful engineering companies in Scotland is A I Welders. I spoke to its managing director, John Hunter, yesterday. He said that, over the past three years, the effect of the high pound has been to cut 35 per cent off his profit margins—35 per cent. The Executive can ignore the problem if it wants, but ignoring it will not make it go away. The minister should not kid himself that there are people in manufacturing out there who are not listening carefully to hear him spell out what he will say to Gordon Brown about his disastrous economic policies. It seems to me that those policies are not designed even for England or for the south-east of England, but are designed entirely for the City of London, so that international capital flows into this country, attracted by the high interest rates. The amendment that we offer, which suggests full and regular benchmarking, is one that should be approved. Whatever strategy we come up with, we must be able to assess how successful it is. That is what benchmarking means, and that is why benchmarking has been adopted as a method of ensuring success and effectiveness in business all over the world. It astonishes me that the Conservatives would reject such a proposal. It is unfortunate that we cannot accept good ideas regardless of their source. I hope that the amendment, which is put forward as a constructive suggestion of a way in which to improve and assess our manufacturing strategy, will be accepted by the Executive, so that, once the strategy is devised, we can ensure that it works for Scotland.

I am loth to interrupt this lesson in gardening. I feel that I am learning a great deal. However, to use gardening parlance, is it not the case that Miss Goldie's party planted a giant hogweed in the Scottish economy, when, for the first five years of this decade, under Conservative rule, business rates were levied that, according to the Scottish Council Development and Industry, were one fifth higher each year—from 1990 to 1995? Instead of imposing that higher tax on Scotland, the Conservatives should surely have been applying weedkiller.

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

Will Ben Wallace give way?

Maureen mentioned the importance of training, which I am sure we all endorse. In relation to shortages, does she accept that the single biggest problem in hotels in the Highlands is the shortage of skilled chefs that has arisen since the closure of Duncraig college? If so, what should be done about it?

We in the SNP welcome the fact that there is to be a strategy on the tourism industry in Scotland, not only because the first mention of the strategy was made in response to one of the questions that I asked on 17 June, but because the industry is vital to everyone in Scotland. We believe that our country has tourism potential that is unmatched in any other country, and the minister's comments reflected that opinion. Perhaps we should begin by considering the very word tourist. When somebody comes to our house to stay, do we call that person a tourist? Or do we call that person a guest or a visitor? The word tourist has pejorative connotations; it is something that we put up with or thole, but about which we are not very enthusiastic. Perhaps we should be talking about visitors and guests. If we extend that argument, whatever we may decide about the structures—and I hope that they will be considered in the review—we should think about the name of the Scottish Tourist Board. Is not that old-fashioned? Should not it sum up what we want to achieve for Scotland? Should not it be called Welcome to Scotland, especially for our friends from south of the border? Whether they consider themselves English, British, Scottish, Scandinavian or whatever, they are all welcome here in Scotland as our visitors and our friends. I understand that the Scottish Tourist Board defines a tourist as someone who spends one night in Scotland away from home. I suppose that I will be a tourist when I visit Hamilton tomorrow evening. Perhaps we have 129 tourists here; perhaps everyone in the chamber is a tourist. By the way in which we treat visitors and guests from other countries, everyone in Scotland is an ambassador. As Annabel Goldie said in a committee recently, how we comport ourselves is important, because it sends a message to Scotland about the image that we wish to convey to the wider world. We welcome the review. We believe—and this is my view following an extensive 17-week surgery tour during the infamous holidays that we are supposed to have had—that there is an appetite  for a minister for tourism. There is an appetite for one individual, not three—estimable though we know Henry McLeish, Rhona Brankin and Alasdair Morrison to be—so that the buck stops with one person. One person would be responsible; one person would be accountable—one person has to do the job that is so important for Scotland over the next few years. It is vital that we get that strategy right, and I ask in a non-partisan way that the decision not to appoint one dedicated minister for tourism be revisited. It is not a political point—it is one of substance—and I hope that it is considered. The review that was announced on 3 August mentioned some important aspects that we need to address, such as identifying our future markets, both domestic and overseas. Surely we have to look at the performance of the Scottish Tourist Board and the area tourist boards. It is wrong for Lord Gordon to say that it is not the function of the review to consider structures—we must consider that to get the strategy right. Strategy is most important, but of necessity it entails looking at structures. Will Alasdair Morrison revisit that decision, so that we can look at the structures as well? I hope that a thousand flowers will bloom as a result of the responses to the review and that there will be more excellent suggestions such as those in the considered piece by Trevor Grundy and Robert Dawson Scott in The Scotsman today. I think that we will get that positive response. There are a number of challenges—the minister's word, which I admit is a Hebridean euphemism. We cannot remain competitive because we are not competitive. Scotland is too expensive; it is not just the Scottish National party that is saying that. In a letter to me dated 8 September, Tom Buncle of the Scottish Tourist Board said, on fuel tax, that "there is clearly a correlation between the cost of fuel and the propensity of visitors to travel widely throughout Scotland." Will Alasdair join us in supporting the campaign run by the Sunday Post to scrap the fuel escalator? I am happy to accept an intervention from any Labour member—I have the application forms here. No takers? That is a shame, because the Sunday Post is doing a grand job.

As Allan knows, since the election the chancellor, Gordon Brown, has increased the fuel tax by 22 per cent. The Highlands and Islands has the highest fuel tax in  the world. I am surprised that Allan chooses to make that the subject of his intervention. As Tom Buncle said, it is clear that business rates represent a significant burden on marginal tourism. We have the power to slash business rates for small businesses in the hotel trade. We can do that in a cost-neutral way—that will probably appeal to Allan—by shifting the burden to big businesses, for which business rates are a much smaller proportion of their turnover. The high pound is a crippling cost to many—again, that is the responsibility of Mr Brown. We have the second highest VAT rate in Europe. Our tourism industry is being taxed out of existence by Gordon Brown. I say to Labour members, in all seriousness, that if Scotland is to become competitive, those matters must be addressed— [Interruption.] Perhaps that is Gordon Brown on the phone. One way in which we can address those matters is by slashing business rates. I hope that the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee will display a little more enthusiasm for those ideas, which I recently expressed to Allan and others. I believe that we can make this Parliament work as we want it to by using its power to help small businesses throughout Scotland, especially those in the rural areas, which have been hammered this summer. Alasdair Morrison mentioned no figures for that whatever. I hope in all sincerity—it is about time—that we get some answers from the Executive about the effect that reserved matters are having on our economy. The Executive cannot duck and dive for ever. One of these days, people in Scotland will say, "They have nothing to say because they will not stand up to Gordon Brown, they will not say a word against Millbank and they will not do anything in case Tony Blair says that it is the wrong thing." One can get away with that only for so long.

I am just winding up, George.

I am a decent bloke, as you know.

I do not intend to join the behoochie tendency. It is what we say, when we are here and when we are down there, that matters. And what has the Executive to say about fuel tax, VAT, the high pound and business rates? That is what Scotland wants to know. That is what my constituents want to know.  It is not all about money. Lurking between the boundaries of my constituency and of John Farquhar Munro's is one of the most cost-effective tourist attractions—the Loch Ness monster. He did not cost £758 million; he was not sponsored by Sainsbury's, nor by any other of Tony's crony companies. Long after Scottish folk have not paid their 58 quid to go down to the dome, people will still be travelling to my constituency to watch out for Nessie. With those words, I wish Alasdair well in the strategy ahead.

On two occasions during the summer there were water shortages in Fort William. The nearest elected councillor serving on the North of Scotland Water Authority was based in the east of Scotland. My constituents would have had to traverse the Mamores and the Cairngorms to consult that councillor. If the minister favours partnership, will she appoint at least two councillors from the Highland Council area, from which not one councillor serves on NOSWA now? If not, is the partnership that she talked about the partnership of Jonah and the whale? Why are NOSWA and the other water authorities not to be members of the proposed Scottish utilities forum?

I am grateful to Elaine Thomson for giving way. What is the statistical likelihood of every one of the 59 Labour MSPs feeling that it is necessary to continue the ban on beef on the bone, given that that should not really be a matter of party politics? Can Elaine tell us whether she feels it is necessary for the ban to continue?

Does Elaine Murray consider that there is any justification now for the continuation of the beef-on-the-bone ban?

The First Minister, who I hope has only temporarily departed, gave some excellent advice this morning. He said that we should be positive. I must acknowledge that all members want what is best for Scotland, no  matter which party we belong to. My question about the Government's programme is whether it is best for Scotland. I am afraid that it is not good enough. As the SNP's spokesman for small business, I am interested in the only specific proposal in the document—that the Executive will "help to create 100,000 new Scottish businesses by 2009". Anybody can set a target, but how is it to be delivered? No measures in the document indicate how the Government's target will be achieved. Last week, in the committee on which I serve, I was positive, as Mr Dewar advised us to be. Henry McLeish listened to three specific proposals that I made that would help to deliver the Government's target. The first was de-rating for small businesses, as proposed by the Federation of Small Businesses. The second was a root-and-branch review of planning law. The third was an elimination of red tape. I am sure that there would be a high level of support for those proposals.

The SNP will always support progressive taxation, just as the late John Smith did. I inform Duncan McNeil that the yield from Gordon Brown's increases in fuel tax is far in excess of one penny in the pound. The difference is that Scotland gets none of that money back, while it would have had the whole of the yield from forgoing Gordon Brown's one penny tax cut, which we advocated. In the absence of any specific measures in the document, is the Government even willing to recognise the fact that Scotland has the highest fuel tax in the European Union? In her meeting with Gordon Brown, Sarah Boyack failed to mention the issue. I find that almost incredible. The Government has no ideas for solutions and no idea of the problems. Perhaps it has one cunning plan: to suggest that the 100,000 Scots for whom it aims to create jobs apply to Chris Tarrant's programme, "Who Wants to be a Millionaire?" I ask the Executive to answer this simple question: which country in the European Union has the highest fuel tax? Is it a) France, b) Germany, c) Spain or d) Scotland, trapped in the United Kingdom? The Executive does not have to answer immediately. If Mr McConnell wants, he can telephone a friend. Gordon Brown, for instance, who not only knows the answer but caused the answer. When we ask the audience on 23 September, we will find that they know the answer, too. They  also know who will best fight for the interests of the people of Scotland.

As part of the SNP's economics team, I am not inclined to recommend that anybody gamble one year's salary on anything. However, a member of my family who was involved in a certain by-election 32 years ago made a bet with odds of nine to one. I remember getting a rather good toy the day after the result. Who knows, I might break with my inclination and place a bet on my sister's winning.

I will take Mr McAllion's last remarks as an endorsement. If the Government is so committed to land reform, why has the effective date of the land reform bill becoming law been postponed by two years, until 2003?

Will the minister give way?

Will Mr Lyon give way?

There are 1,629 unemployed people in my constituency. That is about eight or nine times the number of people here today. People come in units of one; the task that we face is what can we do to make a difference for the better. So far, we have heard only one proposal in the Government's programme that will make a difference-a difference for the worse-and that is the toll tax.  I was encouraged by the minister's positive tone earlier on, but I wonder whether he will take the advice of the pathfinder document to which he referred, particularly the section that the retail sector submitted. It states:  "Road pricing: the sector does not relish the idea of a road toll tax imposition that has the net effect of forcing lorries off motorways onto rural roads and through towns in order to save transport costs."  That is an excellent proposal. I recommend that the minister takes it up, as I believe he suggested, and that he now follows the advice to ditch the toll tax.  SNP members want to make-and have made-some constructive suggestions. It is much easier for a Government to do harm than good, easier for it to create unemployment and make things worse than magic new employment out of the air. I will mention, briefly, five barriers to increasing economic success in Scotland.  On the burden of business rates, will the minister involve the Federation of Small Businesses and all other small businesses organisations in the revaluation process rather than leave contact with them until after the result has been completed? If he does not involve them, I believe that we will get the wrong results, as we did last time. I hope that he will consider banding, net asset value, transitional relief or a combination of those measures.  Will the Executive lift the weight of bureaucracy? In the Highlands, it is virtually impossible to have development off any trunk routes because of the design restrictions that are imposed by the Scottish Office. Will the minister make a specific commitment to review that? I could mention many constituency cases had I the time to do so.  On late payment, will we explore the possibility of reducing the subby-bashing problem by mandating payment directly from the client to the sub-contractor so that the sub-contractor does not face sequestration or liquidation? It is an option that is perfectly possible, so let us consider it. I hope that the ministerial team will.  On access to capital, will the minister restore the small business development loan scheme that mysteriously disappeared without any proper explanation or announcement from Westminster about why it should end?  Finally, will the minister give the electronic sector the value of fifth freedoms, which Alex Salmond mentioned earlier in the Parliament's deliberations?  Many of the more serious problems that affect the Scottish economy are within Westminster's power. Does any member think that the highest fuel tax in Europe is anything but an unbearable burden? I believe that that burden is forcing many hauliers out of business.  Mr Tosh mentioned the energy tax. Arjo Wiggins has written to me stating that the paper sector in Britain will have used up two thirds of its profits to  pay for the energy tax. That is bound to lead to job losses. Nothing has happened for more than 18 months, although Mr McLeish mentioned that consultation was going on. This is a vital matter for my constituency, for the Highlands and for Scotland.  While the SNP welcomes-and will always welcome-the taste of home rule and national self-determination that we have today, we do not have home rule in Scotland; we have home rule and away rule, and it is the away team that is the problem, so what will be done about it?

rose-

On the topic of business rates, does Mr Davidson accept the evidence of the Scottish Council Development and Industry that, while the Conservative party was in power, the total surcharge that Scottish businesses paid,  according to Craig Campbell, was £1.2 billion? That was when the uniform business rate was in force and so it had nothing to do with local authorities of other hues. The uniform business rate amounted to a 20 per cent tax on every business in Scotland. That was not a tartan tax for each of those five years, but a London levy of 20 per cent on every Scottish business and small shop that Mr Davidson is now purporting to defend.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it intends to introduce measures to assist smaller business premises in relation to the impact of the non-domestic rates revaluation to take effect from 1 April 2000. (S1O-75)

What kind of logic dictates that small businesses-the engine of growth in the Scottish economy-must pay 50 per cent of the full rates bill for any small shop or office that is empty, while empty industrial premises, such as the premises in Dunfermline that are not occupied by Hyundai, receive 100 per cent remission?

rose-

rose-

As the representative of the people of Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber, I would naturally prefer the Parliament to be situated in Inverness. However, I am prepared to concede that that will not be possible without adequate transport links to Heathrow and the rest of the world.  I am sure that all members will join me in thanking the Church of Scotland for negotiating with the Scottish Office, which is also to be commended, to make this chamber available to the people of Scotland.  Two sets of issues are becoming confused in this debate: issues relating to the choice of site, and issues relating to the building and, in particular, the chamber. I want to speak out in defence of this chamber, because it is an excellent forum. Last week my colleague Mary Scanlon arranged a visit by a group of people from Inverness. Almost to a person, they expressed their approval for this chamber, because of the sense of history, the ambience, the atmosphere, the tradition and the sense of occasion that inform and-perhaps-raise the quality of our contributions to debates.  Three factors must be considered when we contemplate a move to another chamber: the needs of the press, the needs of the public and the needs of members. I understand that the press in this chamber can see virtually every member except, perhaps, one or two Conservative members; I make no comment as to whether that is an advantage or a disadvantage. I understand that they can see members' reactions and expressions during debates, and even members passing sweeties to one another. That is part of the democratic process.  The arguments about the lack of facilities are unrealistically exaggerated. The First Minister was not here to accept Mrs McIntosh's kind offer of an umbrella to prevent him from becoming drookit the next time that it rains, but I am sure that, if pushed, we can have a whip-round among SNP members to arrange one-in the spirit of non-partisan co-operation. I have never seen the High Street covered with 6 in of snow; sadly, we have not seen 6 in of snow on Cairn Gorm, where, I hope, the Cairn Gorm funicular railway will shortly be situated.  In its report on possible sites, Halcrow Fox and Associates Ltd said that of the four options, it favoured Calton hill. We know that the attitude of the First Minister was ABC-anywhere but Calton  hill. He has disclaimed ownership of the phrase "nationalist shibboleth", and we now believe that the unwanted authorship of that phrase belongs to Brian Wilson, who is not here-I express no opinion as to whether that is an advantage or a disadvantage.  I want to voice one thought that might be unwelcome to members of the Labour party who sit in this Parliament. I believe that any new Parliament building will hasten progress towards full independence for Scotland. Naturally, I welcome that. Perhaps, therefore, the intelligent Labour members-I am sure that they form the vast majority-will reflect that if we were to stay here, which is one of the options under Donald Gorrie's amendment, it might help slow down the separatist march, as Labour members would see it, towards independence.  In conclusion, I wish to echo your words, Sir David, about this Parliament being a kitten, which we want, without any genetic modification, to see transformed into a proud Scottish lion, independent and free.

Is the member aware that in a letter just last week the Labour Government ruled out the possibility of a variable VAT rate?

Will Tavish Scott acknowledge that just last week I received a letter from the Labour Government at Westminster stating that it rules out the possibility of a variable VAT rate on fuel? What specific proposals will the Liberal Democrat party put forward to deal with the crisis in the Highlands and Islands-which have the highest fuel duty in Europe, if not the western world-given that, as Tavish Scott has indicated, this Parliament lacks the power to turn the fuel escalator downward?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

No one is suggesting that there should be one blueprint for the whole of Scotland. The question is how Labour will fund a national park in Loch Lomond. How much will such a park cost per year? Will the Executive rule out imposing local road tolls to fund it?

I congratulate Dr Jackson on raising a debate on a matter which the people of Scotland will expect us to solve in a way relatively free from party political considerations.  I would like to declare a number of interests. The second proposed national park in the Cairngorms falls within my constituency and many of the general issues that Dr Jackson touched upon have a similar, if slightly different, effect in my constituency.  The approach of this chamber should be to select the best elements from the rest of the world's experience of national parks and to learn from them, especially the lake district where the pressure has been unacceptable.  I should perhaps declare a further interest. Early this morning I went for a run, although that is perhaps an exaggeration of the speed, on the west Highland way. I ventured up Conic hill. The view from the top can be bettered only by views  from the Cairngorms. I happened to meet a local shepherd and I asked him his views about this debate, because I was aware that it was in the business bulletin. He said that we must not have another quango, and a national park where the board of management is dominated by people who are not based in the area and who are not knowledgeable about local issues. I would like to see an elected body, comprising a majority of local residents, which has access to expert advice. That is suitable and necessary.  The second issue is one of expense. How much will the park cost per year? How will it be funded? Will the Labour party take this opportunity to rule out local road tolls, which were proposed by Scottish Natural Heritage as one method of funding?

I welcome the fact that the days of opening of the office of the clerk have been published. What opportunity will there be-for all opposition parties and not just the Scottish Nationalists as the main opposition-to have substantive issues debated, such as the removal from Scottish jurisdiction of 6,000 square miles of fishing waters? This appears to have been carried out by stealth by Order in Council shortly before the election in which we were all engaged.  The First Minister remarked that during the election campaign the SNP promised the sun, the moon and the stars. I would challenge that, but what is undoubtedly clear is that while we were all fighting an election campaign, London Labour was stealing Scotland's sea without any consultation with even members of the Scottish Fishermen's Federation-who are present here today and met with us at lunch time. They are anxious to meet with every other party in Scotland.  There is a real sense of concern throughout Scotland that there should be a very early opportunity for every party to raise issues of substantive concern, such as the plight of Scottish fishermen and the serious implications that that order passed by stealth at Westminster will have in relation to prosecution under the English jurisdiction of Scottish fishermen, such as the impact of regulation of the fisheries industry and such as the fact that none of the bodies concerned appears to have been consulted.  I would, finally, ask Mr McCabe to express concern about the fact that this Parliament, whose  essence was to be consultation, should find itself in this situation where no consultation about such an important matter has taken place with any of the relevant bodies. Westminster passed that under a cloud of darkness and during an election campaign.

On a point of order. Now that the ministerial team has been appointed, it would be churlish of us not to congratulate the ministers on their appointments and hope for the best in the future. I want to draw to the attention of the minister who has responsibility for fisheries, the welcome presence of-

On a point of order. I propose that there be a vote as to whether the standing orders are approved. Without the standing orders being approved, it is open to members to decide whether or not we follow the points of order made by Mr Salmond and Michael Russell before proceeding to vote in the way that you have suggested.